 Active Travel England
 Standing Advice Note:
  Active travel and
   sustainable development




June 2024
© Crown copyright 2024
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/ or contact, The
National Archives at www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/contact-us.
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is also available on our
website at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/active-travel-england


Cover photo by Jim Stephenson
Active Travel England Standing Advice
Note: Active travel and sustainable
development
Published: June 2024
This guidance will be reviewed regularly and updated as needed.

1. Introduction
Background
1.1   This advice note has been prepared by Active Travel England (A T E) to help support
      design and transport consultants when preparing a development proposal, and local
      highway and planning authorities in their role as consultees and decision makers for
      planning applications. It is specifically intended for developments outside of London,
      with a separate advice note prepared for schemes within the administrative area of
      Greater London.

1.2   Upon receipt of a planning application consultation, A T E will undertake a triage
      process to determine whether this will be formally assessed by its casework team. In
      circumstances where A T E is experiencing a high volume of consultations, this advice
      note will be provided to local planning authorities (LPAs) where development proposals
      only marginally exceed the consultation thresholds set out in The Town and Country
      Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) (Amendment) Order 2023
      A T E may also consider that there is limited value in providing a detailed assessment
      for some consultations; for example, developments with minimal trip rates or
      applications made under Section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act (to vary or
      remove a previous planning condition) where the design and layout of the development
      has already been approved. In such instances, or whenever provided, this advice note
      will also represent A T E’s formal response.

1.3   The subsequent paragraphs in this advice note will set out A T E’s recommendation for
      how consultants should consider active travel in the preparation of applications and
      how LPAs should proceed to assess an application where standing advice is offered.

The government’s ambition for walking, wheeling and cycling
in England
1.4   The government’s ambition is for England to be a great walking and cycling nation,
      supporting a shift in the way people across England think about undertaking short
      journeys within towns and cities. The aim is for walking, wheeling (trips made by
      wheelchair and mobility scooters) and cycling to be seen as the most convenient,
      desirable and affordable way to travel.




                                                                                               3
Active Travel England Standing Advice Note: Active travel and sustainable development


1.5   The second walking and cycling investment strategy (C W I S 2) sets out objectives to
      boost overall levels of walking, wheeling and cycling across England, with the aim that
      50% of all journeys in towns and cities should be by active modes by 2030. A T E’s
      Framework Document also requires the agency to facilitate an increase in active travel
      to enable the 50% target to be met.

1.6   Aligned to these publications, there are numerous national policy and guidance
      documents that set out how the planning system and the delivery of sustainable
      development can help meet the government’s active travel objectives, which include:

      • The National Planning Policy Framework (N P P F), with particular regard to
        paragraphs 8, 74, 87-90, 128-130, and chapters 8, 9 and 12;

      • National Design Guide;

      • National Model Design Code;

      • Planning Practice Guidance;

      • Active Design;

      • Buses in Urban Developments;

      • Designing for Walking;

      • DfT Circular 01/2022: Strategic Road Network and the Delivery of Sustainable
        Development;

      • Inclusive Mobility;

      • Local Transport Note 1/20: Cycle infrastructure design (L T N 1/20);

      • Local Transport Note 1/24: Bus user priority (L T N 1/24);

      • Manual for Streets;

      • Manual for Streets 2;

      • PAS 6463: Design for the Mind;

      • Streets for a Healthy Life; and

      • Streets for All.

1.7   The above list of documents is not exhaustive and will be kept under review by A T E.




4
                     Active Travel England Standing Advice Note: Active travel and sustainable development


Planning Application Assessment Toolkit
1.8   A T E has produced a Planning Application Assessment Toolkit that helps users to
      assemble evidence and assess the active travel merits – walking, wheeling, and
      cycling – of a development proposal. A T E encourage design and transport consultants
      to use the toolkit and submit a completed version with future planning application
      submissions. Local authority officers (planning and highways) are urged to use the
      toolkit in their assessment of planning applications.

1.9   A T E published the first version of the toolkit on 1st June 2023 alongside its
      commencement as a new statutory consultee. This comprised 31 criteria with text
      explaining how each could be assessed as a ‘pass’ or a ‘fail’. Upon review of this and
      in response to feedback, A T E has simplified the toolkit such that there are now only 10
      assessment criteria, while the new rating system better reflects the range of outcomes
      that are possible from each assessment. Where new development proposals have
      been prepared using the original toolkit, A T E encourage this to be included in
      application documents.

1.10 As shown in the image below, the ‘user input’ sheet on the updated toolkit comprises
     six columns. The cells in the first three columns contain pre-populated text identifying
     the 10 assessment criteria, a brief description of each criterion and the common
     shortfalls found in planning application submissions to date. The cells in the fourth
     column allow the appraiser to apply a rating (exemplar, pass, condition/obligation to
     make acceptable, concern, critical issue or not applicable) against each criterion, while
     the cells in the fifth and sixth columns enable comments and relevant local policies
     and guidance to be entered.




Figure 1: User Input sheet template



1.11 The information entered in the user input sheet will be captured within the Assessment
     Report table in the ‘appraiser report’ sheet, in which pre-populated national policies
     and guidance will supplement any local policies and guidance entered by the
     appraiser. The appraiser report sheet also invites the completion of relevant details of
     the development being assessed as shown overleaf.

1.12 A T E encourage L P As to include the completion of the toolkit as a requirement for
     submission in their local validation checklists where a Transport Assessment is
     required and/or where A T E would be a statutory consultee.




                                                                                                        5
Active Travel England Standing Advice Note: Active travel and sustainable development




Figure 2: Appraiser Report sheet template



2. Active travel assessment considerations
2.1   A T E recognises that the toolkit may not be completed by local authority officers in
      some instances. Where this applies, A T E has provided a summary of the toolkit
      criteria in paragraphs 2.2 – 2.22 of this advice note and local planning and highway
      authorities are encouraged to consider this when assessing relevant proposals at
      pre-application and application stage.

Trip generation and assignment (toolkit criterion 1)
2.2 In order to assess the opportunities for active travel within new developments,
    Transport Assessments should forecast the likely volume and distribution of all day
    pedestrian (walking and wheeling) and cycling trips to, from and within the application
    site. Key to this exercise will be reliable source data, but trip forecasting for future
    years should also align with the national target (or any adopted local targets) that half
    of all journeys in towns and cities shall be walked, wheeled or cycled by 2030.

      This information should be used to inform the design of the scheme, the cumulative
      impact on the existing active travel network, and travel plan targets to embed active
      travel from the outset.

6
                    Active Travel England Standing Advice Note: Active travel and sustainable development


Active travel route audit (toolkit criterion 2)
2.3 The Travel Plans, Transport Assessments and Statements chapter of the Planning
    Practice Guidance states that “measures to improve the accessibility of the location
    (such as provision/enhancement of nearby footpath and cycle path linkages) where
    these are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms” should
    be considered when formulating Transport Assessments.

2.4   A T E advise that a qualitative analysis of local pedestrian, cycling and public transport
      infrastructure should be presented to inform any necessary improvements that would
      be compliant with current design standards. This should include maps, photographs
      and comments that have regard to the following national guidance and tools in the
      assessment of key routes:

      • Inclusive Mobility (Chapters 3, 4, 6, 7 and 15; and Sections 5.2, 5.7, 9.1, 9.3, 9.4
        and 9.7 as appropriate);

      • P A S 6463: Design for the Mind (Sections 5.2.1, 5.2.3, 6.4, 7.6.2, 7.6.3, 7.7 and
        11.12);

      • L T N 1/20: Cycle Infrastructure Design (including Appendix A: Cycling Level of
        Service Tool; and Appendix B: Junction Assessment Tool);

      • the government’s Walking Route Audit Tool; and

      • any adopted or emerging Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans (L C W I Ps).

Pedestrian access to local amenities (toolkit criterion 3)
2.5 A mix of local amenities should be located within an 800m walking and wheeling
    distance (using well-designed routes) of all residential properties or staff entrances
    for workplace facilities. Trip lengths to key amenities should be derived from isochrone
    maps using an appropriate point within the application site, rather than straight-line
    distances from site boundaries or main access points.

2.6   Footpaths/ways to local amenities should conform to the National Design Guide
      standards of being safe, direct, convenient and accessible for people of all abilities,
      which includes but is not limited to routes that:

      • have a minimum width of 2m, with limited pinch points no less than 1.5m;

      • are step-free;

      • have a smooth, even surface;

      • have seating at regular intervals;

      • are uncluttered;

      • have good natural surveillance and clear lines of sight;


                                                                                                       7
Active Travel England Standing Advice Note: Active travel and sustainable development


      • have street lighting;

      • have wayfinding; and

      • have crossing points suitable for the speed and traffic flow of the road(s).

Cycling accessibility (toolkit criterion 4)
2.7   Off-site cycling infrastructure to a range of local amenities, and town centres, railway
      stations, employment areas and the National Cycle Network as appropriate, should be
      coherent, direct, safe, comfortable and attractive in line with the five core design
      principles and geometric requirements in L T N 1/20 (see Sections 4.2 and 5).

2.8 The development should not be reliant on shared use routes in full or intermittently,
    which conflicts with the government’s clear position in paragraph 1.6.1 (2) of L T N 1/20
    that cycles must be treated as vehicles and not as pedestrians. Where on-road
    provision would be utilised, there should be sufficient protection from motor traffic in
    accordance with the suitability and segregation standards in L T N 1/20 (see Figure 4.1
    and Section 6).

Access to public transport (toolkit criterion 5)
2.9 Most buildings within the application site should be within 400m of a high-frequency
    bus stop or 800m of a rail/light station or tram stop, with appropriate facilities. Local
    bus stops should have good natural surveillance and provide seating, lighting, shelter,
    real-time passenger information and raised bus boarders or specialist kerbs. Local rail
    stations should provide cycle parking, including spaces for non-standard cycles
    Footpaths/ways to public transport nodes should conform to the design standards
    identified in paragraph 2.6 of this advice note.

Off-site transport contributions (toolkit criterion 6)
2.10 In consideration of the above, the application documents should set out a package of
     any necessary, directly related and proportionate off-site infrastructure that is to be
     delivered and/or funded. The application should also identify the mechanism to secure
     identified improvements and the trigger point(s) for delivery or payment.

Site permeability (toolkit criterion 7)
2.11 In line with the National Planning Policy Framework and suite of national design
     guidance as set out in paragraph 1.6 of this advice note, new developments must
     prioritise pedestrian and cycle movements. As such, opportunities to maximise
     accessibility for active travel modes should have regard to the following considerations:

      • the development should provide / safeguard pedestrian and cycling connections
        to neighbouring sites including future phases of development;

      • routes for pedestrians and cyclists should be at least as direct – and preferably
        more direct – than the equivalent by car;




8
                   Active Travel England Standing Advice Note: Active travel and sustainable development


     • internal routes should be fully accessible or have adjacent accessible alternatives
       (e.g. ramps alongside steps or bound paths next to unbound paths);

     • appropriate and frequent crossings should be proposed (see Inclusive Mobility
       Sections 4.10-4.11, P A S 6463 Section 7.6.2, L T N 1/20 Table 10-2, Manual for
       Streets Section 6.3 and Manual for Steets 2 Section 9.3);

     • pedestrians and cyclists should be prioritised at side road crossing points
       (see L T N 1/20 Figure 10.13);

     • priority junctions should have radii that minimise the need for pedestrians to deviate
       from their desire line (see Manual for Streets Sections 6.3-6.4 and Manual for
       Streets 2 Section 9.4);

     • there should be no red/zero scores when applying the Junction Assessment Tool
       in L T N 1/20;

     • signalised junctions should have pedestrian aspects on all arms;

     • where cyclists would mix with motor vehicles, lane widths of between 3.2m and
       3.9m should not be proposed (paragraph 7.2.5 of L T N 1/20 identifies that such
       widths allow motor vehicles to drive alongside a cyclist without a safety margin
       for their comfort and protection);

     • there should be safe and well signed transitions for cyclists when moving between
       cycleways on and off the carriageway; and

     • cycleways within commercial sites should be continuous through to cycle parking
       areas.

2.12 Alongside this, shared use routes for pedestrians and cyclists should only be proposed
     where these meet the limited situations listed in paragraph 6.5.6 of L T N 1/20. Where
     shared use routes are acceptable, their widths should be at least 3m (<300 cyclists
     per hour) or 4.5m elsewhere, as per Table 6-3 of L T N 1/20.

Placemaking (toolkit criterion 8)
2.13 The design of streets should encourage social interaction and create attractive, safe
     and accessible open spaces that would support an active life for everyone. This may
     include opportunities to incorporate green infrastructure / street trees, shared space
     residential streets (such as appropriately designed home-zones, mews and culs-de-
     sac), equipped play facilities, seating at regular intervals and clear lines of sight to
     assist with orientation (including measures to prevent inconsiderate parking).

2.14 The overall design approach should have regard to personal and highway safety
     concerns, including:

     • streets, public transport nodes and other public spaces should benefit from
       appropriate levels of natural surveillance and lighting;



                                                                                                      9
Active Travel England Standing Advice Note: Active travel and sustainable development


      • the development should not include ‘blind-spots’, sharp turns or high-sided
        boundary treatments;

      • the development should provide continuous and legible routes, and be supported
        by an effective wayfinding strategy; and

      • residential or local streets should discourage traffic movements through the site
        and be designed for a 20mph speed limit (see Manual for Streets Section 7.4 for
        guidance on achieving this).

2.15 There should be an appropriate provision of well-located, on-site amenities to support
     the quantum of development proposed. For larger residential-led developments,
     evidence should be provided that the applicant has utilised local authority pupil yield
     data (or the Department for Education’s Pupil Yield Dashboard in the absence of such)
     to inform the need for new schools and early years settings.

2.16 For outline planning applications it is advised that an appropriate design code is
     included with the submission and secured by condition where appropriate.

Cycle parking and trip-end facilities (toolkit criterion 9)
2.17 Cycle parking should be provided in accordance with up-to-date local standards,
     or Section 11 of L T N 1/20 in the absence of such. This includes the quality of provision
     as well as the quantum, with details of accessibility, parking types and dimensions,
     security arrangements and lighting required as appropriate. Highly accessible cycle
     parking is essential for people with sensory and/or information processing differences
     and disabled cyclists who may be unable to walk very far or navigate a change
     in levels.

2.18 For workplaces, public buildings (including those used for leisure and recreation) larger
     retail developments and other developments with communal parking:

      • internal cycle stores should be accessible from building frontages, be step-free and
        require passing through no more than two sets of doors;

      • a proportion of cycle parking (typically 5%) should be provided for non-standard
        cycles to accommodate people with mobility impairments, in accordance with
        paragraph 11.3.2 of L T N 1/20 (Table 11-2 also advises on bay lengths and access
        aisle widths for larger cycles using Sheffield stands); and

      • high-quality facilities including showers, lockers, changing rooms and drying areas
        are provided for cyclists in non-residential settings (see Section 11.7 of L T N 1/20,
        B R E E A M guidance and any local standards).




10
                   Active Travel England Standing Advice Note: Active travel and sustainable development


2.19 The quantum and quality of the cycle parking and trip-end facilities proposed should
     align with travel plan targets for cycling and application objectives to deliver a
     sustainable form of development.

Travel planning (toolkit criterion 10)
2.20 Paragraph 117 of the National Planning Policy Framework states that all developments
     that will generate significant amounts of movement should be required to provide
     a travel plan. A T E consider that in most instances this should comprise a ‘full’ travel
     plan to include clear targets and measures to ensure that these can be achieved.
     A ‘framework’ travel plan is generally only appropriate for commercial developments
     where the end user is unknown, while an ‘interim’ travel plan can be acceptable
     where the split of uses is not yet confirmed.

2.21 Where the appropriate travel plan has been submitted:

     • targets for active travel mode share should be ambitious and align with the national
       target (or any adopted local targets) that half of all journeys in towns and cities shall
       be walked, wheeled or cycled by 2030;

     • mode share targets should be set for the end of each phase (where identifiable) and
       extend to five years beyond the final occupation of the development;

     • the requirements of disabled people have not been appropriately considered;

     • targets should relate to all uses within the application site;

     • this should provide sufficient detail on the active travel and public transport
       infrastructure to be provided or improved (both on and off-site) and how its use
       will be embedded by initiatives and incentives to be secured through planning
       conditions and obligations; and

     • this should contain details of effective and influential actions to be taken if targets
       are not met, with the intention for these to be secured and monitored (if triggered)
       through planning conditions and obligations.

Decision-making
2.22 LPAs should use this guidance routinely in the assessment of planning applications
     affording it due weight in deliberations. The guidance reflects A T E’s status as a
     statutory consultee in the planning system. Notwithstanding, the overarching National
     Planning Policy Framework and national design guidance identified in paragraph 1.6 of
     this advice note provides a strong context for embedding active travel infrastructure
     and measures within the design of new development and should be considered as
     early as possible in the planning process.




                                                                                                     11
