National Planning Policy Framework, Chapter 19: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment (N1–6) - GOV.UK

Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Accept additional cookies

Reject additional cookies

View cookies

Hide cookie message

Skip to main content

GOV.UK

Navigation menu

Menu

Menu

Services and information

Benefits

Births, death, marriages and care

Business and self-employed

Childcare and parenting

Citizenship and living in the UK

Crime, justice and the law

Disabled people

Driving and transport

Education and learning

Employing people

Environment and countryside

Housing and local services

Money and tax

Passports, travel and living abroad

Visas and immigration

Working, jobs and pensions

Government activity

Departments

Departments, agencies and public bodies

News

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

Guidance and regulation

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

Research and statistics

Reports, analysis and official statistics

Policy papers and consultations

Consultations and strategy

Transparency

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

Search GOV.UK

×

Search GOV.UK

Search

Search GOV.UK

Search

Home

Housing, local and community

Planning and building

Planning system

Guidance

National Planning Policy Framework, Chapter 19: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment (N1–6)

This is Chapter 19 of the National Planning Policy Framework.

From:

Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government

Published:

29 September 2026

Get emails about this page

Print this page

Applies to England

Contents

Plan-making policies

National decision-making policies

The objective of the policies in this chapter of the National Planning Policy Framework is to influence the design and location of new development to help drive nature’s recovery and contribute to wider environmental outcomes, safeguarding our most important habitats, species and landscapes and recognising the centrality of natural capital to delivering sustainable growth.

Plan-making policies

N1: Identifying environmental opportunities and safeguards

1. Development plans should safeguard and enhance the natural environment, and reflect the wider benefits from natural capital and ecosystem services, by using Local Nature Recovery Strategies, Protected Landscape Management Plans, River Basin Management Plans, National Forest Strategies, Community Forest Plans and other relevant evidence at the most appropriate level to:

 a. Set out the hierarchy of international, national and locally designated sites and areas of importance for their landscape, geodiversity or biodiversity value in the plan area, and identify other features which require particular consideration in managing development due to their environmental value such as chalk streams;

 b. Identify opportunities for the conservation, enhancement and recovery of landscapes, sensitive waterbodies, habitats and priority or threatened species, including through habitat restoration, the use of nature-based solutions, and the creation and strengthening of ecological networks that are more resilient to current and future pressures (including opportunities which exist at a catchment or landscape scale across plan boundaries);

 c. Steer the location of development, including through site allocations, in ways which utilise land of least environmental value where that would be consistent with other policies in this Framework. This should include limiting the scale and extent of development within Protected Landscapes, avoiding the use of higher quality agricultural land where land of poorer quality is available and avoiding and minimising harm to designated sites of importance for nature. Areas which could become of particular importance for nature identified in Local Nature Recovery Strategies should be taken into account as opportunities to integrate development with environmental restoration, but should not necessarily preclude the allocation of land for development; and

 d. Set out standards for green infrastructure provision, in a way which complements and/or incorporates those for recreational land (as set out in policy HC1). These should draw upon Natural England’s Green Infrastructure Standards for England[footnote 58], tailored as necessary to local circumstances.

2. Development plans should only set local standards for biodiversity net gain which are in excess of the statutory net gain requirement where this is for specific site allocations, and is fully justified and deliverable. Local standards should not extend to categories of development which are exempt from statutory biodiversity net gain.

National decision-making policies

N2: Improving the natural environment

1. To contribute positively to the natural environment, and support nature’s recovery, development proposals should:

 a. Consider the environmental qualities of land proposed for development, including habitats, landscape character and the natural beauty of the countryside, and identify opportunities for those qualities to be conserved or enhanced (including through requirements for biodiversity net gain where these apply);

 b. Take into account the quality of agricultural land (including that classified as best and most versatile agricultural land, and its grade), and if significant development of agricultural land is necessary, use areas of poorer quality land where possible;

 c. Take suitable opportunities to connect to and strengthen ecological networks that extend beyond the site, drawing on the measures proposed by Local Nature Recovery Strategies, National Forest Strategies and Community Forest Plans, where present, and other relevant assessments;

 d. Conserve and enhance existing natural features of visual, historic or nature conservation value (such as established trees and hedgerows) where possible; and use appropriate landscaping to help create a well-designed place and integrate the development into its surroundings;

 e. Use green infrastructure provided as part of the scheme and nature-based solutions to secure multiple benefits: such as for biodiversity; surface water and pollution management (including maintaining flow rates and water quality); climate change mitigation and adaptation, and recreation;

 f. Minimise any adverse impacts on biodiversity and include features which support priority or threatened species such as swifts, bats and hedgehogs. Development proposals should incorporate integrated nest boxes (commonly known as swift bricks) into their construction unless there are compelling technical reasons which prevent their use, or would make them ineffective; and

 g. Ensure that green infrastructure and other features to support nature are located and designed to minimise risk of future failure, and that appropriate measures are in place for any necessary long-term management.

2. If significant harm to biodiversity resulting from a development cannot be avoided (through locating on an alternative site with less harmful impacts), adequately mitigated or, as a last resort, compensated for, then the development should be refused.

3. Development proposals may incorporate biodiversity enhancements which exceed the statutory objective for biodiversity net gain, but this should only be a requirement where it is set out in up-to-date development plan policies for specific site allocations. Decision-makers should not give weight to other development plan policies which require biodiversity gains which go beyond the statutory framework, including where a policy requires gains for development proposals which are exempt.

N3: Trees in new development

1. In recognition of the benefits which trees can provide for biodiversity, climate change mitigation and adaptation, and the character and quality of the built environment, development proposals should:

 a. Make new streets tree-lined (unless there are strong reasons why this would be inappropriate in specific streets), and incorporate trees in other suitable locations, such as in parks and through the provision of community orchards;

 b. Ensure that the selection of species and their placement is compatible with highways and other infrastructure requirements and the needs of different users of public spaces; and will be effective in helping to adapt to the effects of climate change and delivering other environmental benefits. Suitable arboricultural advice should be sought, and proposals discussed with highways and trees officers where necessary, so that the right trees are planted in the right places; and

 c. Make provision for the long-term maintenance of both existing and newly-planted trees which form part of the development.

N4: Protected Landscapes

1. Development proposals within Protected Landscapes should be limited in scale and extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to the statutory purposes and special qualities of the Protected Landscape. Substantial weight should be placed on the importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas, and to conserving and enhancing wildlife and cultural heritage in National Parks and the Broads.

2. Proposals for major development[footnote 59] within Protected Landscapes should be refused other than in exceptional circumstances, and where it can be demonstrated that the development is in the public interest. To inform a decision about whether exceptional circumstances exist, consideration of such proposals should include an assessment of:

 a. The need for the development, including in terms of any national considerations such as maintaining a sufficient supply of minerals, and the impact of permitting it, or refusing it, upon the local economy;

 b. The cost of, and scope for, developing outside the Protected Landscape, or meeting the need for the development in some other way; and

 c. Any detrimental effect on the environment, the landscape and recreational opportunities, and the extent to which it could be moderated.

3. Where, exceptionally, proposals for major development are approved within Protected Landscapes, steps should be taken to mitigate potential adverse impacts on their special qualities and statutory purposes[footnote 60], including on features such as tranquillity and dark skies.

4. Development proposals within the setting of Protected Landscapes should be sensitively located and designed to avoid or minimise adverse impacts on the Protected Landscape.

N5: Maintaining the character of the coast

1. Development proposals should maintain the character of undeveloped areas of coast, including land designated for its landscape, habitat or heritage value, while improving public access to it where appropriate. They should not hinder the completion and maintenance of a continuous signed and managed route around the coast (the King Charles III England Coast Path National Trail).

2. Development proposals in areas defined as Heritage Coast (and which do not already fall within a Protected Landscape) should be consistent with the special character of the area and the importance of its conservation. Major development within areas defined as Heritage Coast should not be supported, unless the development is compatible with the special character of the area.

3. If located within a Coastal Change Management Area, development proposals should also be considered against policy F9.

N6: Areas of particular importance for biodiversity and geodiversity

1. To support the conservation of important habitats, species and sites of geodiversity value, development proposals affecting:

 a. A site of international importance, which for the purpose of this policy is a habitats site, should be refused unless:

  i. An appropriate assessment has concluded that the proposal will not adversely affect the integrity of the site (either individually or in combination with other developments), or the proposal can satisfy the derogation tests[footnote 61]; and/or

  ii. The impact of development on the relevant protected features of the protected site is being addressed through an Environmental Delivery Plan which has been made and the developer has committed to paying the nature restoration levy.

 b. A site of national importance, which for the purpose of this policy is one designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest, should only be supported if:

  i. There would be no adverse effect (either individually or in combination with other developments) on the site’s features of special scientific interest; or

  ii. The benefits of the development in the location proposed clearly outweigh both the likely impact on the features of special scientific interest, and any broader impact on the national network of Sites of Special Scientific Interest; or

  iii. The impact of development on the relevant protected feature of the protected site is being addressed through an Environmental Delivery Plan which has been made and the developer has committed to paying the nature restoration levy.

 c. A site of local importance, which for the purpose of this policy is one designated as a Local Nature Reserve or identified as a local wildlife site, local geological site or equivalent in the development plan, should only be supported if:

  i. There would not be a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the site; or

  ii. The benefits of development in the location proposed clearly outweigh the likely impact on the features which make the site valuable for nature conservation.

2. Irrespective of a site’s status in nature conservation terms, development proposals which would entail the loss or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats (such as ancient woodland and ancient or veteran trees) should be refused, unless there are wholly exceptional reasons[footnote 62] and a suitable compensation strategy exists.

3. This policy applies to development on land inside or outside a designated area, if it would have an impact on the identified biodiversity or geodiversity value of the area concerned.

This is Chapter 19 of the National Planning Policy Framework

Continue to Chapter 20: Conserving and enhancing the historic environment (HE1–10).

Return to the National Planning Policy Framework homepage.

Footnotes

58. Natural England’s Green Infrastructure Standards for England published in: Green Infrastructure Framework Standards. ↩

59. For the purpose of this policy and policy N5 only, whether a proposal is ‘major development’ is a matter for the decision-maker, taking into account its nature, scale and setting, and whether it could have a significant adverse impact on the statutory purposes for which the area has been designated or defined. ↩

60. Where significant harm cannot be mitigated, it may be appropriate to consider whether suitable compensation would be acceptable. ↩

61. These being that there are no feasible alternative solutions to the proposal which are less damaging, there are imperative reasons of overriding public interest for it to proceed, and compensatory measures are secured to ensure that the overall coherence of the network of habitats sites is maintained. ↩

62. For example, infrastructure projects (including nationally significant infrastructure projects, orders under the Transport and Works Act and hybrid bills), where the public benefit would clearly outweigh the loss or deterioration of the relevant habitats. ↩

Sign up for emails or print this page

Get emails about this page

Print this page

Contents

Explore the topic

Planning system

Is this page useful?

Maybe

Yes this page is useful

No this page is not useful

Thank you for your feedback

Report a problem with this page

Help us improve GOV.UK

Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

This field is for robots only. Please leave blank

What were you doing?

What went wrong?

Send

Cancel

Help us improve GOV.UK

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab).

Cancel

Services and information

Benefits

Births, death, marriages and care

Business and self-employed

Childcare and parenting

Citizenship and living in the UK

Crime, justice and the law

Disabled people

Driving and transport

Education and learning

Employing people

Environment and countryside

Housing and local services

Money and tax

Passports, travel and living abroad

Visas and immigration

Working, jobs and pensions

Government activity

Departments

News

Guidance and regulation

Research and statistics

Policy papers and consultations

Transparency

How government works

Get involved

Support links

Help

Privacy

Cookies

Accessibility statement

Contact

Terms and conditions

Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg

Government Digital Service

All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated

© Crown copyright
