Entry guidelines


             PLATINUM JUBILEE CIVIC HONOURS COMPETITION

                                ENTRY GUIDELINES

Her Majesty The Queen has agreed that competitions may be held for a grant
of city status and Lord Mayor or Provost status to mark Her Platinum Jubilee
in 2022.

   1. Any local authority in any part of the United Kingdom, a Crown Dependency
      or an Overseas Territory, which considers that its area deserves to be granted
      the rare honour of city status on this very special occasion is welcome to enter
      the competition by the closing date of 8 December 2021.

   2. Lord Mayoralty or Provostship is an exceptional distinction conferred on the
      Mayoralties or Provostships of a few – usually long-established and important
      – cities. Local authorities for existing cities in the United Kingdom are
      welcome to enter the parallel competition for a Lord Mayoralty or Provostship
      by the same closing date.

   3. Applications may only be made by an elected local authority for its entire area
      or a distinct area within its boundary.

   4. Although there are no specific criteria for city status or Lord Mayor or Provost
      status, the Government is asking local authorities to submit their entries in a
      standard size and format, as detailed in the application form. This is intended
      to help local authorities minimise the expense of entering the competitions
      and to provide the Government with a fair basis for comparison and
      assessment of the entries received.

   5. Local authorities are strongly advised not to exceed the limits of the standard
      size and format as described in application form.

   6. The decisions made by Her Majesty, on Ministerial advice, will be final. Local
      authorities may be assured that each entry will be considered ‘in the round’,
      on the merits of its contents rather than on the standard of presentation. Each
      local authority will be sent brief comments on its entry when the results of the
      competitions are announced in 2022. These brief comments on entries will not
      provide specific reasons on why an application is successful or unsuccessful.

   7. Local authorities should not incur any expenditure on lobbyists for the
      purposes of influencing the competition.

   8. Applications are requested to be submitted by email to reach the Cabinet
      Office by 4pm on the closing date, 8 December 2021, at
      civichonours@cabinetoffice.gov.uk. Alternatively, applications can be
      submitted by post if preferred, the address to be used is:
       Constitutional Policy Team
       Cabinet Office
       4th Floor Yellow Zone
       1 Horse Guards
       London
       SW1A 2HQ

   9. If submitted by post, entrants are asked to notify the Constitutional Policy
      Team separately when their entries are dispatched, by sending an email,
      giving the date of dispatch of the hard copies, the name of the local authority
      submitting the application, and its full contact details. Entries submitted by
      post should reach the Cabinet Office by the same time on the closing date as
      those submitted by email.

   10. Acknowledgements will be sent by email when the hard copies have been
       received. If no acknowledgement is received within 6 working days of the
       closing date (or of dispatch, if earlier), please send a further email to the
       above address with ‘City status entry enquiry’ and the name of the local
       authority area in the heading.


              QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON ENTRY GUIDELINES

Q: Can we involve the public in the compilation of our entry?
A: Yes, by all means, so long as you do not exceed the standard size and format.

Q: Can we publish our entry on our website?
A: Yes, local authorities are welcome to publish their entries if they wish to do so.

Q: Will the Government keep our entry confidential?
A: Not necessarily. We will not automatically be publishing applications however you
should be aware that these can be requested under the Freedom of Information Act.
Requests for disclosure will be considered in accordance with the requirements of
the Freedom of Information Act. If a local authority wishes any part of its application
to remain confidential it is asked to flag this up with a clear indication for us to take
into account in deciding whether the information should be released. Wherever
possible we would then alert the local authority before releasing such information.

Q: We cannot afford a glossy booklet/external publishers/research. Is it still
worth our entering?
A: Yes. The Government does not want local authorities to incur any undue expense
entering the competition. It is the quality of the contents of the application, taken as a
whole, that will be assessed, rather than the standards of presentation.

Q: We do not have data on all the points suggested. Does this matter?
A: No. Please simply provide whatever you have or can readily obtain. The
Government does not want local authorities to incur any undue expense by entering
the competition.
Q: Will late entries be accepted?
A: No. If an entry is received late, evidence that it was dispatched in time to reach us
by the closing date will be requested.
