Proposed reforms to the National Planning
Policy Framework and other changes to
the planning system
December 2025
© Crown copyright 2025

Copyright in the typographical arrangement rests with the Crown.

You may re-use this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence visit
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/

This document/publication is also available on our website at www.gov.uk/mhclg

If you have any enquiries regarding this document/publication, email
correspondence@communities.gov.uk or write to us at:

Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government
Fry Building
2 Marsham Street
London
SW1P 4DF
Telephone: 030 3444 0000

For all our latest news and updates follow us on X: http://x.com/mhclg
Contents
Contents ................................................................................................................. 3
Scope of consultation .............................................................................................. 4
Consultation introduction ........................................................................................ 9
Chapter 1: Introduction .......................................................................................... 18
Chapter 2: Plan-making policies ............................................................................. 19
Chapter 3: Decision-making policies ....................................................................... 27
Chapter 4: Achieving sustainable development ........................................................ 32
Chapter 5: Meeting the challenge of climate change ................................................. 37
Chapter 6: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes ................................................... 40
Chapter 7: Building a strong, effective economy ....................................................... 53
Chapter 8: Ensuring the vitality of town centres ........................................................ 55
Chapter 9: Supporting high quality communications ................................................ 58
Chapter 10: Securing Clean Energy and Water ......................................................... 60
Chapter 11: Facilitating the sustainable use of minerals ........................................... 63
Chapter 12: Making effective use of land ................................................................. 68
Chapter 13: Protecting Green Belt land .................................................................... 74
Chapter 14: Achieving well-designed places ............................................................ 80
Chapter 15: Promoting sustainable transport ........................................................... 83
Chapter 16: Promoting healthy communities ........................................................... 87
Chapter 17: Pollution, Public Protection and Security ............................................... 91
Chapter 18: Managing Flood Risk and Coastal Change ............................................. 94
Chapter 19: Conserving and enhancing the natural environment ............................... 99
Chapter 20: Conserving and enhancing the historic environment ............................ 102
Further questions ................................................................................................ 106
Annex A - Data Centres and onsite energy generation ............................................. 108
Annex B - Viability: Standardised inputs in viability assessment .............................. 111
Annex C - Reforming Site Thresholds ..................................................................... 117
Public Sector Equality Duty................................................................................... 123



                                                             3
Scope of consultation
Topic of this consultation: This consultation seeks views on our proposed approach
to revising the National Planning Policy Framework.

Scope of this consultation: The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local
Government is seeking views on how we might revise national planning policy to
support our wider objectives.

Alongside this consultation document, a draft National Planning Policy Framework
(“the Framework”) has been published. This consultation should be read in conjunction
with the draft, which sets out the detailed proposed policy wording indicative of what
may be implemented, subject to the outcome of this consultation.

Beyond the draft Framework this consultation also asks questions related to Energy
thresholds and data centres, standardised inputs in viability assessments and
reforming site thresholds. These questions can be found in Annexes A, B and C
respectively.

In responding to this consultation, we would appreciate comments on any potential
impacts on protected groups under the Public Sector Equality Duty. A consultation
question on this is found in at the end of this document.

Geographical scope: These proposals relate to England only.




Basic Information
Body/bodies responsible for the consultation: The Ministry of Housing,
Communities and Local Government

Duration: This consultation will begin on 16 December 2025 and close at 11:45pm
on 10 March 2026.

Enquiries: For any enquiries about the consultation please contact:
PlanningPolicyConsultation@communities.gov.uk

How to respond
Citizen Space is the department’s online consultation portal and our preferred route
for receiving consultation responses. We strongly encourage responses are made via
Citizen Space, particularly from organisations with access to online facilities such as
local planning authorities, representative bodies and businesses. Consultations
receive a high-level of interest across many sectors. Using the online survey greatly


                                          4
assists our analysis of the responses, enabling more efficient and effective
consideration of the issues raised.

Respondents do not need to answer every question.

Respondents should not cite previous questions or remark ‘see above’. Due to the
way the consultation responses are processed we cannot guarantee your comments
will be captured if replying in this way. Any points you wish to raise in response to a
question should be set out in full as part of that question’s response. The citizen space
portal will be available at the below link:

https://consult.communities.gov.uk/planning/proposed-reforms-to-the-national-
planning-policy-f/

If you cannot respond via Citizen Space, or you have supporting evidence to
accompany your response you may send your response or supporting evidence by
email to: PlanningPolicyConsultation@communities.gov.uk

Written responses should be sent to:

Planning Policy Consultation Team
Planning Directorate – Planning Policy Division
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government
Floor 3, Fry Building
2 Marsham Street
London
SW1P 4DF

When you reply, it would be very useful if you please confirm whether you are replying
as an individual or submitting an official response on behalf of an organisation and
include:

   1. your name
   2. your position (if applicable)
   3. the name of organisation (if applicable)

Please make it clear which question each comment relates to and ensure that the text
of your response is in a format that allows copying of individual sentences or
paragraphs, to help us when considering your view on particular issues.

Thank you for taking time to submit responses to this consultation. Your views will help
improve and shape our national planning policies.




                                           5
Privacy Statement & Personal Data
The following is to explain your rights and give you the information you are entitled to
under UK data protection legislation.

Note that this section only refers to personal data (your name, contact details and any
other information that relates to you or another identified or identifiable individual
personally) not the content otherwise of your response to the consultation.

The identity of the data controller and contact details of the Data Protection Officer

The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) is the data
controller.   The    Data   Protection   Officer     can      be   contacted at:
dataprotection@communities.gov.uk or by writing to the following address:

Data Protection Officer,
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government,
Fry Building,
2 Marsham Street,
London
SW1P 4DF

Why we are collecting your personal data

Your personal data is being collected as an essential part of the consultation process,
so that we can contact you regarding your response and for statistical purposes. We
may also use it to contact you about related matters.

We will collect your IP address if you complete a consultation online. We may use this
to ensure that each person only completes a survey once. We will not use this data
for any other purpose.

Respondents should refrain from sharing personal or special category data outside of
the administrative questions at the front of the Citizen Space questionnaire.

Sensitive types of personal data

Please do not share special category personal data or criminal offence data if we have
not asked for this unless absolutely necessary for the purposes of your consultation
response. By ‘special category personal data’, we mean information about a living
individual’s:

   •   race
   •   ethnic origin
   •   political opinions

                                           6
   •   religious or philosophical beliefs
   •   trade union membership
   •   genetics
   •   biometrics
   •   health (including disability-related information)
   •   sex life; or
   •   sexual orientation.

By ‘criminal offence data’, we mean information relating to a living individual’s criminal
convictions or offences or related security measures.

Our legal basis for processing your personal data

The collection of your personal data is lawful under article 6(1)(e) of the UK General
Data Protection Regulation as it is necessary for the performance by MHCLG of a task
in the public interest/in the exercise of official authority vested in the data controller.
Section 8(d) of the Data Protection Act 2018 states that this will include processing of
personal data that is necessary for the exercise of a function of the Crown, a Minister
of the Crown or a government department i.e. in this case a consultation.

Where necessary for the purposes of this consultation, our lawful basis for the
processing of any special category personal data or ‘criminal offence’ data (terms
explained under ‘Sensitive Types of Data’) which you submit in response to this
consultation is as follows. The relevant lawful basis for the processing of special
category personal data is Article 9(2)(g) UK GDPR (‘substantial public interest’), and
Schedule 1 paragraph 6 of the Data Protection Act 2018 (‘statutory etc and
government purposes’). The relevant lawful basis in relation to personal data relating
to criminal convictions and offences data is likewise provided by Schedule 1 paragraph
6 of the Data Protection Act 2018.

With whom we will be sharing your personal data

MHCLG may appoint a ‘data processor’, acting on behalf of the Department and under
our instruction, to help analyse the responses to this consultation. Where we do, we
will ensure that the processing of your personal data remains in strict accordance with
the requirements of the data protection legislation.

Your responses may be processed by Artificial Intelligence to analyse the responses
to the consultation more efficiently. These tools assist in identifying and mapping
themes in consultation responses, but do not make decisions and all outputs are
reviewed by staff for accuracy and reliability. Where data is processed by Artificial
intelligence, MHCLG will take reasonable and proportionate steps to remove personal
data from the consultation responses before using an Artificial Intelligence, tool but
this cannot be guaranteed. Respondents should refrain from sharing personal or
special category data outside of the administrative questions at the front of the Citizen
Space questionnaire. The AI tool processes data securely and does not copy or share

                                            7
data. The data will only be accessed and used by those authorised to do so. Data
used in AI tools is not used for training the AI model.

MHCLG will take steps to check AI outputs for accuracy and identify and reduce bias.

For how long we will keep your personal data, or criteria used to determine the
retention period.

Your personal data will be held for two years from the closure of the consultation,
unless we identify that its continued retention is unnecessary before that point.

Your rights, e.g. access, rectification, restriction, objection

The data we are collecting is your personal data, and you have considerable say over
what happens to it. You have the right:

a) to see what data we have about you b) to ask us to stop using your data, but keep
it on record c) to ask to have your data corrected if it is incorrect or incomplete d) to
object to our use of your personal data in certain circumstances e) to lodge a
complaint with the independent Information Commissioner (ICO) if you think we are
not handling your data fairly or in accordance with the law. You can contact the ICO
at https://ico.org.uk/, or telephone 0303 123 1113.

Please contact us at the following address if you wish to exercise the rights listed
above,    except the      right   to  lodge    a   complaint with       the ICO:
dataprotection@communities.gov.uk or at

Knowledge and Information Access Team,
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government,
Fry Building,
2 Marsham Street,
London
SW1P 4DF




                                           8
Consultation introduction
The government is committed to tackling this country’s housing crisis. Decades of
failure to build enough homes has constrained growth, pushed ownership out of reach
for too many, driven rents to unaffordable levels, and seen more and more people fall
into temporary accommodation – including 170,000 children.

That is why the government moved within three weeks of entering office to consult on
changes to the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) and finalised these initial
reforms in December 2024. Amongst them were the restoration and raising of
mandatory housing targets, greater support for social and affordable housing provision,
a strengthened brownfield-first approach to development, modernisation of the way
the Green Belt works, including by allowing the release of low-quality ‘grey belt’ land,
and an unlocking of clean energy production including reversing the ban on onshore
wind.

These were urgent revisions, designed explicitly as first steps in shifting the planning
system to support growth. In the year since, the government has sought to maintain
this urgency, including by taking the Planning and Infrastructure Bill through
Parliament such that it will receive Royal Assent before the end of the year, and
securing the recommendations of the New Towns Taskforce for a string of major new
settlements across the country. Building on this momentum, our New Home
Accelerators will unlock thousands of homes in key growth areas, driving delivery at
pace and scale. This is complemented by the largest boost to social and affordable
housing in a generation through the £39 billion Social and Affordable Housing
Programme, ensuring that growth is inclusive and meets the needs of communities
across the country.

Through a series of working papers on ideas ranging from a ‘brownfield passport’ in
urban areas and around transport hubs, to formal recognition of medium sized sites,
we have also continued to work with and listen to the sector on what further reforms
to the planning system could best support development, creating and growing good
quality places in which to live and work.

Drawing on that engagement, and building on our initial reforms, we are now proposing
a fuller and more definitive update of national planning policy. We decided, for reasons
which are set out more fully below, not to commence powers at this stage which would
place national policies for decision-making on a statutory basis. But the key principles
which would have infused statutory National Development Management Policies are
carried through into the proposals which we are consulting on now: to hard-wire a set
of clear, more rules-based policies into the Framework. Changes which are designed
to make planning policy easier to use, underpin the development of faster and simpler
local plans, and be more directive of decision-making in support of both appropriate
housing and commercial development – including by incorporating proposals refined
on the back of our working papers.


                                           9
The new NPPF therefore marks the culmination of a sustained push over the first
period of this Parliament to overhaul the planning system – a journey that began with
those urgent initial changes and continued with the Bill – and which will be brought to
a conclusion by the outcomes of this consultation.

Taken together, these reforms represent a truly seismic regearing of the system – in
support of growth, and through growth of hope and opportunity. We have pursued
them at speed because they are a necessary condition for success. But while
necessary, reform alone is not sufficient. If we are to achieve our goals, the system
we have moved so rapidly to regear must enter a period of stability over the second
half of this Parliament and beyond. One in which every actor – from government to
local authorities to applicants – must seize the benefits of change by bringing a laser
like focus to delivery.


Our objectives
This consultation invites views on significant structural improvements to the
Framework, so that for the first time there is a clear set of separate policies for both
plan-making and decision-making. This is intended to achieve three principal
objectives, namely to:

•   Ensure national planning policy is accessible and understandable for
    everyone who uses it;
•   Establish a comprehensive suite of national policies on general planning
    matters which will apply across the country, to avoid these matters being
    repeated or deviated from in locally-produced plans – in so doing helping to speed
    up their preparation and preventing an unnecessary increase of different standards
    that can complicate development; and
•   Make the policy which it contains more ‘rules-based’ and certain, and so more
    capable of supporting timely and consistent planning – especially in those places
    where development is most desirable, where national policy should provide for a
    default “yes” to the principle of development.

These changes then underpin a number of further policy reforms that are designed to
unlock additional housing supply, facilitate growth-supporting commercial
development, and simplify and improve the approach to climate change,
environmental protections and heritage assets – with the key changes summarised on
pages 15 - 17.

The case for non-statutory national policy
The Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023 provides powers for the Secretary of
State to introduce ‘National Development Management Policies’ on a statutory basis.



                                          10
In light of our objectives, we have considered carefully whether decision-making
policies should be given this statutory status.

National planning policy as it stands already carries very considerable weight in the
planning system: it must be taken into account in plan production, and is an important
material consideration when making decisions on planning applications. Updates to
national planning policy carry this weight from the point they are issued (subject to any
transitional arrangements), and are capable of altering the planning balance where
there is an inconsistency with existing development plan policies – especially where
national policy is clear and definitive. Its effectiveness is illustrated by the way that
December 2024’s introduction of ‘grey belt’ as a category of land has already had a
significant impact. Since the current Framework was updated in December 2024, an
unprecedented 80% of major residential appeals located on grey belt land have been
approved, homes that likely wouldn’t have been built under previous policy.

We consider that the core aims of statutory National Development Management
Policies can be secured within the current legal Framework, by:

•   Setting out much clearer policies for planning and decision-making as proposed in
    this consultation;
•   Making explicit that these decision-making policies should not be repeated in
    development plans; and
•   Providing for these policies to bear on the system from day one, by requiring that
    any inconsistent local policies are immediately given very limited weight.

The government has also considered whether introducing statutory National
Development Management Policies at this stage could have disadvantages, including
loss of flexibility which would frustrate the effective operation of the planning system
in the short-term, as the implications of the new statutory Framework are tested. On
balance, given the impact which we expect the proposals in this consultation will have,
we are not using the powers to prepare and designate statutory National Development
Management Policies at this stage. We will keep this decision under review, and will
return to it if the proposed policies do not have the desired outcomes of supporting
more effective decisions and reducing generic or alternate policies in development
plans.

If, in due course, a decision is made to proceed with statutory National Development
Management Policies, we are interested in views on how we could most effectively
manage the transition from the non-statutory approach which is being consulted on
here.

1) Do you have any views on how statutory National Development Management
   Policies could be introduced in the most effective manner, should a future
   decision be made to progress these?




                                           11
Changes to structure and content
Changes to the structure of the Framework are proposed to improve its clarity, usability,
and consistency.
We are proposing to retain individual chapters on different topics, though with some-
re-ordering:
•   Introductory text on the purpose of the planning system and related high-level
    objectives have been brought into the introduction. This is so that material which
    explains how to use the document, and which sets the strategic context for the
    policies, is differentiated clearly from the policies contained in the subsequent
    chapters;
•   This introduction is followed by procedural policies relating to plan-making (Chapter
    2) and decision-making (Chapter 3), which are contained in separate chapters as
    found in the current Framework;
•   Chapters on particular planning topics are then set out, beginning with policies on
    sustainable development and climate change, in view of their fundamental
    importance and because of the way they frame many of the policies in the chapters
    which follow.
Within this broad approach some further re-ordering of the topic chapters is proposed
to group together those concerned with steering development, then those concerned
with creating sustainable places and those on conserving and enhancing the
environment. In contrast to the current Framework, additional chapters are included
on planning for energy and water, and managing flood risk and coastal change. These
additions enable a grouping together of existing and new policy on the important topics
of energy and water infrastructure, and for policies on flood risk and coastal change to
be set out as clearly and explicitly as possible.
Additional annexes are proposed to be added to the draft Framework, some of which
import key aspects of Planning Practice Guidance which are considered essential for
the operability of the Frameworks policies (these imports relate to the standard method
for calculating Local Housing Need, identifying grey belt land, additional flood zone
and flood risk vulnerability tables; standardised inputs into viability assessment may
be added, subject to consultation).
Apart from the introduction, each chapter contains a brief objective, and then a set of
policies. The policies are split into ones for plan-making and ones for decision-making,
the latter forming a set of national decision-making policies. The procedural chapters
on plan and decision-making contain only plan-making or national decision-making
policies, as relevant.
Many of the individual policies are based on the text found in the current Framework,
although the task of separating plan-making and decision-making material has, in
many cases, required extensive re-drafting. In addition, new policy has been added
where this helps to fill gaps in general planning considerations which apply across the
country (or large parts of it), so that these matters do not need to be repeated in

                                           12
development plans. The procedural policies for plan-making in Chapter 2 have been
substantially revised to reflect the new plan-making system which implements relevant
parts of the Levelling up and Regeneration Act 2023 and the Planning and
Infrastructure Bill. As such, the material that we are consulting on should be read as a
new set of national policies, albeit one which builds upon and often re-states existing
policies in a new form.
Some other proposed changes to the structure and content of the proposed policies
should be noted at the outset:
•   Certain aspects of the current Framework which expect policies to be included in
    locally-prepared plans are not replicated in the version that we are consulting on.
    Where this is the case, it is because these matters are addressed in the proposed
    national decision-making policies, which if implemented following the consultation
    would negate the need for repetition in development plans.
•   The national decision-making policies are worded so that they set expectations for
    ‘development proposals’ where appropriate. This is in contrast to many paragraphs
    in the current Framework which are directed at ‘planning decisions’ or local
    planning authorities. This change is proposed so that it is clear that the national
    decision-making policies are intended to influence the way that development
    proposals are shaped, as well as the decisions made on them by decision-makers.

•   Rather than continuous paragraph numbering, each policy has been given its own
    number, and within it each paragraph and sub-paragraph are numbered separately.
    This is to make sure that every part of each policy can be referred to clearly, and
    in a way which avoids a need for extensive re-numbering should any policies
    change in future. At present footnotes are numbered consecutively; in the final
    version, and subject to views on the overall structure of the document through this
    consultation, we intend to incorporate as many as possible into the body of the text,
    and to make the numbering of remaining footnotes unique to each chapter or policy.

•   Following our commitment to review the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites to
    support a clearer and more consistent planning system, we are proposing to
    incorporate policies relating to traveller sites, currently set out in Planning Policy
    for Traveller Sites, within relevant chapters of the draft Framework. This will reduce
    unnecessary duplication and support equitable outcomes within the planning
    system, while providing greater clarity on how traveller sites should be planned for
    and delivered. These changes will result in the removal of Planning Policy for
    Traveller Sites as a separate document. While some wording has been changed
    or removed, the government’s aims in respect to traveller sites remain unchanged.
Views are sought on whether the proposed structure and format of the draft
Framework are clear and will help to achieve the objectives set out in the introduction
to this consultation.

2) Do you agree with the new format and structure of the draft Framework which
   comprises separate plan-making policies and national decision-making

                                           13
   policies? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

3) Do you agree with the proposed set of annexes to be incorporated into the
   draft Framework? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

4) Do you agree with incorporating Planning Policy for Traveller Sites within the
   draft Framework? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

This consultation does not include revised policies that are set out in the National
Planning Policy for Waste, which sits separately to the Framework. We intend to
consult on revisions to these policies as soon as possible in 2026, with the same
overarching objectives of improving clarity, usability, and consistency.
Throughout the consultation specific questions have been asked only in relation to
policies where there has been an intentional change to the substance of existing policy,
or where a new policy is being introduced, rather than where re-drafting has been
necessary but no change of policy is intended.




                                          14
Twelve key policy changes
As well as setting out national planning policy in a clearer and more comprehensive
manner, we are proposing a number of substantive reforms – in particular to unlock
more homes in the right places, and further support the commercial development
needed to drive growth.

The twelve most significant reforms are summarised below, with other changes
detailed alongside questions at relevant points in the consultation document.

1. A permanent presumption in favour of suitably located development. We
   want to make clear what forms of development are acceptable in principle in
   different locations as part of creating a more rules-based approach to development.
   For urban land, this approach takes forward parts of our ‘brownfield passports’
   work and builds on the December 2024 Framework update, by making
   development of suitable land in urban areas acceptable by default. As part of this
   change, we are also proposing a revised presumption in favour of sustainable
   development, underpinning the way the new policies direct different forms of
   development to the most appropriate locations – in effect applying a permanent
   presumption in favour of suitably located development.

2. Building homes around stations. We want to establish ‘in principle’ support – a
   “default yes” – for suitable proposals that develop land around rail stations within
   existing settlements, and around ‘well-connected’ train stations outside
   settlements, including on Green Belt land. We are also proposing a minimum
   density of 40 dwellings per hectare around all stations and 50 dwellings per hectare
   around ‘well-connected’ stations – maximising opportunities for sustainable
   development, making the most of high levels of connectivity, and improving access
   to jobs and services.

3. Driving urban and suburban densification. We want to get the most use out of
   land in urban and suburban areas, including through the redevelopment of corner
   and other low density plots, upward extensions and infill development – including
   within residential curtilages. These changes will support higher density
   development in sustainable locations, with good access to services. We are also
   setting clear expectations that authorities should set minimum densities in well-
   connected locations, including around train stations and town centres, and support
   an overall increase in density within settlements.

4. Securing a diverse mix of homes. We want to better support the needs of
   different groups through the planning system. This includes stronger support for
   rural social and affordable housing, and setting clearer expectations for accessible
   housing to meet the needs of older and disabled people. It also means providing
   more flexibility on the unit mix of housing for market sale, where local requirements
   have been met for the mix of affordable homes.



                                          15
5. Supporting small and medium sites. We want to make it easier to bring forward
   small sites, through clear support for the principle of development in different
   locations, the policies on building more densely in settlements and strengthened
   support for mixed tenure development. We are also introducing a category of
   ‘medium development’ (see Annex C of this consultation document), linked to a
   range of policy and regulatory easements, to support a more streamlined and
   proportionate planning system – including exploring further the potential benefits
   and drawbacks of enabling developers to discharge social and affordable housing
   requirements through cash contributions in lieu of direct delivery.

6. Streamlining local standards. We want to promote certainty for applicants and
   speed up local plan production by limiting quantitative standards in development
   plans to only those specific issues where local variation is justified. We also want
   to limit duplication of matters which are covered by the Building Regulations – other
   than where there is the existing ability to use ‘optional technical standards’.

7. Boosting local and regional economies. We want to encourage economic
   growth by giving substantial weight to the benefits of supporting business growth,
   and to particular areas and sectors - including those named in the Industrial
   Strategy, AI Growth Zones, logistics, town centres and agricultural and rural
   development. We are also interested in views on whether the town centre
   sequential test should be removed, in order to allow greater flexibility to respond to
   changing patterns of demand.

8. Supporting critical and growth minerals. We want to ensure that adequate
   provision is made for their extraction, recognising their economic importance. In
   parallel, and in view of the government’s mission to achieve clean power by 2030,
   we want to restrict further the extraction of coal.

9. Embedding a vision-led approach to transport. We want to further embed the
   changes made in December 2024, which signalled the importance of moving away
   from a ‘predict and provide’ approach to transport planning that can create
   unattractive environments dominated by cars.

10. Better addressing climate change. We want to set out how decisions can take a
    proactive approach to both mitigation and adaptation in relation to climate change,
    in a way that links to other relevant policies in the draft Framework.

11. Conserving and enhancing the natural environment. We want to make a
    number of changes, including to reflect Local Nature Recovery Strategies, to
    recognise landscape character and conserve and enhance existing natural
    features, to incorporate swift bricks and to provide guidance on sites of local
    importance for nature.




                                           16
12. Taking a more positive approach to the use of heritage assets. We want a
    clearer and more positive approach which can better support suitable heritage-
    related development, replacing the current policies that are difficult to navigate.

We are also proposing some important changes to policies on planning procedures.
The new plan-making system provided for in the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act
2023 is being commenced, and we are proposing a comprehensive set of new policies
on plan-making to support this. Some revisions are also being proposed to policies for
decision-making to reinforce the importance of taking a positive, proportionate and
timely approach to dealing with applications.




                                          17
Chapter 1: Introduction
The introductory chapter explains the role of the Framework, practical information on
how it should be used, and a high-level narrative on the purpose of the planning
system.
The information on how the Framework should be used refers to a simpler and more
consistent approach to the weighting of different considerations which we are
proposing to deploy throughout the draft Framework. The current Framework uses a
number of terms where the government expects weight to be given to particular
matters (great, significant, substantial). In general, these are not intended to imply any
sort of ‘weighting’ hierarchy, so we are proposing that ‘substantial’ is used throughout
the document where positive weighting of this sort is intended.
Paragraph 13 of the introduction is designed to set out more clearly the intended
relationship between statements of national planning policy and the supporting role
played by Planning Practice Guidance.
The section on the purpose of the planning system repeats most of what is contained
at present in the opening paragraphs of chapter 2 of the current Framework, but a new
opening sentence has been added to emphasise the overarching function of the
system in managing the use and development of land in the long-term public interest.
None of the content set out in chapter 1 is intended to be read as substantive policy
for plan or decision-making, which is instead set out in the policies contained in the
chapters which follow.

5) Do you agree with the proposed approach to simplifying the terminology in
   the Framework where weight is intended to be applied? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree




                                           18
Chapter 2: Plan-making policies
The government is clear that the plan-led approach is, and must remain, the
cornerstone of our planning system. Development plans are the best way for
communities to shape decisions about how to deliver the housing and wider
development their areas need. They enable local areas to set their strategy for future
growth and their approach to protecting and enhancing the environment, and they
provide the certainty and confidence required to bring development forward across the
country.
In the absence of an up-to-date local plan, there is a high likelihood that development
will come forward on a piecemeal and speculative basis, with reduced public
engagement and fewer guarantees that it will make the most of an area’s potential.
That is why we are determined to drive local plans to adoption as quickly as possible
in order to achieve our ambition of universal plan coverage and to ensure plans
contribute positively to our Plan for Change milestone of building 1.5 million new safe
and decent homes in England by the end of this Parliament.
We are in the process of bringing forward legislative reforms to the plan-making
system that will accelerate plan production, increase the coverage of plans and,
through the introduction of spatial development strategies, improve effective planning
across local authority boundaries. We previously consulted on the policy principles of
local plan reform, publishing our response to the consultation in early 2025.
This chapter sets out policies that are designed to support the implementation of the
new plan-making system, alongside new regulations and guidance. It is split into three
sections. Following a brief factual description of the required parts of the development
plan, the first section sets out policies on the role that each type of plan is intended to
play, and what should be done in pursuit of this. There is then a set of policies on
preparing plans, followed by a section setting out policy on the approach to examining
each type of plan.

The plan-making framework
PM1: Spatial Development Strategies

This policy anticipates the move towards national coverage of spatial development
strategies and clarifies their role, content, and relationship to other tiers of the
development plan. Spatial development strategies are intended to be high-level
documents focused on genuinely strategic, cross-boundary issues, leaving detailed
policy to other plans. The policy also sets expectations for when spatial development
strategies should be altered or replaced. As we have not previously set out proposals
on what national policy should say on the role and purpose of spatial development
strategies, we would be particularly interested in views on this.

6) Do you agree with the role, purpose and content of spatial development
   strategies set out in policy PM1? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

                                            19
  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

7) Do you agree that alterations should be made to spatial development
   strategies at least every 5 years to reflect any changes to housing
   requirements for the local planning authorities in the strategy area? Strongly
   agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If not, do you think there should be a different approach, for example, that
     alterations should only be made to spatial development strategies every
     five years where there are significant changes to housing need in the
     strategy area?

8) If spatial development strategies are not altered every five years, should
   related policy on the requirements used in five year housing land supply and
   housing delivery test policies, set out in Annex D of the draft Framework, be
   updated to allow housing requirement figures from spatial development
   strategies to continue to be applied after 5 years, so long as there has not
   been a significant change in that area’s local housing need? Strongly agree,
   partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
PM2: Local Plans

The policy explains the role of local plans in providing for new development and
improving the environment at a local level, their required content, and that they should
support the delivery of the spatial development strategies for their area. It also sets
the expectation that local plans are prepared and adopted within 30 months, and that
the preparation of the next plan should then commence within 5 years following
adoption. The policy also makes clear that there are circumstances in which an earlier
revision should take place, including where a new spatial development strategy sets
a significantly higher housing requirement, or where recommended by an Inspector at
examination.

The policy sets out that local plans should cover a period of no less than 15 years from
the point of adoption of the plan. However, we would welcome views on whether this
plan period remains appropriate in the new plan-making system. An alternative would
be to move to no less than 10 years, with the ability for local planning authorities to go
beyond this if they wanted (for example to accommodate significant developments in
future), given that local planning authorities will be required to commence preparation
of a new local plan within 5 years of adopting their previous plan, the expectation that
local plans are produced more quickly and kept up-to-date, and the additional
evidence burden required for plans covering longer periods. We would particularly
welcome views on this.




                                           20
9) Do you agree with the role, purpose and content of local plans set out in
   policy PM2? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

10) Do you think that local plans should cover a period of at least 15 years from
    the point of adoption of the plan? Yes/No

  a) If not, do you think they should cover a period of at least 10 years, or a
     different period of time. Please explain why.

PM3: Minerals and Waste Plans

Minerals and waste plans facilitate mineral supply and sustainable waste management.
The policy sets out their intended purpose and explains that their preparation should
follow the principles set out for local plans, reflecting the similar processes of preparing
these plans set out in legislation.
PM4: Supplementary Plans

Supplementary plans allow authorities to set design expectations or allocate specific
sites for development outside the local plan cycle, while remaining part of the
development plan. This policy sets out matters which local planning authorities should
have regard to when preparing supplementary plans, including not subverting the local
plan vision or spatial strategy, and including these policies into the next cycle of plan-
making of the local plan (or minerals and waste plan) for the area.
PM5: Neighbourhood Plans

This policy redrafts parts of the current Framework’s paragraphs 29-30. It sets out the
role of neighbourhood plans in allowing communities to plan positively for their areas,
and indicates the matters which they may cover. It makes clear that neighbourhood
plans should not propose less development than what is already set out in the wider
development plan.

Preparing plans
PM6: General principles for Plan-making

This policy replaces paragraph 16 of the current Framework, and sets out principles
for the preparation of all types of plan: that they should only address matters and
include policies necessary and relevant to the plan being prepared, should be informed
by environmental assessment where legally required, and be informed by positive
stakeholder engagement. Plans should also be published in accessible, searchable
formats and comply with relevant data standards.
Policy PM6 also states that plans should not replicate, substantively restate or modify
national decision-making policies unless directed by other policies in the draft
Framework. This principle is also reinforced through the examination policies (PM14,

                                            21
PM15, PM16 and PM17), which confirm that it should be considered explicitly during
examination. For local plans, minerals and waste plans and spatial development
strategies, this forms part of the tests of soundness against which plans are examined.
The policy aims to avoid the unnecessary duplication of national policy in plans, while
also providing sufficient flexibility for plans to include policies specific to that area
where appropriate to do so.

  11) Do you agree with the principles set out in policy PM6(1c), including its
     provisions for preventing duplication of national decision-making
     policies? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
     disagree, strongly disagree.

   a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

PM7: Initiating plan-making for local plans and minerals and waste plans

This policy applies to local plans and minerals and waste plans and explains how plan-
makers should initiate and manage the plan-making process to facilitate plan
preparation and adoption within the 30-month timeframe. It includes policy for
preparing a local plan timetable and using a project initiation document to collate key
information. The aim is to support one of the core objectives of reform: speeding up
plan preparation.

  12) Do you agree with the approach to initiating plan-making in PM7? Strongly
  agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
PM8: Evidence for plan-making

Applying to all types of plan, this policy expands significantly on existing policy
(paragraph 32 of the current Framework) and guidance to set out key principles for the
preparation of plan evidence. The policy expects plan-makers to reuse or update
existing evidence rather than produce wholly new evidence where possible, reuse
material from other elements of the development plan where appropriate, and work
with neighbouring plan-makers to prepare joint evidence. It also supports the use of
standardised tools, methods and templates including those published by the
government.
To help reduce the need for new evidence, the policy also sets out that evidence
related to development needs that has been established early in plan preparation
should only require reviewing and updating where there are strong reasons to do so.
The aim of the policy is to ensure that the evidence base to support a plan is relevant,
proportionate and sufficiently up to date, and that only evidence that is required to
support a plan is produced.




                                           22
  13) Do you agree with the approach to the preparation of plan evidence set
  out in policy PM8? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
  disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
PM9: Identifying land for development

This policy sets out how development plans should be informed by an assessment of
land to meet development needs over the plan period. For plans that allocate specific
sites, such as local plans, it establishes procedural principles for identifying, assessing
and selecting sites and aims to make the process faster, more consistent, and more
transparent.

  14) Do you agree with the approach to identifying land for development in
  PM9? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
  strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
PM10: Maintaining cooperation between plan-making authorities and PM11
Demonstrating cooperation between plan-making authorities

These policies replace the current Framework section on effective cooperation
(paragraphs 24-28) and strengthen expectations for engagement between authorities.
Key changes include placing stronger expectations on plan-making authorities to pro-
actively engage with other bodies to identify and address cross-boundary issues,
changes to support the new spatial development strategies system including making
clear that issues do not need to be revisited where they have been addressed by
spatial development strategies, and being more explicit about how authorities should
demonstrate effective cooperation through statements of common ground.

  15) Do you agree with the policies on maintaining and demonstrating cross-
  boundary cooperation set out in policy PM10 and policy PM11? Strongly agree,
  partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
PM12: Developer contributions

This policy seeks to promote greater clarity at the plan-making stage on expected
contributions to reduce the need for negotiation at the decision-making stage. The
policy recognises developer contributions as tools to support viable delivery of the plan,
the need for clear expectations, as well as circumstances for review mechanisms
where contributions fall below plan policy requirements. Policy PM12 also reflects the
introduction of spatial development strategies and acknowledges that contributions
may apply at different tiers and across areas, with particular importance for strategic
sites.



                                            23
  16) Do you agree that policy PM12 increases certainty at plan-making stage
  regarding the contributions expected from development proposals? Strongly
  agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

  17) Do you agree that plans should set out the circumstances in which review
  mechanisms will be used, or should national policy set clearer expectations?
  Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
  disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
PM13: Setting standards

This new policy is intended to clarify the circumstances in which it may be appropriate
to set quantitative local standards in development plans. This supports our intention
to make policy more ‘rules-based’ and to streamline the content of development plans
by narrowing the scope of when local variance is appropriate.

The policy recognises that there are important planning matters that are locally
variable, such as design, parking and open space, where standards set in
development plans can help to provide certainty to applicants. The policy also
acknowledges the circumstances in which adaptation of relevant national standards
may be appropriate.

In addition, the policy proposes preventing standards which cover matters already
addressed by building regulations, with the exception of the established national
technical standards for accessibility and water efficiency. In relation to water efficiency,
the policy recognises that some areas may need to set a tighter standard than the
existing optional requirement, due to the pressure on water supplies. This reflects
relevant parts of the Written Ministerial Statement made on 19 December 2023 titled
The Next Stage in Our Long-Term Plan for Housing Update. The Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs ongoing consultation on revising water efficiency
standards will not affect this policy.

Beyond these areas, the policy identifies specific areas where local standards should
not be set. This includes matters relating to the construction or internal layout of
buildings (other than the nationally described space standard), which the government
considers are matters best left to the market to determine.

The policy as drafted would limit local standards for energy efficiency, as we are
concerned that varying standards across local plans make it difficult for the
construction sector to adapt and deploy energy efficiency technologies at scale. If this
specific restriction were to be taken forward following consultation, we intend to use
secondary legislation to commence section 43 of the Deregulation Act 2015 to amend
the Planning & Energy Act 2008 to make clear that local plans should not set higher
energy efficiency standards for residential development. The draft Framework policy

                                            24
would also replace the policy contained in the 2023 Written Ministerial Statement titled
Planning – Local Energy Efficiency Standards Update.

  18) Do you agree with policy PM13 on setting local standards, including the
  proposal to commence s.43 of the Deregulation Act 2015? Strongly agree,
  partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

Examining plans
PM14: Examining Spatial Development Strategies

This policy sets out how spatial development strategies should be examined. While
the current Framework applies the same soundness tests as local plans, these are not
tailored to spatial development strategies. The revised tests introduce key differences,
including an expectation that spatial development strategies meet housing need
except in exceptional circumstances, and that examiners consider the potential for
spatial development strategies to influence market conditions over the long term,
where this could affect its implementation.
PM15: Examining Local Plans and Minerals and Waste Plans

This policy sets out updated tests of soundness against which local plans and minerals
and waste plans should be assessed.
While the tests are broadly consistent with those in the current Framework (paragraph
36), the revised policy is designed to align with wider changes, including conformity
with any adopted spatial development strategy for the area and the expectation that
plans should not duplicate, substantively restate or modify the content of national
decision-making policies.
The ’positively prepared’ test in the current Framework has been shortened by
referring directly to policy S1 in the sustainable development chapter, which details
how plans should plan for growth and change. Further changes to support a more
proportionate approach to examination include replacing ‘justified’ with an ‘appropriate’
test, to reinforce the message that the plan should contain ‘an’ appropriate strategy
(rather than any implication that it must be ‘the’ most appropriate strategy). We are
also proposing that the ‘effective’ test becomes a ‘realistic’ test, with some changes of
wording, which are intended to facilitate a more proportionate approach to
demonstrating plan deliverability.

19) Do you agree that the tests of soundness set out in policies PM14 and PM15
    will allow for a proportionate assessment of spatial development strategies,
    local plans and minerals and waste plans at examination? Strongly agree,
    partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If not, please explain how this could be improved to ensure a proportionate
     assessment, making it clear which type of plan you are commenting on?


                                          25
PM16: Examining supplementary plans

This sets out policy on the streamlined examination process for supplementary plans,
which focuses on legal compliance and testing whether the relevant plan-making
authority has had regard to any relevant national policies and guidance issued by the
Secretary of State.
PM17: Examining Neighbourhood Plans

This policy adds to the current Framework paragraph 38 to make clear that the
examination of neighbourhood plans will include an assessment of whether they
accord with the policy that they should not duplicate, substantively restate or modify
the content of national decision-making policies.

20) Do you have any specific comments on the content of the plan-making
   chapter which are not already captured by the other questions in this
   section?




                                         26
Chapter 3: Decision-making policies
Chapter 4 of the current Framework sets out the government’s expectations about how
applicants and local planning authorities should engage through the planning
application process to ensure timely and positive decisions. It also sets out a number
of general and cross-cutting decision-making policies.

We are proposing to recast these principles into a clearer set of general and cross-
cutting national decision-making policies. As the planning application process is
principally set out in primary legislation and regulations under the Town and Country
Planning Act 1990, supplemented by caselaw, national planning policy cannot subvert
this statutory framework and we have not sought to repeat it. This means that the
policies we are proposing in this chapter should be read in conjunction with wider
statutory requirements.

Preparing planning proposals
DM1: Preparing Development Proposals

This policy revises paragraphs 40–44 and 47 of the current Framework to set out the
general approach applicants and authorities should take when preparing applications.
It places stronger emphasis on proportionality, responding to concerns that the
process has become overly complex and time-consuming, particularly for smaller-
scale development. Pre-application engagement is now explicitly focused on major
development, and such applications should include a planning statement covering
compliance with the development plan and national decision-making policies,
engagement undertaken, and use of planning obligations. Smaller proposals would
require less information and engagement.

21) Do you agree with the principles set out in policy DM1? Strongly agree, partly
    agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
DM2: Information Requirements

Replacing paragraph 45 of the current Framework, this new policy promotes a more
consistent and proportionate approach to local information requirements set out in
local validation lists. It identifies, in conjunction with a new annex to the draft
Framework, the information required to support national decision-making policies –
such as in relation to transport, heritage, and flood protection – and makes clear that
local lists should only include additional requirements where relevant local policies
exist. These requirements must be proportionate to the scale of development. We
want to ensure that minor development - and our new proposed category of medium
development - are not subject to excessive information requirements which may be
suitable for larger developments but are disproportionate for this scale of
development.


                                          27
An alternative would be to take a regulatory approach, where information requirements
related to national decision-making policies are required through development
management regulations, as is currently done for design and access statements. This
would provide more certainty and consistency, although it requires clear definitions of
which applications would require each information requirement which for some issues
could prove complex. We would welcome views about the appropriate approach.

22) Do you agree with the policy DM2 on information requirements for planning
    applications? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

23) Do you have any views on whether such a policy could be better
    implemented through regulations?

DM3: Determining Development Proposals

This new policy complements policy DM1 and revises paragraphs 39–44 of the current
Framework. It reinforces the expectation that local planning authorities take a positive
and proactive approach, work collaboratively with applicants, and apply proportionality
when considering material considerations. It also encourages timely decisions,
particularly where statutory consultee advice is delayed.

24) Do you agree with the principles set out in DM3? Strongly agree, partly agree,
    neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
DM4: Emerging Development Plan Proposals

This policy redrafts paragraphs 49-51 of the current Framework, with minor wording
changes to reflect the new policy-based format.
DM5: Development Viability

This expands on paragraph 59 of the current Framework and is intended to work in
tandem with policy PM12. It seeks to reduce cases of unnecessary site-specific
viability assessment by clarifying when it may be appropriate at the decision-making
stage. It notes that such assessments are more likely to be justified for developments
where the typology, site characteristics, costs and economic circumstances differ
substantially from those that could be foreseen or assumed at the plan-making stage.
The policy requires any viability assessment accompanying a proposal to explain
divergence from the plan’s viability evidence and meet transparency standards. To
mitigate land price inflation, the policy states that overpaying for land should not justify
failure to meet plan policy. Lastly, the policy encourages decision-makers to consider
using review mechanisms to seek policy compliance, where developer contributions
are reduced below the requirements set out in relevant plan policies.



                                            28
The policy also refers to a new annex to the draft Framework on standardised inputs
to viability assessment. Please refer to Annex B of this consultation document for
further questions on the proposed annex.
Finally, as part of the package of support for housebuilding in London announced by
the Secretary of State and the Mayor of London on 23 October, the government also
committed to clarify the use of Section 73 applications. We are taking steps today to
remind the planning inspectorate, local planning authorities and developers that, as a
general rule, attempts to revisit fundamental issues of viability or planning obligations
through Section 73 applications should be scrutinised carefully, and the applicant
should provide a robust justification for any changes proposed for planning obligations
associated with the original permission beyond those linked to the specific variation of
condition being sought. Where developers submit a Section 73 application that seeks
to reduce affordable housing provision based on a new viability assessment, the
decision-maker should have regard to the harm that such a reduction may cause and
give this appropriate weight in the overall planning balance, alongside the wider merits
of the scheme.
The proper process for modifying or discharging planning obligations is set out in
section 106A of the Town and Country Planning 1990 (as amended). However, the
Government recognises the practical constraints associated with the existing,
statutory route to modify or discharge planning obligations via section 106A (effected
by a ‘deed of variation’). Alongside ongoing work relating to the implementation of
Section 73B of the Levelling-Up and Regeneration Act 2023, the government intends
to undertake a wider review of the statutory framework for modifying or discharging
existing planning obligations. We would therefore welcome views on the efficacy and
use of section 106A and section 73, to inform ongoing work to ensure there is an
appropriate route that provides confidence to both authorities and developers.

25) Do you agree that policy DM5 would prevent unnecessary negotiation of
    developer contributions, whilst also providing sufficient flexibility for
    development to proceed? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
    disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

26) Do you have any further comments on the likely impact of policy DM5:
    Development viability?

27) Do you have any views on how the process of modifying planning
    obligations under S106A, where needed once a section 106 agreement has
    been entered into, could be improved?
  a) If so, please provide views on specific changes that may improve the
     efficacy of S106A and the main obstacles that result in delay when
     seeking modification of planning obligations.




                                           29
28) Do you have any views on how the process of modifying planning
    obligations could be improved in advance of any legislative change, noting
    the government’s commitment to boosting the supply of affordable housing.
  a) If so, please provide views on the current use of s73 and, if any, the
     impact on affordable housing obligations.

DM6: Use of Planning Conditions and Obligations

This policy revises paragraphs 56–58 of the current Framework while maintaining the
core intent. The aim is to encourage consistency and simplify processes. Changes
include aligning the tests for planning conditions with their statutory description,
confirming that conditions cannot be used to secure payments, removing duplicated
policy tests for planning obligations (which are already set out in legislation), and
providing the basis for the use of national model conditions and obligations to promote
consistency. The intention is to start to develop these model conditions and obligations
over the next year, working closely with the sector.

29) Do you agree with the approach for planning conditions and obligations set
    out in policy DM6, especially the use of model conditions and
    obligations?Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.
DM7: Relationship with Other Regulatory Regimes

Replacing paragraph 201 of the current Framework, this policy clarifies how planning
decisions should interact with other regulatory regimes, such as building regulations
and those relating to water quality. It restates the core principles that planning
decisions should be based on whether development would be an acceptable use of
land, and that other regulatory regimes should be assumed to operate effectively.
However, the updated policy also reflects case law requiring the consideration of
issues where they have land-use implications.
In addition, the policy makes clear that changes to approved development resulting
from subsequent regulatory requirements should be approved, addressing concerns
that some planning decisions may stray into matters beyond land-use considerations.

30) Do you agree that policy DM7 clarifies the relationship between planning
    decisions and other regulatory regimes? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
    agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.



DM8: Unauthorised Development and Enforcement

This policy revises paragraph 60 of the current Framework and introduces a
strengthened approach to intentional unauthorised development, replacing the policy
set out in the Written Ministerial Statement made on 17 December 2015 Green Belt

                                          30
Protection and Intentional Unauthorised Development. This new policy proposes that
if it is concluded, based on evidence, that unauthorised development was intentional,
that fact should be given substantial weight in considering whether to grant planning
permission in relation to retrospective applications and enforcement appeals where
planning permission is being sought. This responds to long-standing concerns about
the integrity of the planning system being undermined by retrospective permissions.
The policy does not mean that retrospective applications would be automatically
refused. It will remain a matter of planning judgment for the decision-maker to decide
whether to grant planning permission in light of the circumstances of each case.

31) Do you agree with the new intentional unauthorised development policy in
    policy DM8? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

32) Are there any specific types of harm arising from intentional unauthorised
    development, and any specific impacts from the proposed policy, which we
    should consider?

  a) If so, are there any particular additions or mitigations which we should
     consider?
DM9: Use of Development Orders

This policy updates paragraphs 52 and 53 of the current Framework and expands their
scope to include Mayoral Development Orders, which is proposed to be extended to
all Mayors under the English Devolution and Community Empowerment Bill. The aim
is to encourage greater use of development orders as a tool for delivery.
DM10: Article 4 directions

This policy replaces paragraph 54 of the current Framework and proposes a more
flexible policy in relation to the use of Article 4 so local planning authorities can remove
permitted development rights where it is necessary to protect the amenity or well-being
of an area, for instance to support the renewal of towns centres or where there is an
overconcentration of small Houses in Multiple Occupation. The Article 4 direction
should still be based on robust evidence and apply to the smallest area possible.

33) Do you agree with the new Article 4 direction policy in policy DM10? Strongly
    agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                            31
Chapter 4: Achieving sustainable
development
This chapter sets out core policies for how plans and planning decisions should
approach sustainable development. While they build on aspects of current Framework
chapter 2, including a new presumption in favour of sustainable development, they
introduce a more spatial aspect, especially in relation to decision-making. This is a
gap in the current Framework: while aspects of the current document point to types of
development which may or may not be acceptable in different locations (especially
within the Green Belt), the current Framework lacks a comprehensive approach of the
type found in many local plans. By setting out core locational principles at the national
level, we aim to bring more consistency to decision-making and avoid these principles
from needing to be repeated in development plans.
S1: Positive Plan-Making

This policy replaces the first half of the current presumption in favour of sustainable
development (paragraphs 11(a) and (b) of the current Framework) to create a
standalone provision for plan-making. It retains the core expectation that plans should
positively seek opportunities to meet development needs, with minor adjustments and
re-ordering to avoid overlap with the new policy on setting a spatial strategy (policy
S2) and to provide a clear transition to subsequent policies.
S2: Producing a Spatial Strategy

This new policy introduces a requirement for plans to include a clear spatial strategy.
It emphasises the importance of identifying settlement boundaries, or clear criteria for
identifying settlements, to support the proposed approach to decision-making on
development within and outside settlements (policies S4 and S5).
A proposed definition of settlements for the purpose of this and other policies in the
draft Framework is set out in the glossary at Annex B to the draft Framework.

34) Do you agree with the proposed approach to setting a spatial strategy in
    development plans? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
    partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

35) Do you agree with the proposed definition of settlements in the glossary?
    Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
    disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
S3: Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development

This policy replaces the decision-making elements of paragraph 11 of the current
Framework. It retains the existing principle that proposals which accord with the
                                           32
development plan and national decision-making policies should be approved without
delay. The remainder of the policy takes a different approach to the existing, by
requiring decisions to be made in accordance with policies S4 and S5, depending on
the location of a development proposal.
This is because the ‘tilt’ in favour of granting permission in certain circumstances, set
out at 11(d) of the current Framework, has been replaced by new versions which are
embedded within policies S4 and S5. A core aim of those policies is to promote
sustainable development, by steering proposals to appropriate locations: maximising
the use of suitable land within urban areas, and taking a more selective approach to
the types and locations of development outside settlements. By linking directly to these
policies, the new ‘presumption in favour of sustainable development’ set out in
proposed policy S3 is intended to live up to its name, as an overarching policy which
signals where development should be located.

36) Do you agree with the revised approach to the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
    disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
S4: Principle of Development Within Settlements

This policy builds on the changes to the current Framework made in December 2024,
which included an addition (at paragraph 125c) requiring that development on suitable
brownfield land within settlements is approved unless there would be substantial harm.
This reflected the first strand of the ‘brownfield passport’ working paper published in
September 2024, in terms of making the principle of development on such land clearer.
This was intended to bring greater certainty for those bringing forward development
proposals, including on small sites.

Proposed policy S4 refines this to provide a more complete approach within
settlements, so that development is supported in principle within settlements as a
whole, subject to specified exceptions where there could be unacceptable impacts.
These exceptions include: a conflict with land which has been allocated for specific
purposes; the development of previously undeveloped land which is of value (policy
S4(2)a and b); and circumstances where an important policy elsewhere in the draft
Framework would direct refusal. This approach recognises that some non-brownfield
land within settlements may be appropriate for development, which in practice is likely
to entail relatively small sites, including residential curtilages up to certain limits (see
policy L2).
The policy (and also policy S5) is phrased in terms of development proposals being
approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
adverse effects, rather than applying a ‘substantial harm’ test, in order to make clear
that all relevant national decision-making policies must also be considered.




                                            33
37) Do you agree to the proposed approach to development within settlements?
    Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
    disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
S5: Principle of Development Outside Settlements

Complementing policy S4, this policy sets out the forms of development that are
intended to be regarded as acceptable in principle outside settlements (other than in
the Green Belt and on Local Open Space, where the policy does not apply). Unlike the
inclusive approach to allowing development on suitable land within settlements, this
policy restricts the types of development that are considered acceptable outside
settlements, in order to prevent unsustainable patterns of growth and conserve rural
character.
The list of development considered appropriate outside settlements is broad and
includes those types which are ‘not inappropriate’ in the Green Belt (see policy GB7),
though with some lessening of the controls which apply in the Green Belt, recognising
that a less restrictive approach is appropriate in non-Green Belt areas. This includes,
where development would involve the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of
an existing building, defining the ‘existing building’ as the one which exists at the point
this version of the Framework is finalised, as opposed to that existing on 1 July 1948,
or as built originally (if constructed since then).
Some additional categories of development would also be permitted, including rural
business and services which need to be located outside settlements, and development
of other sorts which would meet an evidenced unmet need (for example in instances
where there is not a five-year housing land supply). This last provision echoes what
the current presumption in favour of sustainable development would allow where
relevant plan policies are out of date, although it adds the proviso that in such
circumstances development should be well-related to an existing settlement (unless
the nature of the use would make this inappropriate), to guard against development
being badly-located.
The policy also allows for suitable development (including housing and mixed-use)
around railway stations offering high levels of connectivity, recognising these as
relatively sustainable locations. It makes clear that such development should be
limited to land physically well-related to the station and within reasonable walking
distance of it. The objective of this aspect of the policy is to support high density
development in sustainable locations. It is recognised that high densities can limit
certain types of development coming forward, including traveller sites and some other
forms of accommodation, for which the proposed density requirements in chapter 12
are unlikely to be appropriate. We are seeking views on the potential impacts of this.
The proposed basis for identifying qualifying stations for this purpose is explained in
the section of this consultation document dealing with the policies on the effective use
of land (chapter 12).



                                            34
Although this policy deals with land outside the Green Belt (and any areas of Local
Green Space located outside settlements), its final paragraph notes that where
development is ‘not inappropriate’ in the Green Belt, the same approach should be
taken – i.e. of approving development unless the benefits would be substantially
outweighed by any adverse effects. This is for consistency, to reflect the wider position
in policies S4 and S5 that where development is regarded as acceptable in principle,
the starting point should be to approve it unless there are good reasons not to. It also
reflects an aspect of the current NPPF, as the existing presumption in favour of
sustainable development will, when it is triggered, also apply to development which is
‘not inappropriate’ in the Green Belt.

38) Do you agree to the proposed approach to development outside
    settlements? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

39) Do you have any views on the specific categories of development which the
    policy would allow to take place outside settlements, and the associated
    criteria? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
    strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons.

40) Do you agree with the proposed approach to development around stations,
    including that it applies only to housing and mixed-use development capable
    of meeting the density requirements in chapter 12? Strongly agree, partly
    agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, including any evidence that this policy
     would lead to adverse impacts on Gypsies and Travellers and other
     groups with protected characteristics.
S6: Neighbourhood Plans and the Presumption

This policy redrafts paragraph 14 of the current Framework, which exempts recently
made neighbourhood plans from the ‘tilt’ in favour of permission contained in the
presumption in favour of sustainable development. It applies where a proposal would
conflict with the neighbourhood plan, and the neighbourhood plan contains proposals
to meet its identified housing requirement. The policy has been re-worded to reflect
the new approach to the presumption, and also to make clear that to qualify the
neighbourhood plan should contain allocations to meet the identified housing
requirement. There has been litigation on the interpretation of the existing policy
wording, which was expressed more vaguely in terms of ‘policies and allocations’.

41) Do you agree that neighbourhood plans should contain allocations to meet
    their identified housing requirement in order to qualify for this policy?



                                           35
Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree or disagree, partly disagree, strongly
disagree.

a) If not, please provide your reasons




                                      36
Chapter 5: Meeting the challenge of
climate change
Climate change presents an urgent and far-reaching challenge, with wide-ranging
implications for communities, ecosystems, and the economy. The planning system
has a vital role to play in reducing emissions and building resilience to its impacts.
Recognising this, core policies on addressing climate change are proposed to be
brought forward in the Framework, with the policies themselves setting out more
comprehensively how planning policies and decisions can make a positive contribution.
Policies on flood risk and energy are proposed to be addressed in separate chapters
to ensure these topics receive appropriate coverage.

The policies aim to ensure that both climate change mitigation and adaptation are
appropriately considered in both plan-making and decision-making. Given the cross-
cutting nature of climate issues, the policies signpost to other relevant chapters, such
as those on design and sustainable transport, where appropriate, to ensure a holistic
approach is taken.

Plan-making policy
CC1: Planning for Climate Change

This policy consolidates and redrafts paragraphs 161, 162, and 164 of the current
Framework to provide a clearer and more cohesive set of plan-making principles. The
policy sets out how development plans should contribute to mitigating climate change
and address climate-related risks.

The list of climate risks identified is illustrative rather than exhaustive and now includes
wildfires to reflect their increased likelihood.

The policy highlights the role of baseline carbon assessments as tools that can be
used to assess the potential impact of spatial strategies and allocations on future
emissions and options for mitigation. It also sets out measures that may be needed to
address current or future vulnerabilities and encourages opportunities to incorporate
green infrastructure and nature-based solutions.

42) Do you agree with the approach to planning for climate change in policy
    CC1? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
    strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                            37
National decision-making policies
CC2: Mitigation of Climate Change

This policy would replace paragraph 163 of the current Framework and establishes a
more comprehensive approach to assessing climate mitigation in planning decisions.
It adopts a signposting approach by cross-referencing relevant policies elsewhere in
the Framework, and draws on existing paragraphs 161, 166, and 167, as well as other
parts of the current Framework.

The policy sets out key considerations for decision-making, including:

   •   Promoting sustainable transport and development patterns;
   •   Encouraging design approaches that conserve energy and other resources;
   •   Supporting opportunities to reuse existing structures and materials;
   •   Protecting and restoring habitats which can act as important carbon stores; and
   •   Restricting fossil fuel extraction.

The policy would also give substantial weight to the benefits of improving the energy
efficiency of existing buildings or drawing energy from district heat networks, and
renewable and low-carbon sources.

43) Do you agree with the approach to mitigating climate change through
    planning decisions in policy CC2? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree
    nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If not, what additional measures could be taken to ensure climate change
     mitigation is given appropriate consideration?
CC3: Adaptation to Climate Change

This policy would also replace paragraph 163 and sets out principles for climate
adaptation in planning decisions. It goes further than the current Framework by
requiring development proposals to consider both current and future climate impacts
over the lifetime of the development.

As with policy CC2, this policy establishes clear criteria that developments should
meet to address key climate risks, linking to other national decision-making policies
where appropriate, and providing a more consistent framework for decision-making.
Sub-paragraph (e) of the policy highlights the particular importance of considering
wildfire risks, due to the increasing prevalence of spells of hot and dry weather, and of
changing vegetation patterns. It indicates when risks should be considered and
outlines potential mitigation measures which may be appropriate. We welcome views
on how such risks are identified and how mitigation measures can be integrated with
wider principles for good design and what guidance is needed to support this.


                                           38
44) Do you agree with the approach to climate change adaptation through
    planning decisions in policy CC3? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree
    nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) What additional measures could be taken to ensure climate change
     adaptation is given appropriate consideration?

45) Does the policy on wildfire adaptation clearly explain when such risks should
    be considered and how these risks should be mitigated? Strongly agree, partly
    agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons

46) How should wildfire adaptation measures be integrated with wider principles
    for good design, and what additional guidance would be helpful?

47) Do you have any other comments on actions that could be taken through
    national planning policy to address climate change?




                                       39
Chapter 6: Delivering a sufficient supply of
homes
Planning for the homes we need remains at the heart of the planning system to ensure
everyone has access to safe and secure accommodation. That is why in December
2024, we published a revised standard method for calculating housing need, alongside
other changes, to better align with government’s ambition to deliver 1.5 million safe
and decent homes.
It is also essential to support a diverse range of accommodation and mix of tenures to
speed up the building of homes, and create thriving and resilient communities across
our towns, cities, and rural areas alike. It is equally important the planning system
supports nationally-important housing types – such as community-based specialist
accommodation for criminal justice purposes, to support our 10-year prison capacity
strategy, and defence homes, to build on the commitments in the Defence Housing
Strategy 2025.
This chapter sets out new proposals to meet these objectives. It includes redrafted
policies previously set out in Chapter 5 of the current Framework, incorporates
relevant policies from the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, strengthens expectations
around tenure mix and meeting a diverse range of housing needs, and goes further in
ensuring social and affordable housing is delivered in line with local needs – including
in rural areas.

Plan-making policies
HO1: Assessing the Need for Homes

Policies HO1 and HO2 set out how development plans should assess and set out
relevant housing requirement figures.
Policy HO1 redrafts parts of paragraphs 62 and 63 of the current Framework,
alongside Planning Policy for Traveller Sites policy A, to better align with efforts to
support strategic planning. As spatial development strategies are adopted, they will
set the housing requirements for local plans, based on meeting the cumulative need
of the area. As such, this policy sets out requirements for spatial development
strategies, and local plans where a spatial development strategy is not in place, to be
informed by an assessment of housing need and traveller site need. This is in
recognition that housing and traveller site needs are best planned for at the strategic
level.
The policy also sets out requirements for development plans, at the appropriate level,
to take into account an assessment of the size, type, and tenure of housing or other
accommodation needed for different groups. Service Family Accommodation would
now be included in the wider assessment of Affordable Housing Need, reflecting its
inclusion in the overall affordable housing definition as set out in the glossary of the
draft Framework at Annex B.


                                          40
HO2: Setting Housing Requirement Figures

Policy HO2 redrafts parts of current Framework paragraphs 62, 68, 67, and 70,
alongside relevant material from Planning Policy for Traveller Sites. This policy sets
out requirements for spatial development strategies, and local plans where a spatial
development strategy is not in place, to set requirement figures for housing and
traveller sites. This policy also includes changes to how housing requirement figures
should be set for neighbourhood plans, and makes clear that local authorities should
avoid setting a housing requirement of nil, except in specified conditions.

48) Do you agree the requirements for spatial development strategies and local
    plans in policy HO1 and policy HO2 are appropriate? Strongly agree, partly
    agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

49) Is further guidance required on assessing the needs of different groups,
    including older people, disabled people, and those who require social and
    affordable housing? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
    partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If so, what elements should this guidance cover?

50) Do you agree with the approach to incorporating relevant policies of
    Planning Policy for Traveller Sites within this chapter? Strongly agree, partly
    agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

51) Is further guidance needed on how authorities should assess the need for
    traveller sites and set requirement figures? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
    agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If so, what are the key principles this guidance should establish?
HO3: Providing Land for Homes

Policy HO3 sets out requirements for local plans to identify a sufficient supply and mix
of sites to meet the requirement figures set in policy HO1, and to set out a trajectory
showing the expected rate of delivery for these sites. It draws from current Framework
paragraphs 72, 75, 78, 79, and 80, and includes relevant material from the Planning
Policy for Traveller Sites. As part of incorporating elements from Planning Policy for
Traveller Sites, we have made changes to the definitions of ‘deliverable and
developable’ in the glossary of the Framework, and made clear that requirements to
set out a trajectory showing expected rates of delivery apply to traveller sites.

52) Do you agree the new Annex D to the draft Framework is sufficiently clear on
    how local planning authorities should set the appropriate buffer for their



                                          41
   local plan 5-year housing land supply? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

53) Do you agree the new Annex D to the draft Framework is sufficiently clear on
    the wider procedural elements of 5-year housing land supply, the Housing
    Delivery Test and how they relate to decision-making? Strongly agree, partly
    agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

54) Do you agree the requirements to establish a 5 year supply of deliverable
    traveller sites and monitor delivery are sufficiently clear? Strongly agree,
    partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.
  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

HO4: Land for large scale residential and mixed-use development

Policy HO4 sets out requirements to identify locations and sites for large scale
residential and mixed-use development. This policy redrafts existing paragraph 77
within the current Framework and supports opportunities to meet housing and other
development needs through the provision of large, strategic sites, such as new
settlements. It also ensures that appropriate considerations are set out in spatial
development strategies and local plans. This recognises that strategic sites can
support a comprehensive approach to development, including a diverse range of
housing types, high quality design and ensuring appropriate infrastructure provision.
To support our commitment to strengthen policy support for mixed tenure development,
and to ensure that new settlements plan for a diverse range of housing types and are
built out as quickly as possible, we are proposing that local plans set out expectations
for a mix of tenures to be provided on these sites.
We also propose to review and update this policy following the government's
confirmation of the locations for new towns in the spring next year. The intention is to
ensure these new towns are incorporated into the preparation of relevant spatial
development strategies and local plans.

55) Do you agree the plan-making requirements, for both local plans and spatial
    development strategies, in relation to large scale residential and mixed-use
    development are sufficiently clear? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree
    nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HO5: Meeting the needs of different groups

This policy sets out requirements for development plans to support the delivery of
housing that meets the needs of different groups. It redrafts current Framework
paragraphs 63, 65, and 67. These proposals build on the changes made in December

                                          42
2024, which further supported the delivery of social and affordable homes by requiring
authorities to set specific requirements for social rent homes, and strengthened
support for mixed tenure development, and respond to our commitment to better
support the provision of social and affordable housing in rural areas.
These changes also support the provision of specialist forms of accommodation, such
as housing for older people, disabled people and students, and set firmer expectations
for the mix of tenures on sites over 150 units.
As part of this, we are:
•   Proposing changes to support the provision of much needed social and affordable
    housing in rural areas. This includes amending the definition of Designated Rural
    Areas in the current Framework glossary to allow affordable housing contributions
    to be sought on minor development in parishes with a population of 3,000 or less
    and a population density of two persons or less per hectare. This is not intended
    to alter the way in which those areas currently designated as ‘rural’ under Section
    157 of the Housing Act 1985 are treated, or how that designation is achieved.

•   Requiring authorities to set out the proportion of new housing that should be
    delivered to M4(2) and M4(3) standards of the building regulations, to ensure plans
    adequately provide for the accessibility needs of an ageing population and the
    needs of disabled people. Authorities will need to set requirements for M4(2) that
    meet or exceed their locally assessed need for this housing, and ensure that need
    is met. The government is proposing a national minimum that ensures at least 40%
    of new housing over the course of the plan period is delivered to M4(2) standards,
    formalising best practice and driving up provision in areas without clear
    requirements. Taken together, this approach ensures necessary levels of
    accessible housing are provided without mandating M4(2) as a minimum standard
    for all housing, while providing authorities with the necessary flexibility to maximise
    housebuilding overall.

•   Requiring authorities to identify sites, or set requirements for parts of allocated sites,
    which can provide specific types of housing such as older persons housing,
    purpose-built accommodation for students, plots for self and custom build, and
    traveller sites.

•   Making clear that authorities should set out requirements for a broader mix of
    tenures to be provided on larger sites to encourage diversity and faster build out –
    building on changes made in December 2024 and informed by responses received
    to the Build Out working paper, published in May 2024. We have proposed 150
    homes as an appropriate threshold and would welcome views on the threshold.
    We are not proposing to set requirements for the mix of tenures that should be
    provided, as the mix should take into account local assessments of need.

56) Do you agree our proposed changes to the definition of designated rural
    areas will better support rural social and affordable housing? Strongly agree,
    partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

                                             43
57) Do you agree with our proposals to ask authorities to set out the proportion
    of new housing that should be delivered to M4(2) and M4(3) standards?
    Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
    disagree.

58) Do you agree 40% of new housing delivered to M4(2) standards over the plan
    period is the right minimum proportion? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
    agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, and would you support an alternative
     minimum percentage requirement?

59) Do you agree the proposals to support the needs of different groups, through
    requiring authorities to identify sites or set requirements for parts of
    allocated sites are proportionate? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree
    nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

60) Do you agree with our proposals to ask authorities to set out requirements
    for a broader mix of tenures to be provided on sites of 150 homes or more?
    Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
    disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons and indicate if an alternative site size
     threshold would be preferable?
HO6: Planning for Diverse Sites

This policy redrafts the current Framework paragraphs 73, 82, and 83. It sets out
requirements for local plans to consider how they can support a diverse mix of sites,
including through allocating land to accommodate at least 10% of the housing
requirement on sites no larger than one hectare. In addition, we have added wording
to require local plans to allocate land to accommodate a further 10% of the requirement
on sites of between 1 and 2.5 hectares. These changes are intended to better support
different scales of development, and provide greater certainty to SMEs, as sites of
these sizes are primarily built out by SME (small and medium-sized enterprise)
housebuilders and tend to be built out more quickly. We are also proposing to ask
authorities to allocate sites where these will support the vitality of rural communities.

61) Do you agree with proposals for authorities to allocate land to accommodate
    10% of the housing requirement on sites of between 1 and 2.5 hectares?
    Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
    disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons




                                           44
National decision-making policies
HO7: Meeting the need for homes

This policy draws from the current Framework paragraph 63. It sets out a new
requirement for substantial weight to be given to the benefits of providing
accommodation that will contribute towards meeting the evidenced needs of the local
community. This includes the provision of homes and traveller sites, the provision of
homes that will meet the needs of groups assessed under policy HO1, as well as any
other evidenced need, such as community led-development or community-based
specialist accommodation.

62) Are any changes to policy HO7 needed in order to ensure that substantial
    weight is given to meeting relevant needs?
HO8: Providing Affordable Homes

This policy sets out requirements relating to how developments should be expected to
deliver social and affordable housing. It redrafts current Framework paragraphs 64
and 66.
We are proposing new policy, accompanied by an amendment to the definition of
affordable housing, that will formally recognise defence homes as a form of publicly
owned affordable housing. To support this, we are making clear that military affordable
housing proposals should, where need is evidenced, be able to form whole or part of
required affordable housing contributions. This will remove obstacles for this type of
provision being brought forward by the Ministry of Defence, and enable military
affordable housing to be delivered on a broader range of sites, in line with operational
needs. Government intends to provide further guidance on how authorities should
establish the need for military affordable housing.
In addition, we propose development proposals which meet or exceed relevant
development plan requirements for affordable housing should benefit from a more
flexible approach relating to the size of market homes provided. This does not weaken
our position on delivering homes in line with community needs, but recognises a
pragmatic approach is sometimes needed to not limit the delivery of affordable housing.
Building on our changes in the December 2024 revisions to the Framework which
made clear that local planning authorities should consider the particular needs of those
who require social rent, we are also seeking views on whether to specify a minimum
proportion of social rent housing, such as 10%, that would be required of major
development unless otherwise specified in development plans.
We are also seeking views as to whether the planning system provides appropriate
flexibility to support temporary accommodation affordable housing products, such as
stepping stone housing, when considering matters such as space standards. We
welcome views, as part of this consultation, on the potential impacts of these proposals.

63) Do you agree that proposals to add military affordable housing to the
    definition of affordable housing, and allow military housing to be delivered

                                          45
   as part of affordable housing requirements, will successfully enable the
   provision of military homes? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

64) Do you agree flexibility relating to the size of market homes provided will
    better enable developments providing affordable housing? Strongly agree,
    partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

65) Would requiring a minimum proportion of social rent, unless otherwise
    specified in development plans, support the delivery of greater number of
    social rent homes? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
    partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If so, what would be an appropriate minimum proportion and development
     size threshold taking into account development viability?

66) Are changes to planning policy needed to ensure that affordable temporary
    accommodation, such as stepping stone housing, is appropriately
    supported, including flexibilities around space standards?

  a) If so, what changes would be beneficial?
On-Site Affordable Housing Provision

The draft Framework retains a strong preference for, and commitment to, on-site
delivery of social and affordable housing, reflecting the benefits this provides in terms
of the delivery of mixed communities, controlled land prices, and secure cash flow for
developers of all sizes.
At the same time, the government also wishes to provide for a more proportionate and
streamlined planning system for SME housebuilders, to help bring competition and
diversity to the market, and support faster build out.
The government has already taken a number of steps to support demand for S106
units and we are actively exploring a range of additional longer-term measures to
provide for a simpler, more transparent and more resilient S106 system. Taken
together, these will help more SME housebuilders across the country find willing and
suitable Registered Providers for S106 units on “medium” sites.

However, the government recognises that even within the context of an improving
market for S106 homes, many SME housebuilders will continue to face challenges in
finding buyers for on-site social and affordable housing provision. In addition, we know
that SME housebuilders experience disproportionately negative outcomes from
prolonged uncertainty and negotiations with authorities and would benefit from a faster
and simpler way to agree S106 obligations.

                                           46
As such, the government has decided to explore further the potential benefits and
drawbacks of enabling developers to discharge social and affordable housing
requirements through cash contributions in lieu of direct delivery in the category of
“medium” sites.
In its fullest form, this approach would mean it was entirely at the applicant’s discretion
as to whether to provide social and affordable housing on-site or via a cash payment
in lieu. Such a policy outcome would be achieved by inserting the following paragraph
1b – as below in italics – into policy HO8:

1. Development proposals should meet or exceed up-to-date development plan
   requirements for the proportion and mix of affordable housing tenures relevant to
   the location, including the minimum proportion of Social Rent. This should be
   provided on-site unless:

   a. Off-site delivery on an alternative nearby site would optimise the quality or
      quantity of homes built;

   b. The development meets the definition of medium site, in which case a cash
      payment in lieu should be accepted; or

   c. A cash payment in lieu of on or off-site provision can be justified robustly, and
      the agreed approach contributes towards the objective of creating mixed and
      balanced communities.


Further consideration of this policy proposition would have to take into account its
impact on the government’s manifesto commitments to strengthen the existing
developer contributions system and to deliver the biggest boost in social and
affordable housebuilding in a generation. It would also have to account for the need to
ensure payments reflect an appropriate value, and the imperative that such payments
could be spent effectively and quickly so as not to push social and affordable housing
delivery timescales far into the future.

67) Do you agree that applicants should have discretion to deliver social and
    affordable housing requirements via cash payments in lieu of on-site delivery
    on medium sites? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If so, would it be desirable to limit the circumstances in which cash
     contributions in lieu of on-site delivery can be provided – for example,
     should it not be permitted on land released from the Green Belt where the
     Golden Rules apply? Please explain your answer.

  b) If you do not believe applicants should have blanket discretion to
     discharge social and affordable housing requirements through commuted
     sums, do you think cash contributions in lieu of on-site delivery should be
     permitted in certain circumstances – for example where it could be

                                            47
      evidenced that onsite delivery would prevent a scheme from being
      delivered? Please explain your answer

68) What risks and benefits would you expect this policy to have? Please explain
    your answer. The government is particularly interested in views on the
    potential impact on SME housing delivery, overall housing delivery, land
    values, build out rates, overall social and affordable housing delivery, and
    Registered Providers (including SME providers).

69) What guidance or wider changes would be needed to enable Local Planning
    Authorities to spend commuted sums more effectively and more quickly?
    Please explain your answer.

70) Would further guidance be helpful in supporting authorities to calculate the
    appropriate value of cash contributions in lieu?

  a) If so, what elements and principles should this guidance set out? Please
     explain your answer. For example, guidance could make clear that
     contributions in lieu should be an amount which is the equivalent value of
     providing affordable housing on site, based on a comparison of the Gross
     Development Value of the proposed scheme with the Gross Development
     Value of the scheme assuming affordable housing was provided onsite.

Finally, the government wants to ensure policy HO8 enables affordable housing to be
delivered offsite where such an approach would optimise the quality and quantity of
affordable housing delivered – for example off-site delivery by RPs on alternative sites
or land transfers.

71) Do you support proposals to enable off site delivery where affordable
    housing delivery can be optimised to produce better outcomes in terms of
    quality or quantity? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
    partly disagree, strongly disagree.

       a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HO9: Specialist forms of accommodation

This is a new policy aimed at setting clearer national requirements for the delivery of
specialist forms of accommodation, ensuring that these come forward in appropriate
locations and with the right access to services. As part of this, the draft Framework
makes reference to community-based specialist and to large-scale shared living
accommodation, both of which are accompanied by new definitions in the glossary.
These additions are aimed at ensuring the specific requirements of these particular
forms of accommodation are better recognised and supported in the planning system.




                                          48
72) Do you agree the with the criteria set out regarding the locations of specialist
    housing for older people? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
    disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

73) Do you agree with the criteria set out regarding the locations of community-
    based specialist accommodation, including changes to the glossary?
    Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
    disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

74) Do you agree with the criteria set out regarding the locations of purpose-built
    student accommodation and large-scale shared living accommodation,
    including changes to the glossary? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree
    nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HO10: Exception Sites

This policy makes changes to deliver on our commitment to further support rural
exception sites. It redrafts current Framework paragraphs 76 and 82. We have made
changes to ensure national policy is clearer on the acceptability of exception site
proposals, in order to strengthen support for this type of affordable accommodation in
rural areas. We continue to support local policies setting out requirements that would
support a broader range of exception site locations.
We recognise the challenge that land values can play in delivering rural exception sites.
In order to help address this, we are proposing to remove First Homes exception sites
as a discrete form of exception site, to reduce competition with rural exception sites.
We are also interested in how a requirement for viability assessment to use a
benchmark land value of £10,000 a plot, five times agricultural value, or existing use
value where appropriate, would support delivery, and welcome views on the feasibility
of this approach.

75) Do you agree the proposals provide adequate additional support for rural
    exception sites? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, including what other changes may be
     needed to increase their uptake?

76) Do you agree with proposals to remove First Homes exception sites as a
    discrete form of exception site? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
    disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

                                          49
77) Do you agree proposals for a benchmark land value for rural exception sites
    will help to bring forward more rural affordable homes? Strongly agree, partly
    agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If so, which approach and value as set out in the narrative for policy HO10
     of the consultation document is the most beneficial for government to set
     out?
HO11: Isolated homes in the countryside

This policy redrafts current Framework paragraph 84, with consequent changes to
reflect policy on the removal of the term “optimum viable use” and new policy in relation
to the reuse of vacant listed buildings as set out in the chapter on conserving and
enhancing the historic environment.
HO12: Traveller Sites

This policy brings together relevant policies from Planning Policy for Traveller Sites for
considering development proposals for traveller sites. As part of these changes, we
are no longer proposing authorities set their own criteria in relation to the allocation of
traveller sites, or consideration of traveller site proposals where there is no identified
need. Instead, the criteria in these policies should be used, to provide greater clarity
and consistency.

78) Do you agree the proposals to set out requirements for traveller sites at
    policy HO12 adequately capture relevant aspects from Planning Policy for
    Traveller Sites, whilst ensuring fair treatment for traveller sites in the
    planning system? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.

79) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HO13: Build out of residential and mixed-use development

This is a new policy to ensure major development proposals are capable of being
implemented within a reasonable period – taking into account tenure mix, local market
conditions and development history of the site. This policy seeks to support our wider
ambitions of speeding up build out, and is informed by the responses to the Build Out
working paper published in May 2024.
The policy is also intended to better support large-scale housing and mixed-use
development. This reflects concerns that the current system demands excessive detail
and certainty for large scale, multi-phase schemes up-front, which can make the
delivery of these schemes challenging. This policy makes clear that the consenting
framework for multi-phase development proposals should be flexible enough to
respond positively to changing circumstances, whilst securing a clear approach to
design, infrastructure provision, and social and affordable housing.




                                            50
This policy also includes a new requirement to ensure that development proposals
which would be inconsistent with emerging plans for large scale development can be
resisted, to better safeguard these development opportunities.
We are interested in views on whether this policy, in conjunction with the others which
we are proposing, provides a sufficient framework to support very large sites. The
government wants to see more very large sites – what might be considered ‘super
strategic sites’ – taken forward, including the implementation of the government’s new
towns programme. We therefore want to understand whether any more specific
definitions or approaches are needed or could be beneficial for this purpose.

80) Do you agree the proposals in policy HO13 will help to ensure development
    proposals are built out in a reasonable period? Strongly agree, partly agree,
    neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

81) Do you agree the requirements to take a flexible approach to the consenting
    framework for large scale residential and mixed-use development is
    sufficient to ensure the opportunities of large scale development are
    supported? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

82) Are any more specific approaches or definitions needed to support the
    delivery of very large (super strategic) sites, including new towns? Yes, no

   a) Please provide your reasons.
Housing Delivery Test Rule Book

The Housing Delivery Test rule book explains how housing delivery test scores are
calculated by the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government. Currently,
the rule book sets out that a spatial development strategy should only be used as the
source of the housing requirement in instances where the relevant borough/district
plan is out-of-date and the spatial development strategy is in-date. To align the
housing delivery test with Policy HO2, and support wider strategic planning ambitions,
we are proposing to update the rule book so that the relevant housing requirement is
derived from whichever is the most recently adopted plan (whether it is a spatial
development strategy or borough/district-level local plan).
To provide clarity to stakeholders and further simplify the system, we are also
proposing to remove the ‘lower of’ rule, which states that for areas with an up-to-date
plan, the housing requirement is the lower of the adopted housing requirement or the
relevant local housing need figure. This will mean that authorities are assessed against
their adopted housing requirement where an up-to-date plan is in place, and against
local housing need where there is no relevant up-to-date plan. We consider this better



                                          51
supports the plan-led system and ensures delivery is captured in relation to the most
up-to-date and relevant figure.

83) Do you agree with the proposed changes to the Housing Delivery Test rule
   book? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
   strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                         52
Chapter 7: Building a strong, effective
economy
Economic growth is the number one mission of this government. As committed to in
the Plan for Change, a number of pro-growth changes were made to the current
Framework in December 2024 to strengthen support for business development. This
consultation seeks feedback on changes to further strengthen support for businesses
and long-term economic growth. This section is intended to replace Chapter 6 of the
current Framework.

These policies aim to provide clear planning policy support for a wide range of
businesses and to support long term economic growth both locally and nationally. The
proposed changes aim to reflect changing business needs and the growth of different
sectors, including data centres and freight and logistics.

Plan-making policy
E1: Providing the conditions for long term economic growth

This policy redrafts elements of current Framework paragraphs 86 and 87. The policy
is clearer that, in allocating sites, plans should avoid overly prescriptive requirements
on acceptable uses, enabling flexibility to respond to changing commercial property
demands. To support wider government priorities, the draft policy also proposes
explicit references to Industrial Strategy Zones, AI Growth Zones, and the Industrial
Strategy itself.

84) Do you agree that more emphasis should be placed on relevant national
    strategies and the need for flexibility in planning for economic growth, as
    drafted in policy E1? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
    partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
E2: Meeting the need for business land and premises

This is a proposed new policy to provide clarity on the relevant planning considerations
for business development proposals. It proposes that substantial weight should be
given by the decision-maker to the economic benefits of proposals for commercial
development (with particular references included to certain areas, e.g. supporting
improvements in freight and logistics), and, in the case of farm and agricultural
modernisation proposals, to benefits relating to domestic food production, animal
welfare, and the environment. The draft policy also sets out some specific factors that
should be taken into account in establishing whether an unmet need exists for

                                           53
development proposals, including market signals and the locational requirements of
the proposed use. These will only be relevant in certain circumstances, as proposed
policy S4 would give general support in principle for business development within
settlements.

85) Do you agree with the approach to meeting the need for business land and
    premises in policy E2? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
    partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
E3: Freight and logistics

This is a proposed new policy which sets out planning considerations specific to freight
and logistics development and associated infrastructure, including access to transport
networks, parking provision, and potential impacts on the environment, local residents,
and neighbouring uses. A policy specific to this sector is proposed because of the
particular physical and locational characteristics of logistics developments, which in
some cases will involve particularly large structures, and because of the particular
importance of having access to the right transport links for the type of operation.

86) Do you agree with the proposed new decision-making policy supporting
    freight and logistics development in policy E3? Strongly agree, partly agree,
    neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
E4: Rural business development

This proposed policy redrafts current Framework paragraph 88, with some changes to
align with the wider policies for inside and outside settlements and strengthen support
for various types of agricultural development and diversification. Policy on supporting
rural community facilities is proposed to be deleted, as this is covered by the section
on Promoting healthy communities.

The second half of the policy redrafts existing paragraph 89 and makes clear that
development proposals located outside settlements should take opportunities, where
they exist, to use previously developed land and sites that are physically well-related
to existing development.

87) Do you agree with the approach to rural business development in policy E4?
    Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
    disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                          54
Chapter 8: Ensuring the vitality of town
centres
This section replaces Chapter 7 of the current Framework and retains the core
principle that ‘main town centre uses’ should be located within existing town centres
wherever possible, with development outside these areas only considered when
suitable sites are not available. This principle, known as the Sequential Test, remains
part of the draft policy, although we are interested in views on its retention.
The proposed decision-making policies place greater emphasis on diversifying town
centre uses to address oversupply of retail floorspace and create opportunities for
more residential accommodation.

Plan-making policy
TC1: Planning for town centres
This policy brings together the principles set out in paragraphs 90 and 94 of the current
Framework. It is proposed to be updated to emphasise the need for policies to reflect
a strategy for town centres, and in this context to consider opportunities to diversify
and intensify uses including residential, and to identify areas where investment in
infrastructure and public realm improvements are planned. The specific reference to
markets in the current Framework has been omitted as their existence is not controlled
directly by planning, but we would expect opportunities to create or strengthen markets
to be a consideration in the wider strategies for town centres mentioned above.
To provide greater flexibility, the policy removes the current requirement to look at
least ten years ahead when allocating sites, instead aligning with the applicable plan
period. It also introduces new provisions to support good design and the wider vitality
and viability of high streets. These include recognising the role that design guides,
codes, masterplans and Article 4 directions can play in shaping distinctive places,
while ensuring that any use of Article 4 directions is fully justified.

88) Do you agree with the proposed changes to policy for planning for town
    centres? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
    strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
TC2: Development in town, district and local centres
This new policy is designed to strengthen the long-term vitality and viability of town
centres by giving substantial weight to proposals that support this, including where this
would entail diversification and residential development. It would also give substantial
weight to protecting and enhancing community access to local shops.


                                           55
89) Do you agree with the approach to development in town centres in policy
    TC2? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
    strongly disagree.

  a) If not, please explain how you would achieve this aim differently?
TC3: Main town centre uses outside town centres
This policy revises the existing guidance on applying the sequential test for main town
centres uses, bringing together the principles currently set out in paragraphs 91, 92,
93 and 95 of the current Framework. It also incorporates elements of Planning Practice
Guidance to provide clearer advice on the format and scale of proposals.
Since the introduction of Class E in the Use Classes Order in September 2020, many
traditional high street uses have been combined into a single use class, giving greater
flexibility to change between uses both within and outside town centres. This change
has reduced the influence of the Sequential Test for retail development, as it means
(for example) that some non-retail premises away from town centres can change to a
retail use without requiring permission.
There is also an argument that the sequential test, where it still applies, creates
unnecessary inflexibility in where development for main town centre uses can be
located (and that reliance could be placed on policies for sustainable transport to make
sure that developments are in suitable locations). On the other hand the test could still
play a role in steering new development for town centre uses to locations which best
support the vitality and viability of town centres. On balance, we have retained the test
in the draft policies that we are consulting on, but welcome views on this approach
and the implications of Class E for town centre policy.

90) What impacts, if any, have you observed on the operation of planning policy
    for town centres since the introduction of Use class E?

91) Do you believe the sequential test in policy TC3 should be retained? Strongly
    agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
TC4: Assessing the impact of development on town centres
This policy redrafts paragraph 94 of the current Framework on requirements for impact
assessments where development for retail and leisure development above a certain
scale is proposed outside town centres. The text is similar to the current Framework
and the policy remains clear that proposed development should demonstrate
acceptable impact on town centres else be refused, as set out in TC3.

92) Do you agree with the approach to town centre impact assessments in policy
    TC4? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
    strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

                                           56
57
Chapter 9: Supporting high quality
communications
This section is intended to replace Chapter 10 of current Framework on supporting
high-quality telecommunications infrastructure. It does not include plan-making
policies, as we consider that the relevant considerations can be addressed sufficiently
through national decision-making policies. The decision-making policies largely
comprise a redraft of the current Framework provisions, to reflect the policy-based
approach to the draft Framework, although it has also been updated to reflect changes
in telecommunications technology.

The government’s 10 Year Infrastructure Strategy (UK Infrastructure: A 10 Year
Strategy - GOV.UK) sets out how the delivery of high-quality digital infrastructure is
essential to the UK’s growth, productivity, and the resilience of public services. The
upgrade to 5G Standalone (5GSA) represents a critical step in meeting the capacity
required to support public use, businesses, and data-intensive technologies such as
artificial intelligence. By setting clear expectations for how planning decisions should
support network expansion and upgrades, the revised policies provide the foundation
for achieving nationwide coverage of 5G and gigabit broadband. In doing so, they
underpin the government’s ambition for world-class digital connectivity and securing
the economic and social benefits that depend on it.

National decision-making policies
TI1: Proposals for Telecommunications Infrastructure

This policy consolidates aspects of current Framework paragraphs 119-123. The
redrafted policy makes clear that existing sites should be considered before new
infrastructure is proposed on undeveloped sites. It also emphasises that infrastructure
should be sited and designed to minimise adverse impacts and that additional
requirements should not be imposed on applicants where these do not relate to
planning matters.

TI2: Telecommunications Infrastructure – Supporting Information

This policy also draws together elements of paragraphs 119–123 of the current
Framework. It sets out clear expectations for the supporting information that should
accompany a planning application, without introducing any new requirements for
applicants.

93) Do you agree that the updated policies provide clearer and stronger support
    for the rollout of 5G and gigabit broadband? Strongly agree, partly agree,
    neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.


                                          58
94) Do you agree the requirements for minimising visual impact and reusing
    existing structures are practical for applicants and local planning
    authorities? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
    disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

95) Do you agree the supporting information requirements are proportionate and
    sufficient without creating unnecessary burdens? Strongly agree, partly agree,
    neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                       59
Chapter 10: Securing Clean Energy and
Water
This new chapter is proposed in recognition of the importance of improving energy
and water infrastructure. It brings together existing policies on renewable and low-
carbon energy with two new policies on planning for energy and water infrastructure,
and decision-making on water infrastructure.

Plan-making policies
W1: Planning for Energy and Water

This policy requires development plans to reflect the capacity of, and future
requirements for, energy and water infrastructure. It emphasises the need for early
engagement between relevant plan-making authorities, utility providers, regulators
and network operators to establish a clear understanding of energy supply, network
capacity, water supply, drainage, and wastewater capacity. The aim is to make sure
that potential constraints caused by current or future deficits in capacity are identified
and addressed proactively at the plan-making stage.

The policy also expects plans to make appropriate provision for new and upgraded
infrastructure, and to include measures to avoid constraining the operation or
expansion of water and electricity networks.

96) Do you agree with the approach to planning for energy and water
    infrastructure in policy W1? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
    disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree, what alternative
     approach would you suggest?
W2: Securing Renewable and Low Carbon Energy and Electricity Network
Infrastructure

This policy updates paragraph 165 of the current Framework. In addition to renewable
and low-carbon energy development, the policy now refers to electricity network
infrastructure. This is because this type of infrastructure is commonly developed as
standalone projects and not necessarily always in association with renewable and low
carbon projects. A definition of electricity network infrastructure is proposed for
inclusion in the glossary to ensure consistent interpretation. The definition of
renewable and low-carbon energy has also been updated.

The policy requires development plans to identify areas suitable for renewable and
low carbon energy development and electricity network infrastructure, including future
re-powering and life extensions. Identification is only required where it would help
secure development for these uses.


                                           60
97) Do you agree with the amendments to current Framework policy on planning
    for renewable and low-carbon energy development and electricity network
    infrastructure in policy W2? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
    disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
W3: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Development and Electricity Network
Infrastructure

This policy consolidates current Framework paragraphs 168 and 169 and introduces
references to electricity network infrastructure. This is because this type of
infrastructure is commonly developed as standalone projects and not necessarily
always in association with renewable and low-carbon technologies.

The re-cast policy goes beyond the existing by indicating that substantial weight
should be given to benefits for energy security, economic development and net zero,
the additional benefits from re-powering, and the contribution that small-scale and
community-led developments can make.

Additionally, the policy clarifies the need for decommissioning and site restoration for
time-limited developments, recognising that most renewable and low-carbon energy
schemes are permitted on a temporary basis.

Current Framework paragraph 169 is proposed to be modified, so that where these
types of development come forward outside areas identified in the development plan,
they should be assessed against the national decision-making policies as a whole,
rather than the criteria used for identifying suitable areas in the development plan. This
is to reduce any uncertainty about how this policy should be applied in practice, and
to reflect the more comprehensive role that national decision-making policies are
intended to play in assessing development.

98) Do you agree with the proposed approach to supporting development for
    renewable and low carbon development and electricity network
    infrastructure in policy W3? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
    disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree, and any changes
     you would make to improve the policy.
W4: Water Infrastructure

This new policy supports the delivery of water supply, drainage and wastewater
infrastructure where it is not already covered by permitted development rights, and
does not require approval through the Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects
regime. The policy gives substantial weight to proposals that increase capacity to


                                           61
support planned development, strengthen the security of supply for existing users,
improve water quality, and reduce water-borne pollution.

99) Do you agree with the proposed approach to supporting development for
    water infrastructure in policy W4? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree
    nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                       62
Chapter 11: Facilitating the sustainable
use of minerals
This section redrafts Chapter 17 of the current Framework on facilitating the
sustainable use of minerals. A sufficient supply of minerals is essential to delivering
the infrastructure, buildings, green energy and goods that the country needs to
support society, national growth and transition to net zero. In this regard, minerals play
a vital role in supporting the government’s overarching growth objectives, and an
effective minerals planning system underpinned by clear national planning policy is
required to facilitate the achievement of those objectives.

Existing policy has been reframed to ensure consistency across the draft Framework.
Two key policy changes are proposed:

•     A more restrictive approach to the extraction of coal, oil and gas. The
      government has been clear in its intention to not issue new licences to explore new
      oil and gas fields and to not grant new coal mining licences. The Secretary of State
      for Energy Security and Net Zero issued a Written Ministerial Statement, on 14
      November 2024, noting the government’s intention to restrict future licensing of all
      new coal mines 1. Similarly, the Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, in
      March 2025, consulted on ending the issuing of new oil and gas licences for
      exploration and production 2 . The response published in November 2025 3
      confirmed that the government will implement plans not to issue new onshore
      licences to explore new fields (in England) while current licences will continue to
      be managed by the North Sea Transition Authority under the existing licensing
      framework. The new proposed planning policy on fossil fuel extraction is intended
      to support this direction of travel and to align with the proposed licensing reforms.
      It is recognised that the licensing reforms are to be finalised and remain pending,
      but the opportunity to propose updates to planning policy is being taken now in
      acknowledgement of the transition to green energy and to reduce the climate
      impacts associated with fossil fuel extraction.

•     New policy on critical and growth minerals – aligning with those set out in the
      government’s recently updated Critical Minerals Strategy4. This new policy reflects
      their importance in supporting the green energy transition, achieving net zero,
      safeguarding national security and supporting the growth of key sectors set out in
      the Industrial Strategy5.




1
    Written statements - Written questions, answers and statements - UK Parliament
2 Building the North Sea’s Energy Future: consultation document

3   Building the North Sea’s energy future: government response
4 Vision 2035: Critical Minerals Strategy - GOV.UK
5 Industrial Strategy - GOV.UK


                                                  63
Plan-making policies
M1: Planning for a Sufficient Supply of Minerals
This policy consolidates and reframes elements of the current Framework paragraphs
222, 223(a) and (b), 224(a), 226 and 227(a), (c) (d) and 228 (a). Its purpose is to
ensure that development plans provide for a sufficient supply of minerals of national
and local importance.
New policy is proposed to make clear that development plans should not identify new
sites or extensions to existing sites for coal extraction. This seeks to align planning
policy with the wider government position on proposed licensing reforms for coal,
reduce reliance on fossil fuels and support the green energy transition. We are also
proposing to remove shallow and deep-mined coal from the glossary definition of
‘minerals of national and local importance’ which is relevant to this policy.
The policy indicates that the development plan should distinguish between and plan
for the three phases of oil and gas development and outlines this should be within
licensed areas. This is intended to maintain the current approach to planning for oil
and gas extraction within licensed areas. The policy also makes clear that the
development plan should not identify new sites or extensions to existing sites for oil
and gas development outside licensed areas. This is in line with the government’s
intention not to issue new licences for onshore oil and gas extraction.
Finally, we are also proposing to add critical and growth minerals to the glossary
definition of ‘minerals of national and local importance’. This is light of their growing
importance in supporting the green energy transition, achieving net zero, safeguarding
national security and supporting the growth of key sectors set out in the Industrial
Strategy.

100) Do you agree with the proposed prohibition on identifying new coal sites
   in policy M1, and to the removal of coal from the list of minerals of national
   and local importance? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

101) Do you agree with how policy M1 sets out how the development plan
     should consider oil and gas? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
     disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

102) Do you agree with the proposed addition of critical and growth minerals
   to the glossary definition of ‘minerals of national and local importance’?
   Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
   disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

                                           64
M2: Safeguarding Mineral Resources and Infrastructure Through Plan-Making

This policy revises current Framework paragraph 223(c) - (e). Its intention is to prevent
mineral resources from being sterilised by non-mineral development and to safeguard
associated infrastructure essential for transport, handling, processing, and
manufacture. Most significantly, M2 has been reframed to provide more directive
policy to prevent minerals sterilisation by ‘requiring’ prior extraction on sites allocated
for non-mineral development (where practical and environmentally feasible) as
opposed to ‘encouraging’ it as per current Framework paragraph 223(d). This is in
recognition that minerals are a finite natural resource which can only be worked where
they are found.

103) Do you agree criteria b of policy M2 strikes the right balance between
   preventing minerals sterilisation and facilitating non minerals development?
   Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
   disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
M3: Assessing the Benefits of Mineral Development
This policy reframes the opening sentence of the current Framework paragraph 224,
replacing “great weight” with “substantial weight” for consistency with the approach
being taken across the draft Framework as a whole, and does not reflect any intended
change in weighting to be applied. The policy includes a list of matters to which, in this
context, particular importance should be given. This draws on current Framework
paragraph 224 (f) and (g), and 226 (f) and 227 (c). Policy M3 also seeks to ensure that
the benefits of processing secondary aggregates as an alternative to primary materials
are considered in decision-making.

The government has recently published a new Critical Minerals Strategy with a key
policy objective to optimise domestic production. The current Framework has no
explicit reference to critical or growth minerals, and therefore policy M3 seeks to
recognise their growing importance in supporting the green energy transition,
achieving net zero, safeguarding national security, and supporting the growth of key
sectors set out in the Industrial Strategy. The intention is for the policy to support
domestic exploration and extraction or processing of these materials given their
growing and future importance.
The footnote in policy M3 makes clear that this policy does not apply to development
involving peat, coal, or onshore oil and gas extraction. This represents a policy change
for oil and gas (i.e. the policy no longer provides that “great weight” should be given to
the benefits of oil and gas extraction).



                                            65
We are proposing this change in recognition of the need to transition away from using
fossil fuels in order to reduce climate change impacts. Coal is already excluded under
existing policy, and existing policy is also clear that permission for peat extraction from
new or extended sites should not be granted.

104) Do you agree policy M3 appropriately reflects the importance of critical
   and growth minerals? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

   a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

105) Do you agree with the exclusion of development involving onshore oil and
   gas extraction from policy M3? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

106) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

M4: Considering the Impacts of Mineral Development.

This policy revises current Framework paragraphs 224(a) - (c) and (e) to provide clear
guidance on managing the impacts of mineral development and ensuring that mineral
sites are restored to high standards once extraction ceases.

107) Do you agree policy M4 sufficiently addresses the impacts of mineral
   development, noting that other national decision-making policies will also
   apply? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
   strongly disagree.

108) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

M5: Development Involving Peat, Coal or Onshore Oil and Gas
This policy retains the existing position on peat extraction as set out in current
Framework paragraph 224(d) but introduces substantive new policy on fossil fuel
extraction. It would have the effect that development involving surface or underground
coal workings, or onshore oil and gas extraction, should not be approved unless it
meets one of the criteria listed in Policy M5.
The first criterion of the policy concerns development to facilitate the exploration,
appraisal or production of oil and gas within licensed areas. This seeks to ensure that
oil and gas extraction proposals can still be permitted within licensed areas (in line
with the current policy position).
The second criterion of the policy restricts future development unless for the purposes
of public safety. Development proposals for coal extraction would be considered under
this criteria. This would replace the position set out in current Framework paragraph
230 which take a less restrictive approach, and aligns with the proposed approach to
licensing coal led by the Department for Energy Security and Net Zero .


                                            66
The third criterion of the policy converts current Framework paragraph 228(d) into
clearer decision-making policy.
Current Framework paragraph 228(b) and (e) are also retained but redrafted in this
policy, as well as paragraph 229.

109) Do you agree with approach to coal, oil and gas in policy M5? Strongly
   agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

110) Are there any other exceptional circumstances in which coal extraction
   should be permitted? Yes/No

111) If yes, please outline the exceptional circumstances in which you think
   coal extraction should be permitted.
M6: Safeguarding Mineral Resources and Infrastructure through decision-
making
This policy consolidates and reframes current Framework paragraphs 223(d) and (e)
and paragraph 225 so that they are relevant to decision-making.
The policy also set out how Minerals Consultation Areas should be considered before
determining a planning application, filling a gap in existing policy.

112) Do you agree policy M6 strikes the right balance between preventing the
   sterilisation of minerals reserves and minerals-related activities, and
   facilitating non-minerals development? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

113) Does policy M6 provide sufficient clarity on the role of Minerals
   Consultation Areas? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                          67
Chapter 12: Making effective use of land
Making the best use of land is a fundamental objective of the planning system, and is
essential in meeting the need for homes and other forms of development, while
safeguarding and improving the environment. The government has been clear that
brownfield land should be the first port of call. That’s why in September 2024 we
published a Brownfield Passport policy paper, seeking views on a range of proposals
to make better use of land in urban and suburban locations, including through
densification. As part of the government’s response to the consultation of the current
Framework in December 2024, we also made a clear commitment to go further in
strengthening support for brownfield development. This chapter sets out new
proposals to meet these objectives, and includes redrafted policies previously set out
in Chapter 11 of the current Framework.

Many of our urban areas have been developed at relatively low densities, particularly
when compared to continental Europe. In many places, there is potential for higher
densities, to better support thriving neighbourhoods, improve access to jobs and
services, and make the best use of land within our towns and cities. The policy
changes in this chapter seek to capture this potential in two ways – by supporting
intensification of land uses in urban and suburban areas, and setting clear
expectations for minimum densities in locations with good transport connectivity.

Well-connected locations can reduce the need to travel, require less land for parking
and road infrastructure, and better support opportunities for active travel (walking,
cycling and wheeling). As a result, higher density development can create sustainable
and well-designed places. This section seeks to optimise land use in well-connected
locations, such as around train stations, by introducing national minimum density
requirements in these locations. To help achieve these ambitions, policy S4 within the
Sustainable Development chapter will provide in-principle support to land within
settlements, helping to unlock land around stations within settlements. Policy S5
provides in-principle support to unlock land around stations for suitable development
with a ‘high level of connectivity’ outside of settlements.

Plan-making policy
L1: Planning for an Effective Use of Land

This policy consolidates sections of current Framework paragraphs 125(a), 126, 127,
129(c) and (d), 130, and 130(a) and (b). It brings together all relevant plan-making
policies from the current Chapter 11 into a single, streamlined policy, with minor
drafting changes to improve clarity while maintaining conciseness — for example, in
relation to setting minimum density standards.

Compared with the current Framework, the policy places greater emphasis on using
allocations for large, medium and small sites to optimise land use. This includes


                                         68
identifying suitable redevelopment opportunities, achieving appropriate scale and
density, and securing a range of development benefits.

114) Do you agree policy L1 provides clear guidance on how Local Plans
   should be prepared to promote the efficient use of land? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

115) If not, what further guidance is needed?

National decision-making policies
L2: Making Effective Use of Land
This policy draws together decision-making provisions from current Framework
paragraphs 125(b)–(e), 127, and 130(c). It also introduces substantive changes to
support densification in urban areas by highlighting specific opportunities, such as
redevelopment of existing plots, addition of mansard roofs, proposals to fill gaps in the
existing roof line, higher buildings at street corners, and by setting clear parameters
for development within residential curtilages.
This is in recognition that although the form and character of urban areas vary
significantly across different places, there are common opportunities across different
locations that could support densification. Setting clear expectations in national policy
will provide greater certainty to support these types of development, and support
opportunities for intensification in already built-up areas.
Corner plots present an opportunity to support more distinctive buildings, often with
greater height and depth to surrounding streets. This additional height can help to
establish a landmark feature, and support legibility and wayfinding.

Similarly, upward extensions provide an opportunity to support additional homes by
utilising the airspace above existing residential and commercial premises. Where a
street has varied character and inconsistent building heights, filling gaps in the existing
roof line could support gentle densification in built up areas, whilst remaining sensitive
to the surrounding area.

Redeveloping low density plots provides an opportunity to make more efficient use of
land in urban and suburban locations. This could include redeveloping existing or
adjoining plots at higher densities – to optimise site potential and enable more homes
to come forward in sustainable locations. Infill development, including within curtilages,
can also support gentle intensification in these locations. The policies ensure clear
safeguards are in place to prevent inappropriate development within residential
curtilages, avoid over concentration of development and prevent an unacceptable
burden on local infrastructure.
The policy also supports development that may differ from the existing street scene
such as buildings on street corners or where specific changes are set out in a design
code forming part of a development plan. It is intended to complement locally produced
design guidance and codes that reflect local character and provide more detailed

                                            69
requirements. The policy also expects decision-makers to give substantial weight to
proposals that promote the reuse of brownfield land and urban intensification.
Additional changes encourage development footprints that optimise a site’s
development potential where previously undeveloped land is proposed for
development.

116) Do you agree policy L2 provides clear guidance on how development
   proposals should be assessed to ensure efficient use of land? Strongly agree,
   partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

117) Do you agree policy L2 identifies appropriate typologies of development
   to support intensification? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If not, what typologies should be added or removed and why?

118) Do you agree the high-level design principles provided in policy L2(d)
   appropriate for national policy? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

119) Do you agree policy L2 (d)(i) achieves its intent to enable appropriate
   development that may differ from the existing street scene, particularly in
   cases such as corner plot redevelopment and upwards extensions. Strongly
   agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

120) Do you agree with the proposed safeguards in policy L2 that allow
   development in residential curtilages? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
L3: Achieving Appropriate Densities
Building on current Framework paragraphs 129 and 130, this policy sets out principles
for decision-making on density. It clarifies that the existing character of an area should
be taken into account but not preclude development proposals that maximise site
potential. The policy introduces an expectation that development proposals for
residential and mixed-use development within settlements should contribute to an
increase in the density of the area in which they are located.
This policy also introduces new minimum density requirements for residential
development near train stations. This is recognition that locations with good public
transport connectivity can support residential and mixed-use development at higher
densities. We consider there is a strong case to make the best use of land around all
                                           70
stations, to maximise development opportunities in places with good connectivity, and
support sustainable patterns of growth. As such, we are proposing a minimum density
of 40 dwellings per hectare in the net developable area of the site around all train
stations.
To maximise ambition, and direct growth to the right locations, we also want to set
more ambitious minimum density requirements for areas with particularly good
connectivity. We know that not all stations are capable of supporting the same level of
growth, and have therefore defined a subset of ‘well-connected’ stations, that have the
potential to support more ambitious densities. We have defined a ‘well-connected’
station (including underground, tram and light rail stops) as one which is:
•   located within the top 60 Travel to Work Areas (which are located partially or fully
    within England), by Gross Value Added
•   with a service frequency (in the normal weekday timetable) of four trains or trams
    per hour overall, or two trains per hour in any one direction
Travel to Work Areas are defined based on commuting patterns, and therefore help to
capture existing functional economic geographies and employment catchment areas,
along with other trips people make. Ranking by Gross Value Added helps to identify
areas that have the greatest potential to support growth, including good access to jobs
and services. We consider the top 60 Travel to Work Areas strikes the right balance
of supporting growth in places within easy reach of our key towns and cities, whilst not
directing growth to areas without sufficient transport infrastructure.
Given Travel to Work Areas are large geographies, we consider a minimum service
frequency requirement is needed. This will ensure higher densities are only directed
to stations with the capacity to support growth, or the potential to do so. While there
may be some stations that could support ambitious growth that are not captured within
this definition, we have set clear expectations for authorities to consider suitable
opportunities for sustainable growth around stations as part of the plan-making
process.
For development around well-connected stations, we are proposing a minimum
density requirement of 50 dwellings per hectare within the net developable area of the
site. We consider this will be sufficiently ambitious in some locations, particularly
locations outside of settlements, and will act as the minimum requirement for other
locations. For more urban locations, we would expect higher densities to be achieved,
and are interested in how we could set clear expectations for more ambitious minimum
density requirements in our urban cores – including how these locations should be
defined.
We also acknowledge that other public transport modes, beyond trains and trams,
could support minimum residential density standards. To explore this further, we have
asked a consultation question seeking views on this approach.
Taken together, these proposals support our ambitions to optimise development
potential in sustainable locations, and take a gradated approach to setting minimum
density requirements across different locations, to ensure opportunities are maximised.
We wholly welcome views on our proposed definition and minimum densities.
                                          71
121) Do you agree policy L3 provides clear guidance on achieving appropriate
   densities for residential and mixed-use schemes? Strongly agree, partly agree,
   neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If not, please explain how guidance could be clearer?

122) Do you agree with the minimum density requirements set out within
   policy L3? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

  b) Could these minimum density requirements lead to adverse impacts on
     Gypsies and Travellers and other groups with protected characteristics?
     Please provide your reasons, including any evidence

123) Do you agree that using dwellings per hectare is an appropriate metric for
   setting minimum density requirements? Additionally, is our definition of ‘net
   developable area’ within the NPPF suitable for this policy? Strongly agree,
   partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

124) Do you agree with the proposed definition of a ‘well-connected’ station
   used to help set higher minimum density standards in targeted growth
   locations? In particular, are the parameters we’re using for the number of
   Travel to Work Areas and service frequency appropriate for defining a ‘well-
   connected’ station? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons and preferred alternatives.

125) Are there other types of location (such as urban core, or other types of
   public transport node) where minimum density standards should be set
   nationally? Yes/No

  a) If so, how should these locations be defined in a clear and unambiguous
     way and what should these density standards be?

126) Should we define a specific range of residential densities for land around
   stations classified as ‘well-connected’?

127) If so, what should that range be, and which locations should it apply to?
L4: Residential Extensions
This new policy provides high-level guidance on good design for residential extensions,
recognising the prevalence of such proposals and the need for consistent national
principles. It is intended to complement locally produced design guidance and codes
that reflect local character and provide more detailed requirements.
                                         72
128) Do you agree policy L4 provides clear high-level guidance on good design
   for residential extensions? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

129) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                      73
Chapter 13: Protecting Green Belt land
In December 2024, the government introduced a number of changes to Green Belt
policy, including the definition of “grey belt” and new requirements for authorities to
review their Green Belt where development needs cannot otherwise be met. These
changes replaced the previous haphazard approach to Green Belt designation and
release with a modern, strategic, targeted approach.

This section introduces new policies to support sustainable development, reflect the
role of spatial development strategies, and improve clarity. It replaces Chapter 13 of
the current Framework on Protecting Green Belt Land, and some parts of existing
Green Belt guidance have been included as a new annex to the draft Framework
(Annex E).

The policies in this chapter support wider ambitions to unlock land for development
and drive higher densities around train stations, to make the most of high levels of
connectivity, and improve access to jobs and services. To reflect this, the chapter has
been amended to make clear that Green Belt boundaries may be altered in order to
support development opportunities on land around suitable stations where these are
identified in the development plan. This will better enable development plans to make
the most of these opportunities.

The policy also makes clear that housing and mixed-use development around stations
defined as ‘well-connected’ will not be considered inappropriate, provided it is of an
appropriate scale, does not prejudice long-term development proposals, and complies
with the Golden Rules. The objective of this policy is to support high density
development in sustainable locations. We recognise that high densities can limit
certain types of development coming forward, including traveller sites and some other
forms of accommodation, for which the proposed density requirements in chapter 12
are unlikely to be appropriate. We are seeking views on the potential impacts of this.

Plan-making policies
GB1: Establishing New Green Belts

This policy revises parts of current Framework paragraph 144. Criteria relating to the
establishment of a new Green Belt are retained, while those concerning boundary
definition (144(d) and (e)) have been moved to policy GB4 for clarity. Paragraph 144(c)
has been amended to require that new Green Belts must not act as a constraint to
long-term sustainable growth ambitions for the relevant area, rather than simply
demonstrating the consequences for sustainable development. This reflects the
principle that Green Belts should only be designated in exceptional circumstances and
should not inhibit sustainable development.

130) Do you agree that policy GB1 provides appropriate criteria for
   establishing new Green Belts? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

                                          74
131) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
GB2: Assessing Existing Green Belt Land

Drawing from current Framework paragraphs 143 and 145, this policy sets out how
Green Belts should be reviewed and assessed, incorporating the established Green
Belt purposes. It clarifies the respective roles of spatial development strategies and
local plans. It makes clear that spatial development strategies should assess the
strategic role of the Green Belt and identify broad locations for further consideration,
while local plans should undertake detailed assessments informed by principles set
out in new Annex E to the draft Framework (reflecting current Green Belt guidance).
The policy also confirms that Green Belt assessments should form a routine part of
plan-making where Green Belt exists, including identifying any land that constitutes
‘grey belt’.

132) Do you agree policy GB2 gives sufficient detail on the expected roles
   spatial development strategies and local plans play in assessing Green belt
   land? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
   strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

GB3: Altering Existing Green Belt Boundaries

This policy revises current Framework paragraphs 146 and 147 to distinguish more
clearly between establishing exceptional circumstances (including consideration of
alternative development options) and principles for making specific boundary changes.
It makes explicit the criteria for “examining all other reasonable options” and
incorporates policy from Policy E of the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites regarding
the release of Green Belt for traveller sites.

In addition, this policy makes clear that alterations to Green Belt boundaries may be
made where doing so would support opportunities to develop identified sites on land
around suitable stations.

133) Do you agree with proposals to better enable development opportunities
   around suitable stations to be brought forward? Strongly agree, partly agree,
   neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
GB4: Defining Green Belt Boundaries

This policy consolidates policy from current Framework paragraphs 144, 148, 149, and
150 into a single provision on defining Green Belt boundaries, whether for new
designations or alterations.

GB5: Beneficial Uses of Green Belt


                                          75
This policy revises and expands current Framework paragraphs 151 and 152, placing
more positive expectations on development plans. It reinstates the requirement to
consider compensatory improvements when land is removed from the Green Belt and
introduces new provisions requiring consideration of contributions to Local Nature
Recovery Strategies and support for objectives relating to the National Forest,
community forests, and protected landscapes.

134) Do you agree the expectations set out in policy GB5 are appropriate and
   deliverable in Local Plans? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

135) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
GB6: Control of Development in Green Belt

This policy redrafts current Framework paragraphs 153 and 160 to clarify the approach
to inappropriate development in the Green Belt. It consolidates considerations relating
to inappropriate development so that the expectation to give substantial weight to harm
applies only to such development.

GB7: Development which is not inappropriate in the Green Belt

This policy revises current Framework paragraphs 154 and 155, improving clarity and
proportionality. Key changes include:

•   GB7(1a): Refers to “development” for agriculture rather than “buildings,” allowing
    for non-building agricultural development.
•   GB7(1b): Combines principles on reuse, alteration, extension or replacement of
    buildings, with a new footnote clarifying how “original building” is assessed. The
    requirement that the reuse of buildings must preserve the openness of the Green
    Belt and not conflict with the purposes of including land within it has been removed,
    as it is unduly restrictive.
•   GB7(1f): Replaces “preserve openness” with restrictions that ensure the impacts
    on openness is minimised, and there would not be a significant conflict with the
    Green Belt purposes, reflecting current practice.
•   GB7(1g): Uses “development” rather than “housing, commercial, or other” and
    clarifies when Golden Rules apply.
•   GB7(1h): Introduces a significant new provision specifying that housing and mixed-
    use development on Green Belt land is not inappropriate where it is near a well-
    connected station, of a scale that existing infrastructure can accommodate, does
    not prejudice long-term development proposals, and complies with the Golden
    Rules. This development should accord with the density requirements set out in
    policy L3.


                                           76
136) Do you agree policies GB6 and GB7 set out appropriate tests for
   considering development on Green Belt land? Strongly agree, partly agree,
   neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

137) Do you agree policy GB7(1h) successfully targets appropriate
   development types and locations in the Green Belt, including that it applies
   only to housing and mixed-use development capable of meeting the density
   requirements in chapter 12? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

138) Please provide your reasons, including any evidence that this policy
   would lead to adverse impacts on Gypsies and Travellers.

GB8: Golden Rules
The Golden Rules are designed to ensure that development on land within or released
from the Green Belt delivers increased tangible benefits for communities – including
higher levels of social and affordable housing, green space, and necessary
infrastructure improvements.

This policy consolidates and redrafts current Framework paragraphs 156–159 into a
single, streamlined provision. It also incorporates the exception for traveller sites
currently set out in Policy E of the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, ensuring that all
exceptions are contained within the draft Framework for clarity and consistency.

The policy also sets three clear and limited circumstances where the use of a site-
specific viability assessment may be justified to enable development in the Green Belt.
This proposed lifting of the current restriction on any site specific viability assessment
on Green Belt land would work in tandem with policy PM12: Developer contributions
and DM5: Development viability. Further to this, the government would only implement
the lifting of the restriction once wider proposed reforms are considered and finalised
– including to policies PM12, DM5, associated viability guidance (including the
proposed annex to the draft Framework, set out in Annex B of this document) and
potential policies detailed below regarding an “affordable housing floor” and
Benchmark Land Values. The government will publish updates to the Viability Planning
Practice Guidance, which will take effect on publication.

139) Do you agree that site-specific viability assessment should be permitted
   on development proposals subject to the Golden Rules in these three
   circumstances? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

140) With regards to previously developed land, are there further changes to
   policy or guidance that could be made to help ensure site-specific viability


                                            77
   assessments are used only for genuinely previously developed land, and not
   predominantly greenfield sites?
Affordable Housing Floor
Reflecting the manifesto commitment to ensure any new development on Green Belt
land benefits communities, the government is also seeking views on a minimum
threshold (or ‘floor’) below which applicants should not seek to negotiate on viability
grounds under the three circumstances proposed above – to avoid developments
coming forward with no or very low levels of affordable housing. The government is
considering the following options in respect of the three circumstances:
a) A fixed national ‘floor’, whereby a minimum proportion of Social Rent housing, for
   example 10% or 15% of the overall development, would be required for these
   developments, unless otherwise specified in up-to-date development plans.
b) An affordable housing ‘floor’ reflecting differing local circumstances. For instance,
   the Green Belt affordable housing ‘floor’ could be required to meet or exceed plan
   policies for equivalent land types (e.g. previously developed land) and
   development types outside of the Green Belt.

141) Do you agree with setting an affordable housing ‘floor’ for schemes
   subject to the Golden Rules accompanied by a viability assessment subject
   to the terms set out? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

142) Please explain your answer, including your view on the appropriate
   approach to setting a ‘floor’, and the right level for this?
Benchmark Land Values
In 2024, the government consulted on setting indicative benchmark land values for
land released from or developed in the Green Belt. The government does not believe
a national benchmark land value would sufficiently account for variation in land values
or types of land and, if set too low, would disincentivise landowners from bringing their
sites forward.

Nonetheless, there may be instances where further guidance could be beneficial to
support compliance with the Golden Rules, as well as plan deliverability. This may be
particularly true of greenfield land, which is typically more homogenous than
brownfield land in terms of its existing uses and abnormal costs. The government is
therefore interested in the potential benefits of testing viability at the plan-making stage
using a standardised national benchmark land value scenario of 10 times Existing Use
Value for greenfield, Green Belt land. The purpose of the test would be to send a clear
signal and ensure that plan-makers (and viability practitioners working on their behalf)
have a clear and strong justification should they wish to adopt a higher benchmark
land value.

143) Do you agree with local planning authorities testing viability at the plan-
   making stage using a standardised Benchmark Land Values scenario of 10

                                            78
   times Existing Use Value for greenfield, Green Belt land? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

     a)       Please explain your answer.

144) Do you have any other comments on the use of nationally standardised
   Benchmark Land Values for local planning authorities to test viability at the
   plan-making stage?

Annex B of this consultation document contains wider questions relating to
standardised inputs into viability assessments, including the determination of
benchmark land values, landowner premiums and alternative use value.

Guidance and Glossary

A change is proposed to the definition of ‘grey belt’ to remove reference to other
“Footnote 7” areas. This reference was originally included to ensure that our grey belt
policy reforms did not undermine the protection given to these areas. However, this
reference meant that grey belt can only be provisionally identified before considering
the impact of specific development proposals, which could make it more difficult to
accurately identify grey belt. It could also apply additional layers of protection to these
areas within a Green Belt context, which is unnecessary.

Our revised definition seeks to enable grey belt to be identified with greater certainty,
whilst continuing to ensure that these areas receive the same level of protection as
elsewhere in the Framework.

145) Do you agree that proposed changes to the grey belt definition will
   improve the operability of the grey belt definition, without undermining the
   general protections given to other footnote 7 areas? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                            79
Chapter 14: Achieving well-designed
places
This section redrafts Chapter 12 of the current Framework: ‘Achieving Well-Designed
Places.’ As design intersects with multiple policy areas, the chapter links closely with
several other parts of the Framework.

To support the implementation of the draft Framework we intend to publish updated
Design and Placemaking Planning Practice Guidance in the new year. This will
consolidate four previous guidance documents (National Design Guide, Design
Process and Tools Planning Practice Guidance, National Model Design Code Parts 1
and 2).

Plan-making policies
DP1: A Strategy for Design

This updates policy on how development plans should incorporate design policies,
tools, and processes to create a coherent design strategy. It will be supported by the
updated Design and Placemaking Planning Practice Guidance, which provides
detailed guidance on embedding design in plan-making.

The policy draws on elements of current Framework paragraphs 132, 134, and 138
but is more explicit about the role of plans in identifying where design guides, codes,
and masterplans are needed, including for significant site allocations and areas of
change. The policy gives examples of such areas including town centre, regeneration
areas and suburban areas with scope for intensification to help support the delivery of
policies on town centres (policy TC1) and making effective use of land (policies L1 and
L2). The policy also seeks to ensure that that design policies are locally specific and
are necessary to add further detail to policy DP3. Unlike current Framework paragraph
132, the policy does not refer specifically to neighbourhood planning groups, as it
applies to all development plan policies, including neighbourhood plans.

146) Do you agree that policy DP1 provides sufficient clarity on how
   development plans should deliver high quality design and placemaking
   outcomes? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

DP2: Design Guides, Design Codes and Masterplans

This policy builds on parts of current Framework paragraphs 132–134 but reflects the
move away from a legal requirement for authority-wide design codes. It sets out clear,
streamlined principles for producing design guides, codes, and masterplans and


                                          80
introduces monitoring and review expectations currently found in guidance, providing
a stronger steer in policy.

The policy also includes a reference to understanding the economic, social, and
environmental context for implementing local design guides, codes, and masterplans,
recognising their importance for successful delivery.

147) Do you agree with the approach to design tools set out in policy DP2?
   Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
   disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
DP3: Key Principles for Well-Designed Places

This policy builds on current Framework paragraphs 135 and 139 to set out key
principles for assessing proposals. It rewrites the existing tests to align with the
features of a well-designed place which will be set out in the updated Design and
Placemaking Planning Practice Guidance, and to reflect the importance of considering
a scheme’s context. As part of these changes the policy includes additional references
to how proposals should contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and
the transition to net zero, and on how development proposals can incorporate and/or
connect to a network of high quality, accessible, multi-functional green infrastructure
(although specific policy on trees in new development is proposed to be moved to the
natural environment chapter).

The principle that development that is not well designed should be refused is retained.
The policy provides clearer wording on assessing proposals against national policy,
local design policies, and design codes, and continues to give weight to outstanding
or innovative designs.

148) Do you agree policy DP3 clearly set out principles for development
   proposals to respond to their context and create well-designed places?
   Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
   disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
DP4: The Design Process

This policy builds on current Framework paragraphs 137, 138, and 140 but places
greater emphasis on considering design quality throughout the delivery process. It
does not specifically reference design tools such as Building for a Healthy Life, as in
current Framework paragraph 138, but the Design and Placemaking Planning Practice
Guidance will provide further detail on the use of such tools in decision-making.



                                          81
The policy takes a firmer stance on encouraging design review and ensuring its
outcomes are taken into account. It is intended to be read alongside proposed policy
DP1, which requires development plans to set out where design review is appropriate.
Current Framework paragraph 141, which relates to the separate consenting process
for advertisements, has been omitted as advertisement control is a separate regulatory
regime.

149) Do you agree with the proposed approach to using design review and
   other design processes in policy DP4? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) If not, what else would help secure better design and placemaking
     outcomes?




                                         82
Chapter 15: Promoting sustainable
transport
This section replaces Chapter 9 of the current Framework on ‘Sustainable Transport’.
Much of the revised chapter is intended to restate existing transport policy in clearer
terms while removing certain plan-making expectations where these matters can be
addressed adequately through national decision-making policies. Changes have also
been made to further embed a ‘vision-led’ approach to transport, in relation to both
plan and decision-making.

The opportunity has been taken to provide additional policy where this will fill gaps in
existing coverage of general planning issues, such as in relation to roadside facilities
and maintaining and improving rights of way.

Plan-making policies
TR1: Vision-Led Approach to Planning for Transport

This policy consolidates relevant plan-making provisions from current Framework
paragraphs 109 and 111 (excluding 109(f), which is addressed in policy TR3, and
111(e), 111(f), and footnote 46, which are covered in policies TR5 and TR7). It
introduces new policy on early engagement in plan-making to promote a vision-led
approach and includes a reference to the Connectivity Tool as a method for assessing
site connectivity and informing site selection. The policy also proposes that plans may
set thresholds for what constitutes a significant amount of movement in new
development, where this could support the application of proposed policies TR3 and
TR6.

150) Do you agree that policy TR1 will provide an effective basis for taking a
   vision-led approach and supporting sustainable transport through plan-
   making? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
   strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
TR2: Local Parking Standards

This policy draws together elements of current Framework paragraphs 112 and 113
on parking standards. So that policies are clear, it requires development plans to set
local parking standards, rather than simply suggesting this as an option. It also
introduces a more permissive approach to maximum parking standards, removing the
requirement for “a clear and compelling justification” where such standards support
sustainable transport, optimise development densities in accessible locations, or
manage local road networks. Additional wording clarifies that standards should allow
flexibility through ranges where appropriate and address specific business
requirements.
                                          83
151) Do you agree that policy TR2 strikes an appropriate balance between
   supporting maximum parking standards where they can deliver planning
   benefits, and requiring a degree of flexibility and consideration of business
   requirements in setting those standards? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
TR3: Locating Development in Sustainable Locations

This policy revises elements of current Framework paragraphs 109(b), (d), (e), and (f)
and paragraph 110, consolidating key decision-making principles for sustainable
development patterns. The term “significant development” has been replaced with
“significant amount of movement in the context of the area within which they would be
situated” in sub-paragraph (a) to provide greater clarity about the type of impact with
which this is concerned. The Connectivity Tool is also specifically referenced as a tool
that should be used in assessing the connectivity of particular locations proposed for
development. The policy also introduces the concept of ‘wheeling’ for greater
inclusivity which will be defined in the glossary.

152) Do you agree with the changes proposed in policy TR3(1a), including the
   reference to proposals which could generate a significant amount of
   movement, and the proposed use of the Connectivity Tool? Strongly agree,
   partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
TR4: Street Design, Access and Parking

This policy redrafts parts of current Framework paragraphs 109(b) and 117 to create
a more cohesive approach to transport considerations in the design of schemes. It
includes new provisions for incorporating facilities that prioritise sustainable transport
and adds explicit references to meeting the needs of older people, children, and
people with disabilities. The policy also directs users to national design guidance,
including Manual for Streets and the forthcoming Design and Placemaking Planning
Practice Guidance.

153) Do you agree that proposed policy TR4 provides a sufficient basis for the
   effective integration of transport considerations in creating well-designed
   places? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
   strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
TR5: Roadside Facilities



                                           84
This policy revises current Framework paragraph 111(e) (including footnote 46) and
paragraph 114 to provide clearer guidance on roadside facilities. It clarifies
circumstances where new, significantly expanded, or upgraded facilities should be
approved and states that the loss of facilities should not be supported unless
compensatory provision with good access to the strategic transport network is likely to
be provided or the facility is demonstrably no longer needed or viable.

154) Do you agree with policy TR5 as a basis for supporting the provision and
   retention of roadside facilities where there is an identified need? Strongly
   agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
TR6: Assessing Transport Impacts

This policy consolidates current Framework paragraphs 115(d), 116, and 118 on
assessing transport impacts. It amends the wording so that proposals “likely to” (rather
than “will”) generate significant amounts of movement need to be supported by a
transport statement or assessment and a travel plan, reflecting the fact that impacts
will not be considered fully until these are prepared. The text also clarifies that the
choice between a transport assessment and a transport statement should be
proportionate to the scale and significance of issues.

TR6(3) is intended to provide clearer language than current Framework paragraph 116
in terms of how adverse impacts on transport networks should be considered, and has
been broadened to reflect potential impacts on the transport network as a whole (not
just highways impacts). TR6(4) provides further clarification that the assessment of
potential impacts should take into account impacts at different times of day, potential
cumulative impacts and multimodal trip generation, as well as the vision for the
development.

155) Do you agree that the amended wording proposed in policy TR6 provides
   a clearer basis for considering when transport assessments and travel plans
   will be required, and for considering impacts on the transport network?
   Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
   disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
TR7: Marine Ports, Airports and General Aviation Facilities

This policy revises parts of current Framework paragraph 87(b), 109(f), and 111(f )
(converted from a plan-making policy) and introduces new provisions to support
proposals that modernise facilities, enable the transition to low-carbon fuels, maintain
airfields’ public service roles, and demonstrate acceptable environmental effects in
relation to noise, air quality, carbon emissions, transport networks, landscape, visual
impact, and marine considerations.



                                          85
156) Do you agree the proposed text in policy TR7 provide an effective basis
   for assessing proposals for marine ports, airports and general aviation
   facilities? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
   strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
TR8: Public Rights of Way

This policy builds on current Framework paragraph 105 to provide additional guidance
on extending the rights of way network where suitable opportunities exist. It also
acknowledges that diversions may be acceptable where they maintain or enhance the
overall route network.

157) Do you agree with the additional policy on maintaining and improving
   rights of way proposed in policy TR8? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                          86
Chapter 16: Promoting healthy
communities
The Plan for Change sets out a number of missions relating to health, education,
policing and communities. In support of these missions and the Pride in Place Strategy,
the government is clear that the planning system should enable the creation of places
that encourage and support healthy lives, promote inclusion and tackle loneliness
through the provision and retention of appropriate public services and facilities that
communities need.

This section predominately redrafts Chapter 8 of the current Framework on ‘Healthy
and Safe Communities’, with the exception of policies on public safety which are
proposed to be moved to a new section on ‘Pollution, Public Protection and Security’.

This revised chapter proposes several policy changes to provide greater clarity on how
development plans should assess and make provision for community facilities and
public service infrastructure, and to be clearer about the treatment of development
proposals involving new, improved or the potential loss of such facilities.

Plan-making policies
HC1: Planning for healthy communities

This policy consolidates elements of current Framework paragraphs 96, 98, 100, and
101 to provide clearer direction on what plans should include in relation to community
facilities and public service infrastructure – both of which have been defined in the
glossary. This terminology is being proposed to distinguish in this chapter between
uses which serve a community in their local area, and which will often (though not
always) be provided through local businesses, community groups and parish/town
councils, and services provided by higher tiers of local government or central
government, some of which will serve local areas (such as primary schools) and others
which will serve wider areas (such as hospitals).

The policy also sets out that the development plans should set standards for the
provision of outdoor recreational land, including play areas, sports facilities, informal
recreation spaces and allotments, with reference to relevant national standards and
best practice. The intention is to make the expected level of provision for these facilities
explicit, given their vital role in supporting health and wellbeing, improving quality of
life, and ensuring appropriate contributions from development are secured.

158) Do you agree with the approach to planning for healthy communities in
   policy HC1, including the expectation that the development plan set local
   standards for different types of recreational land, drawing upon relevant
   national standards? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

                                            87
 a)    Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

HC2: Local Green Space

This policy rewords current Framework paragraphs 106–107 on the designation of
Local Green Space, but includes a minor change so that designated areas should be
“close” to the community they serve rather than “reasonably close”. This change is
proposed to emphasise that areas identified as Local Green Space should be
genuinely local.

159) Do you agree that Local Green Space should be ‘close’ to the community
   it serves? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
   strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

Decision-making policies
HC3: Community facilities and public service infrastructure serving new
development
This policy redrafts elements of current Framework paragraphs 100 and 101, but takes
a more forward-leaning and comprehensive approach to be clear about the importance
of all forms of community facilities and public services infrastructure being secured in
instances where development could have a significant impact on the number of people
needing those services. The policy also echoes HC2 by pointing to national standards
where local standards for green space provision are not in place.
HC4: Proposals for new community facilities and public service infrastructure

This policy redrafts current Framework paragraph 100(a) and parts of paragraph 101
to give substantial weight to proposals that provide new or improved community
facilities and public service infrastructure where these come forward as specific
development proposals. The draft policy also introduces new expectations on
engaging with local communities in the design of proposals for play facilities, to ensure
that they are inclusive and reflect user needs.

160) Do you agree that the proposed policies at HC3 and HC4 will support the
   provision of community facilities and public service infrastructure serving
   new development? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HC5: Hot food takeaways and fast food outlets

This policy restates current Framework paragraph 97 on the relevant planning
considerations for hot food takeaways and fast food outlets, but clarifies that the
prohibition on such uses close to schools and other places where young people gather
applies within ‘reasonable’ walking distance of them. This is intended to avoid any
                                           88
ambiguity that the policy could apply to hot food takeaways and fast food outlets which
are a considerable but still ‘walkable’ distance away.

We are also interested in views specifically on the application of the term ‘fast food
outlets’ in planning decisions, and whether any further clarity could be provided on the
types of establishments this policy should apply to.

161) Do you have any views on whether further clarity is required to improve
   the application of this policy, including the term ‘fast food outlets’, and the
   types of uses to which it applies?
HC6: Retention of key community facilities and public service infrastructure

This is a new policy which builds on current Framework sub-paragraph 98(c) to provide
additional clarity on planning considerations where key facilities may be lost due to
development. This approach reflects common practice in local plans and is intended
to supports the government’s wider ‘Pride in Place’ agenda. The policy would apply
only to facilities which are the last of their type in an area, to avoid unreasonable
restrictions being placed on proposals to change the use of existing premises.

162) Do you agree with the proposed approach to retaining key community
   facilities and public service infrastructure in policy HC6? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HC7: Development affecting existing recreation facilities

This serves a similar purpose to proposed policy H6 in relation to the retention of open
space, sport and recreation facilities, and is a slight rewording of paragraph 104 of the
current Framework. It has been expanded to explicitly reference ‘other formal and
informal play space and allotments’ in relation to the types of facility covered, given
the important role they play in supporting healthy communities.

A change is also proposed (at HC7(1b)) to one of the criteria under which a loss of
existing recreation land might be acceptable: this would amend the existing stipulation
that it should be replaced with equivalent or better provision in terms of both quantity
and quality, with the requirement that it be replaced by equivalent or better provision
in terms of quantity and/or quality. This is proposed to allow some additional flexibility
in how replacement space can be provided, while maintaining the position that there
should be no net reduction in provision. In doing so, it recognises that an improvement
in the quality of recreational land can sometimes offset a reduction in overall quantity,
although we welcome views on the effect of this change.

163) Do you agree with the approach taken to recreational facilities in policy
   HC7, including the addition of ‘and/or’ with reference to quantity and quality
   of replacement provision? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.


                                           89
  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HC8: Development affecting Local Green Space

This policy restates current Framework paragraph 108 on the treatment of
development proposals affecting designated Local Green Space, but clarifies that grey
belt policy does not apply, nor does policy on previously developed land in the Green
Belt (as areas identified as Local Green Space should not fall into either category).

164) Do you agree with the clarification that Local Green Space should not fall
   into areas regarded as grey belt or where Green Belt policy on previously
   developed land apply? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree,
   partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                         90
Chapter 17: Pollution, Public Protection
and Security
This section brings together elements of the current Framework chapters on
Promoting healthy and safe communities and Conserving and enhancing the natural
environment to form a new consolidated chapter. The purpose of this restructuring is
to group policies relating to safeguards against pollution and natural or man-made
hazards so they can be read together in a coherent way, and ensure key constraints
are identified early on in the planning process and development proposals are safe
and appropriate for their location.

Plan-making policy
P1: Planning for Clean, Liveable and Healthy Places

This policy expands on relevant parts of the existing natural environment and healthy
and safe communities chapters of the current Framework (Paragraphs 102, 187e and
f, 196, 198 and 199) to set out the key considerations for plan-makers in identifying
sites and necessary safeguards which can limit risks from ground instability, pollution
and other hazards. It also restates existing policy on identifying opportunities to reduce
pollution through development, while adding new policy on identifying land which may
be needed for public safety and security. It omits some requirements on plan-makers
in the current Framework where these are covered by the national decision-making
policies proposed in the rest of this chapter (and which are not therefore intended to
be repeated in plans), such as policies to promote public safety.

165) Do you agree with policy P1 as a basis for identifying and addressing
   relevant risks when preparing plans? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree
   nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

Decision-making policies
P2: Ground Conditions

This policy reflects current Framework paragraphs 196 and 197, setting out the
expectation that sites should have appropriate ground conditions to support safe and
sustainable development.

166) Are any additional tools or guidance needed to enable better decision-
   making on contaminated land?

P3: Living Conditions and Pollution



                                           91
Building on current Framework paragraphs 198 and 199, this policy lays out the broad
requirements for new development to be acceptable in terms of living conditions and
pollution, followed by specific criteria which need to be considered for different types
of pollution. It includes explicit reference to daylight and sunlight, as common and
important planning considerations, and adds specific provisions on air pollution, noise
exposure, artificial light and water quality, with specific mention of chalk streams.

167) Do you agree with the criteria set out in proposed policy P3 as a basis for
   securing acceptable living conditions and managing pollution? Strongly
   agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
P4: Impact of Development on Existing Activities

Building on current Framework paragraph 200 this sets out policy on mitigating the
impact of development on existing activities (known as the ‘agent of change’ principle).
We have heard that the existing policy is not always applied effectively, so the
proposed policy is more explicit about the matters to be considered such as both the
current and permitted levels of activity within existing uses, which includes licensing
for music and cultural venues. It also sets out further types of activity which may be
affected, including explicit reference to the emergency services, defence, industrial
and waste sites. This will enable decision-makers to consider the right information
early on and reduce the risk of conflict between new and existing development.

168) Do you agree policy P4 makes sufficiently clear how decision-makers
   should apply the agent of change principle? Strongly agree, partly agree,
   neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
P5: Maintaining Public Safety and Security

This new policy expands upon current Framework paragraph 102(a), laying out how
proposals should anticipate and address possible safety concerns at the application
stage. There are new substantive provisions on the need to consider safeguarding
areas around hazardous installations, nuclear sites, and civilian aerodromes and
technical sites ensuring the appropriate bodies are consulted and the operation of
existing uses are not compromised. We are also considering how we can safeguard
areas around military sites while protecting sensitive data.

169) Do you agree policy P5 provides sufficient basis for addressing possible
   malicious threats and other hazards when considering development
   proposals? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.
  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

P6: Land and Operations for Defence and Public Protection

                                          92
Expanding on current Framework paragraph 102(b), this policy reflects the importance
of supporting development needed for defence and public protection purposes, by
attaching substantial weight to these uses, while also highlighting the need to avoid
adverse impacts on operational activity.

170) Do you agree that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of
   development for defence and public protection purposes? Strongly agree,
   partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                         93
Chapter 18: Managing Flood Risk and
Coastal Change
A dedicated chapter on managing flood risk is being proposed, partly because of the
importance of this issue, but also because flood risk policy involves a number of
assessments and we are proposing to use this chapter to set these out as clearly as
possible. Most of the content reflects pre-existing policy in chapter 14 of the current
Framework, although changes are also proposed to reflect recent updates to Planning
Practice Guidance, and to strengthen policy on coastal risks and protection.

Plan-making policies
F1: Assessing Flood Risk for Plan-Making

This policy revises paragraph 171 of the current Framework. It aims to ensure that
development plans are informed by up-to-date strategic flood risk assessments and
advice from the Environment Agency and other relevant flood risk management
authorities. The wording has been updated to make clear the importance of
considering both current and future flood risk (rather than referring less directly to the
effects of changing climate), and to be clear about the consequences which should be
considered.

F2: Planning for Effective Flood Risk Management

This policy redrafts paragraph 172 of the current Framework, retaining the requirement
for development plans to adopt a sequential and risk-based approach to the location
of development.

F3: Managing Coastal Change

This policy consolidates and adds to paragraphs 183 and 184 of the current
Framework. It requires development plans to designate Coastal Change Management
Areas likely to be affected by coastal change and to plan for risk reduction through
measures such as limiting development and safeguarding land for management
interventions. New requirements include:

   •   Taking account of Shoreline Management Plans and the National Coastal
       Erosion Risk Map;
   •   Extending Coastal Change Management Areas to include estuaries and tidal
       rivers; and
   •   Considering risk over a 100-year timeframe.

These changes, which partly draw on existing Planning Practice Guidance, aim to
improve how Coastal Change Management Areas are identified so that inappropriate
development is avoided in areas at current or future risk.

                                           94
171) Do you agree with the proposed changes set out in policy F3 to improve
   how Coastal Change Management Areas are identified and taken into
   account in development plans? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
F4: Assessing Flood Risk for Decision-Making

This policy, partly based on paragraph 181 of the current Framework, sets out when
site-specific flood risk assessments are required. The policy includes changes to aid
clarity, such as moving information from current footnote 63 to within the policy text,
and a new reference to the Flood Map for Planning.

F5: The Sequential Test

This policy consolidates references to the sequential test set out in paragraphs 173 to
176 and 180 of the current Framework, which steer development to areas of lowest
flood risk. The policy explains when the sequential test is required and how it should
be applied.

Changes are proposed to provide additional clarification as to when the sequential test
is not required, including in instances where a site is potentially at risk from surface
water flooding, but where a site-specific flood risk assessment demonstrates that the
proposed layout, design, and mitigation measures would ensure the development
would be safe for its lifetime.

A further addition to the policy clarifies that the area to which the sequential test is
applied should consider the anticipated catchment of the development in terms of its
likely occupiers or users. The proposed policy states that development proposals
should not be located in areas at risk of flooding if reasonably available alternative
sites exist, but omits reference to development “not being permitted”, as it may still be
appropriate for development to proceed in these circumstances, when weighed
against other considerations (and subject to the other tests in the chapter being
satisfied, including that the development would be safe for its lifetime). These changes
reflect recent updates to the Flood Risk and Coastal Change Planning Practice
Guidance, made in September this year.

172) Do you agree with the proposed clarifications to the sequential test set
   out in policy F5? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
F6: Development in Areas at Risk of Flooding from Rivers or the Sea



                                           95
This policy consolidates the majority of references to the ‘exception test’ in paragraphs
177 to 180 of the current Framework, but is also drafted to make clearer that this test
operates in the context of what development types are regarded as incompatible with
risk of flooding from rivers or the sea. To do this, the expanded policy refers directly to
tables which are currently set out in Planning Practice Guidance, but which are now
set out as new Annex F in the draft Framework. The remainder of the policy then sets
out the circumstances in which exceptions may be permitted through the application
of the exception test.

New wording has been included to clarify the circumstances in which the exception
test need not be applied, including where development is proposed on an allocated
site which was subject to the exception test during plan-making, unless there has been
a significant increase in the risk of flooding to the site, or a more vulnerable use is
proposed.

173) Do you agree with the proposed approach to the exception test set out in
   policy F6? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree
F7: Ensuring Development is Safe from Flooding

This policy redrafts elements of paragraphs 170 and 181 of the current Framework to
ensure development is safe for its lifetime and does not increase flood risk elsewhere.
It sets out clear criteria for assessing proposals and specifies that development which
does not meet these criteria should be refused.

F8: Sustainable Drainage Systems and Watercourses

This policy is partly a redraft of paragraph 182 of the current Framework, which
requires all development proposals that have drainage implications to incorporate
Sustainable Drainage Systems.

The policy adds a new requirement that Sustainable Drainage Systems should be
designed in accordance with the National Standards for Sustainable Drainage
Systems to provide a consistent basis for improving their design.

A further change also introduces a new policy to avoid the enclosure of watercourses
and encourage the de-culverting and re-naturalising of river channels. This addition is
intended to deliver multiple social and environmental benefits of re-naturalising rivers,
including improvements to water management.

174) Do you agree with the proposed requirement in policy F8 for sustainable
   drainage systems to be designed in accordance with the National
   Standards? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
                                            96
175) Do you agree with the proposed new policy to avoid the enclosure of
   watercourses, and encourage the de-culverting and re-naturalisation of river
   channels? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

    a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
F9: Development in Coastal Change Management Areas

This policy updates paragraphs 185 and 186 of the current Framework, setting out
how proposals in areas at risk of coastal change should be managed. Proposed
additions include a requirement that proposals within areas shown as being at risk on
the national coastal erosion risk map should be subject to the same tests as
development proposed within Coastal Change Management Areas (where these
areas are not already included within Coastal Change Management Areas).

Stronger policy wording is also proposed to make clear that permanent new residential
development (including through changes of use) is inappropriate. This is already set
out in the Flood Risk and Coastal Change Planning Practice Guidance, but it is
proposed to move this into the draft Framework to improve clarity.

These changes are intended to ensure that only appropriate development is permitted
within any area at risk of coastal change.

176) Do you agree with the proposed changes to policy for managing
   development in areas affected by coastal change? Strongly agree, partly agree,
   neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

    a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

177) The National Coastal Erosion Risk Map sets out where areas may be
   vulnerable to coastal change based on different scenarios. Do you have
   views on how these scenarios should be applied to ensure a proportionate
   approach in applying this policy?

Annex F: Managing Flood Risk and Coastal Change

The new Annex F to the draft Framework brings together information currently set out
in Annex 3 to the current Framework, and the Planning Practice Guidance, into one
single annex to support the application of flood risk policy. Updates are proposed to
Table 2 to provide certainty as to the information that needs to be submitted and the
tests that need to be met to secure planning permission for these types of
development:

•   In the essential infrastructure category – hydrogen production facilities, carbon
    capture and distribution facilities, data centres, and electric vehicle charging
    stations;



                                         97
•   In the highly vulnerable category – installations under the control of Major Accident
    Hazards Regulations, and installations requiring a radioactive substances
    regulation permit;
•   In the more vulnerable category – floating/rising designs; and
•   In the less vulnerable category – most types of land-raising.

178) Do you agree with the proposed new additions to Table 2: Flood Risk
   Vulnerability Classifications? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor
   disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

    a) Should any other forms of development should be added? Please give
       your reasoning and clearly identify which proposed or additional uses you
       are referring to.




                                           98
Chapter 19: Conserving and enhancing
the natural environment
This section would replace Chapter 15 of the current Framework on safeguarding and
enhancing the natural environment, excluding policies on ground conditions and
pollution. Those policies would be incorporated into the new chapter on pollution,
public protection and security.

The chapter has been revised to incorporate new legal requirements within the
planning system and align with current approaches to working with nature, including a
stronger focus on green infrastructure and nature-based solutions.

Plan-making policies
N1: Identifying environmental opportunities and safeguards

This policy brings together elements of current Framework paragraphs 187, 188 and
192 to set out the key considerations for how the natural environment should be
considered in plan-making. It highlights the importance of using relevant
environmental evidence, including Local Nature Recovery Strategies, to set out areas
which need safeguarding from development because of their importance for nature;
balancing the need to safeguard areas because of their potential for nature with the
need to deliver development, pursue opportunities for nature recovery, and direct
development away from sensitive locations.

New provisions include requirements for plan-makers to set clear standards for green
infrastructure, drawing upon national benchmarks. A policy change is also proposed
to limit the circumstances in which plans may seek biodiversity net gain contributions
which exceed the statutory requirement. Biodiversity net gain plays an important
contribution to nature recovery, but needs to be applied in a proportionate and
consistent manner across local planning authorities. Reflecting this, requirements
which exceed the statutory expectations are proposed to be limited to circumstances
in which higher levels of gain can be justified on specific sites being allocated in the
development plan, where this would not be on sites that are exempt from the statutory
requirement. We are interested in views on how opportunities to provide more net gain
from particular sites could also contribute to providing off-site gains for other
neighbouring sites in the area, where those other sites are unable to meet the statutory
requirement through their own on-site provision.

179) Do you agree that the proposed approach to planning for the natural
   environment in policy N1, including the proposed approach to biodiversity
   net gain, strikes the right balance between consistency, viability,
   deliverability, and supporting nature recovery? Strongly agree, partly agree,
   neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.


                                          99
  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

180) In what circumstances would it be reasonable to seek more than 10%
   biodiversity net gain on sites being allocated in the development plan,
   especially where this could support meeting biodiversity net gain obligations
   on other neighbouring sites in a particular area?

National decision-making policies
N2: Improving the natural environment

This policy consolidates and adds to aspects of current Framework paragraphs 187,
192 and 193 to provide clearer and more comprehensive expectations for how new
development should contribute positively to the natural environment.

It now makes explicit that landscape character and existing natural features are
matters to be considered. New development should also include improvements for
nature, through the application of biodiversity net gain where relevant, using actions
from Local Nature Recovery Strategies, green infrastructure and nature-based
solutions, and adding features for wildlife – with a new requirement for swift bricks in
developments.

181) Do you agree policy N2 sets sufficiently clear expectations for how
   development proposals should consider and enhance the existing natural
   characteristics of sites proposed for development? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
N3: Trees in new development

Redrafted from paragraph 136 of the Achieving well-designed places chapter in the
current Framework, this policy addresses the integration of trees within new
development. It is proposed for inclusion within the natural environment section to
ensure consistency and alignment with wider environmental objectives.

N4: Protected Landscapes

This policy revises current Framework paragraphs 189 and 190 on development within
protected landscapes. In line with the wider drafting principles proposed across the
draft Framework, the term “substantial weight” replaces “great weight” for consistency
across policies. An additional provision emphasises the importance of mitigation
measures which consider the special qualities of these landscapes where major
development is permitted, and the use of compensation where significant harm cannot
be mitigated. The latter reflects changes which we think are needed following the
amended legal duty in the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023 that relevant
authorities should ‘seek to further’ the purposes of these areas in exercising their
functions.

                                          100
182) Do you agree the policy in Policy N4 provides a sufficiently clear basis for
   considering development proposals affecting protected landscapes and
   reflecting the statutory duties which apply to them? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, including how policy can be improved to
     ensure compliance.
N5: Maintaining the character of the coast

This policy combines current Framework paragraph 191 with 187(c) to consolidate
provisions on conserving the character of coastal areas, including those defined as
Heritage Coast. It also cross-references relevant policies on coastal change and flood
risk to provide a coherent approach.

N6: Areas of particular importance for biodiversity

This policy clarifies the hierarchy of internationally, nationally and locally designated
areas of importance for biodiversity, as well as irreplaceable habitats, drawing on
current Framework paragraphs 193(b) and (c), 194 and 195. It anticipates the
introduction of Environmental Delivery Plans and introduces new national policy
clarifying protections for sites which are designated locally, addressing a gap in the
current Framework. Local Nature Recovery Strategies will enable local authorities to
more easily identify where these areas are, as they align with the guidance for
responsible authorities to map areas which are of particular importance for nature.

183) Do you agree policy N6 provides clarity on the treatment of internationally,
   nationally and locally recognised site within the planning system? Strongly
   agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

184) Are there any further issues for planning policy that we need to consider
   as we take forward the implementation of Environmental Delivery Plans?




                                          101
Chapter 20: Conserving and enhancing
the historic environment
This section revises Chapter 16 of the current Framework on the conservation of the
historic environment.

The government is committed to the conservation and enhancement of the historic
environment which is an irreplaceable resource.

Chapter 16 of the current Framework sets out the latest national policy and guidance
on the historic environment, reflecting an approach that has evolved since the
Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990. Stakeholder feedback
has consistently highlighted that the application of heritage policy has been one of the
most complex matters for applicants and decision-makers to deal with, partly due to
the interaction with the special duties in this Act protecting listed buildings and
conservation areas. This has led to heritage becoming a regular ground for legal
challenge.

There are also concerns that the current policies focus too much on addressing harm
and do not provide sufficient positive support for the sustainable redevelopment of
heritage assets to support growth - for instance, in relation to vacant listed buildings
being brought back into use. Together with strong policies on brownfield development
elsewhere in the Framework, the changes proposed here are intended to strengthen
the ability to bring forward heritage-related development. The redraft also provides
more explicit policy on World Heritage Sites, conservation areas and archaeological
assets to ensure comprehensive national coverage.

Under the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 we have a power to extend the
special regard duties, mentioned above, beyond listed buildings and conservation
areas to include other heritage assets: World Heritage Sites, Registered Parks and
Gardens, Protected Wrecks and Schedule Monuments. The government is interested
in gathering views on whether this measure should be implemented, and were they to
be implemented what implications may this have on new development proposals.

185) Do you agree the government should implement the additional regard
   duties under Section 102 of the Levelling-Up and Regeneration Act? Strongly
   agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons.

186) Do you have any evidence as to the impact of implementing the additional
   regard duties for development?




                                          102
Plan-making policies
HE1: Planning for the Historic Environment

This policy builds on paragraph 203 of the current Framework and sets out the key
considerations for heritage in plan-making. It retains the expectation that local planning
authorities prepare a positive strategy for the historic environment, while providing
clearer guidance on the factors that should inform this strategy and how these can
align with wider planning objectives.

HE2: Conservation Areas and World Heritage Sites

This policy provides specific guidance on planning for conservation areas and World
Heritage Sites. It reworks current Framework paragraphs 204, 219 and 220, making
explicit the potential link with design guides, codes and masterplans. It also introduces
an expectation that conservation areas are reviewed periodically and that any new or
amended designations are supported by an adopted appraisal and management plan.

HE3: Historic Environment Records

This policy restates the requirement, currently in paragraphs 205–206 of the
Framework, for local planning authorities to maintain or have access to a publicly
available historic environment record. While powers exist under the Levelling-up and
Regeneration Act to place these records on a statutory footing, these have not yet
been implemented. If these powers are commenced, this policy would no longer be
required in future versions of the Framework.

187) Do you agree with the approach to plan-making for the historic
   environment, including the specific requirements for World Heritage Sites
   and Conservation Areas, set out in policies H1 – H3? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

National decision-making policies
HE4: Securing the Conservation and Enhancement of Heritage Assets

This policy consolidates principles from current Framework paragraphs 202, 209, 210
and 221 to set out a clear approach for decision-making on the conservation and
enhancement of heritage assets, both designated and non-designated. It brings these
principles together in one place to provide a more coherent approach.

HE5: Assessing Effects on Heritage Assets

Replacing current Framework paragraphs 207 and 208, this policy sets out how
applicants and authorities should assess the effects of development on heritage
assets. It introduces clearer guidance on the full range of potential impacts on these

                                           103
assets - from positive effects to total loss of significance - recognising that
development can improve heritage outcomes. The policy places responsibility on
applicants to provide robust assessments, while requiring authorities to consider their
accuracy.

188) Do you agree with the approach to assessing the effects of development
   on heritage assets set out in policy H5? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HE6: Proposals Affecting Designated Heritage Assets

This policy combines current Framework paragraphs 212–215 and clarifies the
decision-making process for proposals affecting designated heritage assets. It
includes a reference to approving proposals that deliver positive impacts and signals
support for changes that bring underused buildings back into use or improve energy
efficiency. The draft removes the concept of “optimum viable use” to allow greater
flexibility where proposals cause harm not considered to be substantial.

The policy also moves from “great weight” to “substantial weight” for consistency
across the draft Framework, with a footnote explaining its interaction with statutory
duties. This is intended to improve consistency in how weighting is applied across the
draft Framework, rather than to signal any change in weighting to be given to the
conservation of designated heritage assets. We have sought to clarify this through the
inclusion of a footnote, explicitly setting this out.

189) Do you agree with the approach to considering impacts on designated
   heritage assets in policy HE6, including the change from "great weight" to
   "substantial weight", and in particular the interactions between this and the
   statutory duties? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HE7: Decisions on Non-Designated Heritage Assets

This policy revises current Framework paragraph 216 to clarify how proposals
affecting non-designated heritage assets should be assessed. It introduces explicit
wording on approving proposals with positive effects and makes the decision-making
test more transparent.

HE8: World Heritage Sites

Expanding on current Framework paragraphs 219 and 220, this policy provides clearer
guidance for decisions affecting World Heritage Sites, separating them from
conservation area policy. It includes additional detail on considering impacts on
Outstanding Universal Value.


                                         104
HE9: Conservation Areas

This policy reflects existing guidance but is presented as a standalone provision for
conservation areas. It expands on considerations for assessing proposals that affect
their character or appearance.

HE10: Archaeological Assets

This policy provides expanded guidance on investigating and recording archaeological
assets, incorporating elements of paragraph 207. It clarifies expectations for
preservation and documentation where impacts cannot be avoided.

190) Do you agree with the new policies in relation to world heritage,
   conservation areas and archaeological assets in policies HE8 – HE10?
   Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly
   disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
HE11: Loss or Removal of Heritage Assets

This policy consolidates current Framework paragraphs 211, 217 and 218 to provide
a cohesive approach where development would result in the loss or removal of
heritage assets. It ensures assets are not lost unnecessarily and that, where removal
occurs, they are recorded in the Historic Environment Record. The policy also retains
the “retain and explain” approach for statues, plaques, memorials and monuments.

191) Do you have any other comments on the revisions to the heritage
   chapter?




                                         105
Further questions
Beyond the specific questions above, please consider the following questions.

Transitional arrangements
The transitional arrangements in the draft Framework set out how the Framework
would apply to plan-making and decision-making from the date of final publication.
For the purposes of decision-making
It is proposed that the Framework would be a material consideration from the day of
publication of the final version. This means, as has been the case in previous versions
of the Framework, that the policies of the revised Framework will need to be taken into
account when making decisions from that date.
The draft Framework proposes policies on the interaction between policies contained
in development plans around the country and the new suite of national decision-
making policies. The draft Framework is likely to overlap with many development
management policies and cover a lot of the same issues that are already addressed
locally. Eventually, the expectation is that this overlap will fall away because plans
prepared against the new Framework should not repeat, duplicate or modify policies
covered by the Framework. However, for a period, where plans are being produced
and updated, there will be inevitable overlap.
Where polices in the Framework and development plan are consistent, then this would
be straightforward. Practically, consistency between polices would mean that no
tension would arise on how issues should be considered.
Where there is inconsistency between policies in the Framework and development
plan policies, this would be much more difficult for decision-makers to navigate. To
address this, we are proposing that development plan policies should be afforded very
little weight where inconsistency arises, except where they have been examined and
adopted against the new Framework. This would:
   •   Give clarity on how inconsistency should be managed in decision-making; and
   •   Ensure government priorities which are reflected in policies of the Framework
       have effect as quickly as possible and are not hindered by policies that have
       not been produced in accordance with this Framework.
For the purposes of plan-making
This Framework is proposed to form the basis of all new system plans and the draft
transitional arrangements reflect this. All old system plans, under this arrangement,
would proceed in accordance with the relevant previous versions of this Framework.
For spatial development strategies the proposed approach is that they are produced
in accordance with the new Framework. For Neighbourhood Plans, any plans that
have not been submitted by the time of publication of the final Framework, would
proceed on the basis of the new version.

                                         106
We believe that these transitional arrangements are consistent with our overall
ambition for the development plan system.
Status of the draft Framework for plan-making
Development plans will not be required to follow the revised Framework until the final
version is published (and then the extent of effect will depend on final transitional
arrangements).

192) Do you agree with the transitional arrangements approach to decision-
   making? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree,
   strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

193) Do you have any further thoughts on the policies outlined in this
   consultation?



Written Ministerial Statements and other documents
There are a number of Written Ministerial Statements and other documents, found in
Annex A to the draft Framework, where the planning policy within them has been
reflected in the proposed policies on which we are consulting. These are statements
where we regard the planning policy which they contain as being superseded by the
draft Framework policies, but we welcome views on whether any changes should be
made to this list.

194) Do you agree with the list of Written Ministerial Statements set out in
   Annex A to the draft Framework whose planning content would be
   superseded by the policies proposed in this consultation? Strongly agree,
   partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                         107
Annex A - Data Centres and onsite energy
generation

Artificial Intelligence (AI) will transform the UK economy and public services. To realise
its benefits, we need resilient, onshore data centre capacity supported by reliable
energy infrastructure. In 2026, more than £370bn is set to be invested in AI
infrastructure globally. Faster planning decisions to speed the build-out of AI
infrastructure are essential to position the UK to capture our share of this investment
to drive growth and opportunity across the country.

Delays and uncertainty in the planning regime are making it difficult to build AI data
centres and the large-scale infrastructure that they depend on. The Planning and
Infrastructure Act is a major step forward – it will cut red tape, speed up decisions and
increase certainty and flexibility.

In November we also announced our plans to invest in additional specialist AI data
centre planning capacity, protect land and unblock planning decisions for AI Growth
Zones through central government intervention, further streamline consenting for
Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects (NSIPs) and to update national planning
policy to give strong support to AI data centres.

We want developers to have maximum flexibility to choose the most efficient and
effective planning routes for their projects to accelerate the build-out of AI data centres,
a key foundation to realising AI’s potential for economic growth and public sector
transformation.
Most applications to build data centres are considered by local planning authorities
under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (TCPA). Some major data centres –
particularly while waiting for grid connections – need on site energy generation to
make the project viable. Above certain thresholds, energy generation projects must be
considered under the NSIP regime.

This means that the planning process for renewable energy infrastructure to support
data centres for AI workloads is likely to be separate to planning application for the
data centre itself. In addition, consenting for energy generation projects can be slower
given the complexity and scale of these projects, and consenting via two separate
regimes cannot account for dependencies between data centres and the energy
generation projects which will power them. This inhibits flexibility for developers and
creates potentially unnecessary delays to planning decisions.

There is already a power for the Secretary of State to direct, on request, certain types
of projects into the NSIP consenting regime that fall outside Planning Act 2008
definitions and thresholds, and once regulations are made in January, this power will

                                            108
be extended to data centres. Subject to a direction being given, this will enable
developers to apply for consent for data centres and energy generation together via
the NSIP regime and we will consult on a new draft National Policy Statement for data
centres shortly.

The Planning and Infrastructure Act will also give the Secretary of State the power to
direct a project out of the NSIP regime, on case-by-case basis, if they consider that it
is appropriate for an alternative consenting regime to apply to the development. The
power to be able to give a direction to disapply the requirement for development
consent for a specific development will bring greater flexibility to the planning system
by ensuring the appropriate regime is used based on the specific circumstances of a
project, rather than on strict statutory definitions and thresholds. The co-location of
energy generating stations with data centres is an example of where more flexibility
may be beneficial and directing the energy generation element of the project into the
same consenting regime as the data centre may be appropriate. The government
intends to bring forward secondary legislation to commence the redirection power at
the earliest opportunity and in parallel will publish guidance to support applicants
seeking to use the redirection power and set out how decisions will be made. The
Secretary of State will consider requests for directions on a case-by-case basis in
accordance with the legal and policy framework.

We want to understand whether the ability to enter or leave the NSIP regime and
ensure data centres and co-located energy generation projects can be consented
under one regime outlined above provides sufficient flexibility or whether more needs
to be done. If more needs to be done, we want to understand whether increasing the
Planning Act 2008 threshold for renewable energy generation projects co-located with
a data centre would help speed up the consenting process for data centres and their
supporting infrastructure, where appropriate. The main benefit of such a change could
be upfront certainty for developers that the TCPA consenting regime would apply in
those cases.

195) Do you consider the planning regime, including reforms being delivered
   through the Planning and Infrastructure Act, provide sufficient flexibility for
   energy generation projects co-located with data centres to be consented
   under either the NSIP or TCPA regime? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please give reasons.

196) Would raising the Planning Act 2008 energy generation thresholds for
   renewable projects that are co-located with data centres in England (for the
   reason outlined above) be beneficial? Yes/No

  a) If so, what do you believe would be the appropriate threshold? Please
     provide your reasons.

                                          109
197) Do you have any views on how we should define ‘co-located energy
   infrastructure’? Please provide your reasons.

198) Do you think the renewable energy generation thresholds under Section
   15 of the Planning Act 2008 for other use types of projects should be
   increased, or should this be limited to projects co-located with data centres?
   Yes/No

  a) Please provide your reasons.

199) What benefits or risks do you foresee from making this change? Please
   provide your reasons.




                                      110
Annex B - Viability: Standardised inputs in
viability assessment
Standardised inputs to viability assessments provide a consistent framework for
evaluating development proposals and ensure both authorities and developers have
greater certainty in the viability assessment process.
The government is therefore proposing moving the current Planning Practice
Guidance sub-section on ‘Standardised inputs to viability assessment’ into an annex
to the draft Framework, and updating where needed, to support the proposed policies
PM12, DM5 and GB8 above, subject to views received. The remainder of the existing
viability PPG would remain in guidance. The proposed updates seek to support greater
consistency, upfront clarity for all interested parties, and reduce the need for
negotiation at the decision-making stage. At the same time, the proposals seek to
ensure the system remains sufficiently responsive to different development types and
risk profiles, to ensure development can proceed.
Growth Testing

Surveyors and developers factor anticipated growth into viability assessments to
reflect changes in development conditions and costs over time. Strategic, multi-phase
sites take years, or even decades, to build out, during which time development
conditions are subject to change. Within the constraints of this uncertainty, growth
testing may help to maximise plan policy compliance at appropriate points in
development schemes by establishing a positive but realistic view of growth
expectations. An upfront commitment on developer contributions would also provide
greater clarity for all stakeholders, including communities, alongside supporting the
efficacy of any proposed review mechanisms.
Of course, growth assumptions may not be realised, increasing risks to developers
and ultimately could see returns fall below acceptable and investable thresholds. Any
approach would need to ensure that sites and developments remain investable.
We would therefore welcome views on the benefits and risks that may be brought
about by encouraging growth testing for strategic, phased schemes, as well as any
risk mitigations we might consider.

200) Would you support the use of growth testing for strategic, multi-phase
   schemes? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.
  a) Please explain your answer.

201) Would you support the optional use of growth testing for regeneration
   schemes? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.
  a) Please explain your answer.

                                        111
Developer returns: Expectations

Viability Planning Practice Guidance states, ‘an assumption of 15-20% of gross
development value may be considered a suitable return to developers in order to
establish the viability of plan policies’ and further states that plan-makers, ‘may choose
to apply alternative figures where there is evidence to support this.’

The government is interested in the merits of providing greater specificity than the
existing range to increase certainty and speed in the system. Local planning
authorities would still be able to justify different figures in plan-making where they have
evidence to support this, as they are able to do currently.

As part of this, the Government is interested in the merits of providing greater
specificity where a lower figure than the existing 15-20% range may be appropriate
and justified. For example, 6% of gross development value is generally used for
affordable housing tenures other than Discount Market Sale and First Homes. Other
cases may include residential investments that have an entirely different economic
model (recovering investment over the course of years of rental yield, rather than upon
sale), or for sites de-risked by public sector investment, where we note that the
Planning Practice Guidance already says that ‘potential risk is accounted for in the
assumed return for developers at the plan-making stage.’ As we seek increased clarity
on expected developer contributions at plan-making stage, it may be appropriate for
plan-makers to reflect more specifically the relative degree of risk and bespoke
economic models when setting expected developer returns for sites.

202) Do you agree greater specificity, including single figures, which local
   planning authorities could choose to diverge from where there is evidence
   for doing so, would improve speed and certainty? Strongly agree, partly agree,
   neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please explain your answer. If you agree, the government welcomes views
     on the appropriate figure – for example, whether 17.5% would be an
     appropriate reflection of the industry standard for most market for sale
     housing.

203) Are there any site types, tenures, or development models to which
   alternative, lower figures to 15-20% of Gross Development Value might
   reasonably apply?

  a) Please explain your answer. The government is particularly interested in
     views on whether clarifying an appropriate profit of 6% on Gross
     Development Value for affordable housing tenures would make viability
     assessments more transparent and speed up decision-making.

204) Are there further ways the government can bring greater specificity and
   certainty over profit expectations across landowners, site promoters and


                                           112
   developers such that the system provides for the level of profit necessary
   for development to proceed, reducing the need for subjective expectations?

  a) Please explain your answer.
Developer returns: Alternative metrics

The government is aware some developers and surveyors sometime use metrics other
than profit on gross development value (for example the Internal Rate or Return or
Return on Capital Employed) to assess investments. Alternative metrics may provide
a more effective measure of cash flow in certain contexts, given their ability to manage
return over longer periods of time. Conversely, however, they may also be more
volatile than percentage of Gross Development Value.
The government is interested in views on whether supplying guidance on additional
metrics would support timely housing delivery, and the goal of securing plan policy
compliance where this is possible.

205) Existing Viability Planning Practice Guidance refers to developer return
   in terms a percentage of gross development value. In what ways might the
   continued use of gross development value be usefully standardised?

206) Do you agree there circumstances in which metrics other than profit on
   gross development value would support more or faster housing delivery, or
   help to maximise compliance with plan policy? Strongly agree, partly agree,
   neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please explain your answer.

207) Are there types of development on which metrics other than profit on
   gross development value should be routinely accepted as a measure of
   return e.g. strategic sites large multi-phased schemes, or build to rent
   schemes?

  a) Please explain your answer.
Benchmark land values: Landowner premiums

Viability Planning Practice Guidance sets out that ‘the premium for the landowner
should reflect the minimum return at which it is considered a reasonable landowner
would be willing to sell their land. The premium should provide a reasonable incentive,
in comparison with other options available, for the landowner to sell land for
development while allowing a sufficient contribution to fully comply with policy
requirements.’

This guidance does not currently acknowledge specific circumstances in which a
landowner may not require the usual premium to sell their land for development. This
may be the case, for example, if land is a liability, or because a landowner has an

                                          113
interest in securing optimal public benefits (as might be the case for a public sector
body). We are seeking views on the merits of amending guidance to acknowledge
these scenarios, and any risks arising from proposed changes (for example, any
unintended consequences on encouraging land supply to be brought forward).

208) Do you agree that guidance should be updated to reflect the fact a
   premium may not be required in all circumstances? Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) In what circumstances might a premium, or the usual premium, not be
     required?

  b) What impact (if any) would you foresee if this change were made?

Benchmark Land Values: Alternative use value

Current Planning Practice Guidance sets out the scenarios whereby alternative use
value of the land may be informative in establishing benchmark land value. It is also
clear this should be limited to those uses which would fully comply with up to date
development plan policies, including any policy requirements for contributions towards
affordable housing.

The government is aware of cases of extant planning consents for an alternative use
potentially driving up land values, despite, for example, market demand lapsing. In
such cases, there is a risk of contributions being negotiated down on the basis of an
inflated land value, despite there no longer being any realistic prospect of the land
commanding the alternative use value in practice. We are therefore interested in views
on whether guidance should set out any specific cases in which alternative use value
would not be appropriate. The government’s intended effect would be for plan-makers
to continue to be able to refer to alternative use values where these may be informative,
whilst being able to disregard them where they do not have a bearing on real-world
land transactions.

209) Do you agree that extant consents should not be assumed to be sufficient
   proof of alternative use value, unless other provisions relating to set out in
   plans are met? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please explain your answer.

210) If extant consents were not to be assumed as sufficient proof of
   alternative use value, should this be at the discretion of the decision-maker,
   or should another metric (e.g. period of time since consent granted) be used?
   Decision maker discretion / Another metric / Neither

  a) If another metric, please set out your preferred approach and rationale.


                                          114
Benchmark land values: Market evidence

Existing Planning Practice Guidance sets out that market evidence can be used as a
cross-check of benchmark land value but should not be used in place of benchmark
land value. It adds that evidence should be based on developments which are fully
compliant with emerging or up to date plan policies, including affordable housing
requirements at the relevant levels set out in the plan. Where this evidence is not
available plan-makers and applicants should identify and evidence any adjustments
to reflect the cost of policy compliance. This is so that historic benchmark land values
of non-policy compliant developments are not used to inflate values over time.

Whilst the government recognises that market evidence may be useful as a cross-
check of benchmark land value, historic benchmark land values of non-policy
compliant developments should not be used to inflate values over time. Noting the
government’s commitment to securing appropriate affordable housing and
infrastructure to support new development, we would welcome views on the efficacy
of existing Planning Practice Guidance in managing this risk.

211) What further steps should the government take to ensure non-policy
   compliant schemes are not used to inform the determination of benchmark
   land values in the viability assessments that underpin plan-making?

Residual land value cross-check

The residual land value represents the amount remaining after deducting all
development costs – including construction, fees, finance, planning obligations, and
developer return – from the gross development value of the completed scheme. This
residual figure may then be compared against a benchmark land value to assess
viability.

The government is aware of cases where viability assessments have reported very
low or even negative residual land values, despite market data showing considerably
higher prices were paid for those sites. In such cases, there is an inconsistency
between low or negative residual land values, which can suggest a scheme might not
be viable, and a high price paid for land, which might imply that developers judge a
scheme to be profitable. Nonetheless, we also acknowledge that there are occasions
when low or negative residual land values might be expected, for example when a
given scheme forms part of a wider project (e.g. accompanied by an enabling
development).

We therefore propose encouraging decision-makers to aid their analysis of viability
assessments by cross-checking the residual land values of the scheme in question
with residual land values for comparable schemes; to help to set the viability
assessment in context.




                                          115
We would welcome your views on how this cross-checking tool might aid the
interrogation of viability assessments submitted alongside a development proposal, as
well as any unforeseen risks.

212) Do you agree that the residual land value of the development proposal
   should be cross-checked with the residual land values of comparable
   schemes; to help set the viability assessment in context. Strongly agree, partly
   agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please explain your answer.




                                        116
Annex C - Reforming Site Thresholds
Introduction
In May 2025, we published a Reforming Site Thresholds working paper, which can be
found on gov.uk here, seeking views on proposals to support a more streamlined and
proportionate planning system for SME developers, who are vital to diversifying our
housing market and delivering the homes our communities need. The paper proposed
a new definition of ‘medium’ development of 10-49 units and up to 1 hectare, supported
by a range of regulatory and policy easements, in recognition of the particular needs
of this scale of development. The aim of these proposals was to simplify planning
requirements for smaller scale development, and ensure the planning system is more
targeted and proportionate across different scales of development. This is vital given
the share of SME developers has decreased significantly since the 1980s.

We received approximately 180 responses to this working paper. There was broad
support for a introducing a medium category of development. Some respondents
made clear that the changes could help reduce costs for SME developers, streamline
the number of planning matters local authorities had to consider, and speed up
planning applications. However, concerns were raised in relation to the proposed area
threshold of 1 hectare, with several respondents stating that this was overly restrictive,
and could limit the number of SMEs supported. Some respondents suggested that the
area threshold could be more generous, to provide greater flexibility.

In light of the consultation responses received, we are now seeking views on an
updated set of proposals to support SME developers, with the aim to finalise our
reforms next year. This section seeks to ensure stakeholders understand the overall
holistic reforms that would apply to medium sites – including a revised definition set
out in the draft Framework Glossary, targeted policy interventions within the
Framework for this category of site, and wider regulatory changes outside the
Framework. This includes considering uplifting thresholds for the Building Safety Levy
to exempt medium sites, and changes to the application of Permission in Principle in
relation to the new medium site category.

Implementation of                 new       medium           category         in the
Framework
Our definition of medium development within the glossary of the draft Framework
defines medium development as 10-49 homes (inclusive) on sites with an area of up
to 2.5 hectares. This change provides a more generous hectare threshold than the
working paper proposed, in recognition that development coming forward at average
densities, alongside other requirements such as infrastructure, green space and
drainage, could require up to 2.5 hectares to deliver 49 units. This is particularly the
case in more suburban and rural settings. We believe an upper limit of 49 units is

                                           117
appropriate as the majority of schemes of 10-49 units are delivered by SMEs and this
threshold was generally supported in responses to the working paper.

213) Do you agree that a 2.5 hectare threshold is appropriate? Strongly agree,
   partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.

214) Do you agree that a unit threshold of between 10 and 49 units is
   appropriate? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither agree nor disagree, partly
   disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.
Within the draft Framework, there are proposed targeted policies to support this
category of site including

   •   Supporting proportionate information requirements – this is discussed in
       relation to policy DM2 on page 27 of this consultation.
   •   Setting clear expectations for medium sites in plan-making – this is
       discussed in relation to policy HO6 on page 44.
   •   Commuted Sums – exploration of options is considered in relation to policy
       HO8 on page 45 of this consultation.

We welcome views on these easements at the appropriate points in the consultation.
The government is also aware that negotiation of section 106 agreements can create
delays in the planning process and increase costs for developers and local planning
authorities. We are therefore progressing work on producing model planning
obligations; this includes working with the Planning Advisory Service to develop and
publish a standard s106 template – with a template for medium sites as an immediate
priority – which would be expected to become the default for applications in the future.

Some responses to the working paper raised concerns that introducing a new medium
category of sites could result in misuse of category within the planning system,
whereby larger sites may be divided into smaller parcels of land to benefit from the
proposed easements, or by delivering at lower densities than the site may otherwise
be suited for. We want to ensure that these reforms delivering easements where
appropriate, are primarily supporting SME builders, and recognise that, if ‘gaming’ of
the system were to occur, this would undermine confidence in the category. We are
therefore interested in views on the relative risks associated with this issue and how
we might mitigate against them.

215) Do you foresee risks or operability issues anticipated with the proposed
   definition of medium development? Yes/No.

216) If so, please explain you answer and provide views on potential
   mitigations.


                                          118
Implementation of new medium category outside the
Framework
There are wider policy easements not discussed proposed for medium sites that will
supported outside the Framework. These are as follows:

  a. Changes to Biodiversity Net Gain – The Government has set out its intentions
     for applying BNG easements and exemptions for different categories of site,
     and will set out details outside of this NPPF consultation in the New Year
  b. Reforms to the operation of planning committees – we will publish the
     government response to our technical consultation on planning committee
     reform in early 2026, alongside a consultation on draft regulations on our
     national scheme of delegation.
  c. The application of build out transparency measures in relation to medium
     sites – this will be addressed when the government responds to the consultation
     on build out transparency published in May. The original consultation can be
     found on gov.uk here.

Implementation of new medium category in regulations
Building Safety Levy

The Building Safety Levy (“the levy”) will be charged on building control applications
and initial notices for the creation of residential floorspace in England from 1 October
2026. Under the levy regulations sites of fewer than 10 dwellings or 30 bedspaces in
purpose-built student accommodation are exempt from paying the levy (the “small
development exemption”). The exemption is linked to the number of dwellings included
in the planning permission for the development, so it is not possible to break up
building control applications on one site in order to avoid paying the levy.

In the working paper we asked whether, if a medium sized sites threshold were
introduced, the small development exemption from the levy should be extended to
align with medium sites. Many respondents commented that SME developers are
disproportionately impacted by the costs associated with development and operate on
smaller margins, and as such are more likely to face viability challenges. Some
respondents expressed concern about whether the introduction of such change might
impact on the availability of building safety remediation funding and/ or the pace of
remediation works. Some local authority respondents commented that in Local
Authorities where the majority of residential applications were for sites of fewer than
50 units this may cause a levy administrative cost deficit.

We are therefore seeking views on whether the current small development exemption
should be extended to cover a wider range of sites and, if so, what an appropriate
threshold might be. This could include changes to the dwelling limit and the equivalent
purpose-built student accommodation bedspace threshold. In keeping with its
commitment to support SME developers, the government is specifically considering
uplifting the Building Safety Levy small development exemption threshold to 50
                                          119
dwellings, to align with the new medium category. We also welcome views on whether
the exemption should remain based solely on dwellings/ bedspaces or include other
factors such as site area.

217) Do you have any views on whether the current small development
   exemption should be extended to cover a wider range of sites – indicatively
   to sites of fewer than 50 dwellings, or fewer than 120 bedspaces in purpose-
   built student accommodation?

  a) Please provide your reasons.

 We are considering whether 120 bedspaces in a purpose-built student
 accommodation development is an equivalent size to a development of 50 dwellings.
 In order to reach this figure we have used the ratio for including purpose-built student
 accommodation when calculating net additional homes used in the Housing Delivery
 Test 6. The current ratio is 2.4.

218) If the exemption were to be extended, do you have any views on whether
   the development of 120 purpose-built student accommodation bedspaces is
   an appropriate equivalent to a development of 50 dwellings for the purposes
   of the levy exemption?

  a) Please provide your reasons.

 To align with the current approach to the levy small development exemption and to
 reduce administrative burden on local authority levy administration teams, we are
 considering whether any further exemption should be on a dwelling/ bedspace basis
 only.

219) If the exemption were to be extended, do you have any views on whether
   the exemption should be based solely on the existing metrics
   (dwellings/bedspaces) or whether there should also be an area threshold.

220) If you do have views on possible changes to the small developments levy
   exemption, please specify the potential impact of the possible change of the
   levy exemption on people with protected characteristics as defined in
   section 149 of the Equality Act 2010.

221) What do you consider to be the potential economic, competitive, and
   behavioural impacts of possible changes to the levy exemption? Please
   provide any evidence or examples to support your response.




6 Housing Delivery Test measurement rule book - GOV.UK


                                            120
Uplifting the Permission in Principle threshold
Permission in Principle was introduced in 2017 as a new, more proportionate
mechanism to provide certainty to developers and landowners that a site is suitable
for housing-led development so they do not have work up an application for planning
permission to test the principle of development for a site. If Permission in Principle is
granted, an applicant only needs to have Technical Details Consent approved to
secure planning permission for the residential development. Permission in Principle
can currently be granted either: through the inclusion of a site on part 2 of a Brownfield
Land Register by the local planning authority; or by an application to the local planning
authority for minor residential development (up to 9 dwellings.)
There has been a steady increase in the use of the Permission in Principle application
route. In the three months between April and June 2025, there were 305 applications
for Permission in Principle decided by local planning authorities, of which 165 were
approved (52%). We want to see greater use of Permission in Principle, and
engagement with the sector has indicated that the restriction of that the application
route can only be used for minor residential development has meant some sites that
could be suitable for SME builders are not able to benefit from Permission in Principle.
We propose to extend the Permission in Principle application route to sites suitable for
medium development. This will require amending the restrictions for Permission in
Principle set out in the Town and Country Planning (Permission in Principle) Order
2017. This will enable SME builders to test the principle of development for residential
development on more sites without the burden of preparing applications for planning
permission.
We do not intend to make substantive changes to the process for submitting and
determining these applications under the regulations. Permission in Principle
applications for medium development will have limited statutory information
requirements (for example an application form, and location plan) like applications for
minor development currently do, but we are interested in views about whether a short
planning statement should also be required for these applications. This would allow
applicants to clearly set out their case for why the site is suitable in principle for
medium development in line with local development plan and national decision-making
policies for consideration by the local planning authorities.
We will also consult further on the appropriate planning fee for these applications as
part of our wider plans to localise planning fees following the enactment of the Planning
and Infrastructure Bill.

222) Do you agree with the proposal to extend the Permission in Principle
   application route to medium development? Strongly agree, partly agree, neither
   agree nor disagree, partly disagree, strongly disagree.

  a) Please provide your reasons, particularly if you disagree.




                                           121
223) Do you have views about whether there should be changes to the
   regulatory procedures for these applications, including whether there should
   be a requirement for a short planning statement?



Development Management Procedure Order
Given our proposals for medium development will be subject to the same time limits
as major development and a design and access statement will still be important for
these developments, there is no legal need for the medium development definition to
be in the Development Management Procedure Order. As mentioned, the key
regulatory changes we are considering are an exemption from the Building Safety
Levy and expansion of Permission in Principle where it would be more straightforward
and effective to create a bespoke definition directly within these regulations. This is
why we are proposing a new definition in policy.




                                         122
Public Sector Equality Duty
We would like to hear about any potential impacts of any of the above proposals on
businesses, or of any differential impact on persons with a relevant protected
characteristic as defined by the Equality Act 2010 compared to persons without that
protected characteristic, together with any appropriate mitigation measures, which
may assist in deciding final policy approaches in due course.

224) Do you have any views on the impacts of the above proposals for you, or
   the group or business you represent and on anyone with a relevant protected
   characteristic?

  a) If so, please explain who, which groups, including those with protected
     characteristics, or which businesses may be impacted and how.

225) Is there anything that could be done to mitigate any impact identified?




                                       123
