                                                     Rt Hon Matthew Pennycook MP
                                                     Minister of State for Housing and Planning
                                                     2 Marsham Street
                                                     London
                                                     SW1P 4DF




To: All Local Authority Leaders and Metro Mayors
in England
Cc: All Local Authority Chief Executives and
Combined Authority Chief Executives in England

                                                                                   17 August 2026


Dear Leaders,

CREATING A CLEAR, RULES-BASED PLANNING SYSTEM

As you know, this government has acted with ambition and urgency in response to the acute and
entrenched housing crisis that we inherited, including by means of a bold overhaul of the planning
system. In December 2024, we revised the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), reversing
the previous government’s anti-supply changes, implementing a new standard method aligned to
our more ambitious national housing target, and releasing more land into the system through a
modernised, strategic approach to green-belt land designation and release.

In December 2025, our landmark Planning and Infrastructure Act received Royal Assent, and we
launched a consultation on a fuller and more definitive overhaul of the NPPF. This wholly
restructured Framework built on the initial revisions we made in December 2024, included a range
of new measures to support key economic sectors, and incorporated new clear and rules-based
national policies for the making of both plans and decisions.

Following extensive engagement with a wide range of stakeholders and detailed analysis of
responses to the consultation undertaken between 16 December 2025 and 10 March 2026, we are
today publishing a new NPPF and the government response to that consultation. You can find the
full response and new NPPF on gov.uk here, but key changes made following consultation are
summarised below.

Alongside the NPPF, we are also announcing wider reforms to speed up the planning system and
make it more certain. This includes publishing the response to the recent government consultation
on reforms to the statutory consultee system and publishing Housing Delivery Test (HDT) results
for 2024 and 2025.

National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 2026

The new NPPF confirms reforms to make planning policy easier to use, underpin the development
of faster and simpler local plans, and provide a clearer basis for decision-making. This includes
separating policies for plan-making and decision-making. In order to ensure that these changes
make an immediate difference, the decision-making policies will come into effect from today.
Many of the reforms reflect the positions set out in December, but I have summarised the key
changes since the consultation below:

   1. Clarifying policies throughout the Framework: including setting out more clearly the
      respective roles of different types of plans and what needs to be considered in decision-
      making (e.g. how transport impacts, pollution, heritage, protected landscapes and safety for
      women and girls should be reflected in planning decisions).

   2. Increasing the ambition of the ‘default yes’ for development around well-connected
      stations: expanding the scope of the policy to the top 80 Travel to Work Areas (TTWAs) by
      Gross Value Added, as opposed to the top 60 TTWAs proposed in the consultation.

   3. Updating policies to support increased densities: supporting more types of development
      within the curtilage of residential properties, and ensuring that extra floorspace rather than
      just extra units are supported – giving more flexibility to expand accommodation of all types.

   4. Tailoring minimum densities to maximise overall supply: by adjusting our approach to
      minimum densities around rail stations and ensuring local areas maximise densities where
      they can be supported, we have maintained an ambitious approach, while avoiding unviable
      requirements in areas that cannot support them.

   5. Requiring flexibility when applying parking standards to large retail and similar rede-
      velopment schemes: making it easier to regenerate sites.

   6. Recognising the role of strategic sites: by creating a consistent and distinct category of
      sites comprising around 1,500 units or more, with policies tailored to support them where
      relevant.

   7. Revising policy on local standards: by maintaining that quantitative standards in develop-
      ment plans should be limited to matters where local variation is justified and setting out clearly
      the circumstances in which local standards for energy efficiency and internal layout may be
      justified.

   8. Providing clearer support for telecommunications development: ensuring schemes can
      come forward in appropriate locations, including where this can improve connectivity for rail
      users.

   9. Updating policies which safeguard against the loss of facilities: ensuring that key facili-
      ties such as public houses are not lost where that can reasonably be avoided.

   10. Strengthening policy on Protected Landscapes: reinserting text to make clear that major
       development should be refused other than in exceptional cases. Landscape and scenic
       beauty in Protected Landscapes will also remain protected by statute.

Statutory Consultee Reforms

Alongside the new NPPF, the government is also publishing its response to the consultation on
reforms to the statutory consultee system. As you know, statutory consultees play an important role
in the planning process by providing expert advice on matters ranging from transport and heritage
to the environment and sport. However, where referrals are unnecessary or advice is delayed, the
system can slow decision-making and hold back the delivery of homes and growth.

That is why, in November 2025, we launched a consultation on reforms designed to ensure that
statutory consultees provide timely, proportionate and relevant advice on planning applications.
Following careful consideration of more than 1,600 consultation responses, today the government
is publishing its response and setting out a package of reforms that will streamline consultation
requirements while maintaining important safeguards.

The response to the consultation confirms that Sport England will be retained as a statutory
consultee, but the range of planning applications on which it must be consulted will be narrowed to
ensure their advice is focused on the cases where they add most value. The statutory consultee
status of The Gardens Trust and Theatres Trust is being removed, while a new notification
requirement is being introduced to ensure these bodies can continue their important role in the
planning process. We are proceeding with the proposals on which we consulted to reform four of
the national statutory consultees that receive the highest volume of planning applications: Active
Travel England, National Highways, Historic England, and the Mining Remediation Authority.

We are also maintaining the current moratorium on the creation of new statutory consultees,
ensuring that the planning system remains targeted, proportionate and focused on supporting
growth.

Together, these reforms will reduce unnecessary bureaucracy, help local planning authorities reach
decisions more quickly, and ensure statutory consultees can focus their expertise on the proposals
that matter most. You can find the full government response and details of the reforms here.

Housing Delivery Test (HDT) Results

Alongside the new NPPF, the government has also published the 2024 and 2025 Housing Delivery
Test (HDT) results. This combined publication is to help support the HDT return to a regular
publication timetable and ensure that scores reflect the most up-to-date information on housing
delivery. The 2025 HDT results, which can be found on gov.uk here, will be used for the purposes
of decision making. Alongside these results, the government has also published a revised HDT Rule
Book, which can be found here.

This suite of reforms represent a significant moment of change to national policy; however, there
will be more to do in the coming months as we continue to modernise the planning system through
a range of activities including updating relevant Planning Practice Guidance, implementing the
measures from the Planning and Infrastructure Act, and continuing to support local authorities’ ca-
pacity & capability.

I would like to thank you for continuing to work alongside government as we deliver the reforms
needed to tackle our national housing emergency and generate the sustained economic growth
needed to improve the prosperity of our country and the living standards of working people in all
areas. It is only by working together to make the best use of these changes that we will deliver the
homes, jobs and improved living standards we owe to those we serve.

                                           Best wishes,




                             RT HON MATTHEW PENNYCOOK MP
                            Minister of State for Housing and Planning
