

 National Planning Policy Framework, Chapter 6: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes (HO1–13) - GOV.UK

Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

 Accept additional cookies

 Reject additional cookies

 View cookies

 Hide cookie message

 Skip to main content

 Navigation menu

 Menu

 Menu

 Services and information

 Benefits

 Births, death, marriages and care

 Business and self-employed

 Childcare and parenting

 Citizenship and living in the UK

 Crime, justice and the law

 Disabled people

 Driving and transport

 Education and learning

 Employing people

 Environment and countryside

 Housing and local services

 Money and tax

 Passports, travel and living abroad

 Visas and immigration

 Working, jobs and pensions

 Government activity

 Departments

Departments, agencies and public bodies

 News

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

 Guidance and regulation

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

 Research and statistics

Reports, analysis and official statistics

 Policy papers and consultations

Consultations and strategy

 Transparency

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

 Search GOV.UK

 ×

 Search GOV.UK

 Search

 Search GOV.UK

 Search

 Home

 Housing, local and community

 Planning and building

 Planning system

 Guidance

 National Planning Policy Framework, Chapter 6: Delivering a sufficient supply of homes (HO1–13)

 This is Chapter 6 of the National Planning Policy Framework.

 From:

 Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government

 Published:
 29 September 2026

 Get emails about this page

 Print this page

 Applies to England

 Contents

 Plan-making policies

 National decision-making policies

The objective of the policies in this chapter of the National Planning Policy Framework is to support the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes and traveller sites, by ensuring that a sufficient amount and variety of land can come forward where needed. This includes planning for an appropriate mix of accommodation for the local community and ensuring that land with permission is developed without unnecessary delay.

Plan-making policies

HO1: Assessing the need for homes

1. The preparation of spatial development strategies, and local plans where a spatial development strategy is not in place, should be based upon:

 a. A housing need assessment that establishes the overall number of homes needed in the area as a minimum over the plan period, using the standard method in Annex D;

 b. An assessment of the permanent and transit site accommodation needs of travellers in the area as a minimum over the plan period; and

 c. An understanding of any accommodation needs that cannot be met within neighbouring areas.

2. At the most appropriate level, development plans should also take into account an assessment of the size, type and tenure of housing or other accommodation needed for different groups. These groups include, but are not limited to:

 a. Those who require affordable housing (including Social Rent) as defined in the glossary at Annex B;

 b. Older people (including those who require retirement housing, housing-with-care and care homes);

 c. Disabled people;

 d. People who rent their homes;

 e. Families with children;

 f. Looked after children (evidence of need for which can be found in the relevant local authority’s Children’s Social Care Sufficiency Strategy) and those who require other specialist community-based accommodation (where evidence of need is available for the relevant local authority);

 g. Students;

 h. Travellers; and

 i. People wishing to commission or build their own homes.

HO2: Setting requirement figures for homes

1. Spatial development strategies should establish a housing requirement, and set pitch and plot requirements where a need has been identified, for each local planning authority within the strategy area. These figures should not be retested as part of local plan preparation unless there has been a significant change in circumstances which affects the overall requirement and its distribution to each local planning authority area.

2. Where a spatial development strategy is not in place, local plans should establish the housing requirement figure and pitch and plot requirements for their area, taking account of any relevant emerging spatial development strategy.

3. Housing requirement figures should:

 a. Reflect the extent to which the identified needs of the area can be accommodated over the plan period as a minimum, in accordance with policy S1; and

 b. Be higher than the overall figure identified in the local housing needs assessment where appropriate. This includes situations where a higher housing requirement is necessary to meet the needs of neighbouring areas, or to reflect growth ambitions linked to economic development or infrastructure investment.

4. Pitch and plot requirements should reflect the extent to which identified permanent and transit site accommodation needs of travellers in the area can be accommodated over the plan period as fully as possible, in accordance with policy S1.

5. In the case of local plans, a housing requirement figure should also be set for designated neighbourhood plan areas, unless it is impractical to do so (because a neighbourhood planning area has been designated at a late stage in the local plan preparation process, or after the plan has been adopted, or in instances where the local plan is out of date; in which case the local planning authority should provide an indicative figure instead). This requirement figure should take into account factors such as the latest evidence of local housing need, the population of the neighbourhood area and the most recently available planning strategy of the local planning authority. Local planning authorities should avoid setting housing requirement figures for neighbourhood planning areas at nil other than where:

 a. The local plan already meets or exceeds the housing need figure for the neighbourhood planning area; or

 b. The neighbourhood planning area has a clear and well evidenced need for no additional housing; or

 c. The constraints within the neighbourhood planning area are so substantial as to preclude any additional housing of any kind from coming forward.

HO3: Providing land for homes

1. Local plans should identify a sufficient supply and mix of sites to meet or exceed the housing requirement figure and pitch and plot requirements for their areas over the plan period, drawing on the land availability assessment in accordance with policy PM9. This should include:

 a. In relation to housing:

  i. A supply of specific deliverable sites for five years following the intended date of adoption of the plan, with an appropriate buffer (as set out in Annex D); and

  ii. A supply of specific, developable sites or broad locations for growth for the subsequent years 6 to 10 and, where possible, for the remaining plan period, where the plan covers more than 10 years.

 b. In relation to traveller sites:

  i. A supply of specific deliverable sites for five years following the intended date of adoption of the plan (as set out in Annex D); and

  ii. A supply of specific, developable sites or broad locations for growth for the subsequent years 6 to 10 and, where possible, for the remaining plan period, where the plan covers more than 10 years.

 c. A trajectory showing the expected rate of housing and pitch and plot delivery over the plan period and, where appropriate, the anticipated rate of development for specific sites.

2. Where an allowance is to be made for windfall sites as part of the identified supply, there should be compelling evidence that they will provide a reliable source of supply. Any allowance should be realistic having regard to the land availability assessment, historic windfall delivery rates and expected future trends.

HO4: Land for strategic site development

1. The development plan should, where appropriate, identify suitable locations for strategic sites for housing-led development (such as new settlements, new urban quarters or significant extensions to existing settlements). These locations should:

 a. Be capable of being supported by the necessary infrastructure and facilities at appropriate points in the development’s delivery (including complying with relevant aspects of policies TR1 and TR3, and taking advantage of any opportunities presented by existing or planned infrastructure investment);

 b. Be capable of supporting a sustainable community, with sufficient access to services and employment opportunities within the development itself (without expecting an unrealistic level of self-containment), or in larger towns to which there is good access by sustainable transport modes; and

 c. Address strategic environmental opportunities and safeguards, including those set out in Local Nature Recovery Strategies.

2. Local plans should identify specific sites for this form of development, together with infrastructure and other site-specific requirements, including:

 a. Setting clear expectations for the quality of places to be created by using design tools such as masterplans and design codes (which can be informed by the Design and Placemaking planning practice guidance), and drawing on other principles which may be relevant such as Garden City Principles;

 b. Making a realistic assessment of the likely rates of delivery and identifying opportunities for supporting rapid implementation, such as through joint ventures, land assembly or locally led development corporations; and

 c. Supporting delivery by setting expectations for an appropriate mix of tenures which would meet the needs of different groups, as set out in policy HO5(1)(d).

HO5: Meeting the needs of different groups

1. The development plan should, at the most appropriate level, set out policies to address the housing needs of different groups (including, but not limited to, those assessed under policy HO1). This should include:

 a. In relation to affordable housing:

  i. Setting requirements for the type and mix of affordable housing (applying the definition in the glossary at Annex B) required to meet identified local needs, including the minimum proportion of Social Rent homes required as part of major development. In Designated Rural Areas development plans may set affordable housing requirements for residential developments which are not major development; and

  ii. Setting a specific affordable housing requirement (or requirements) for major development involving the provision of housing on land which is proposed to be released from the Green Belt, or which may be approved on land within the Green Belt[footnote 29].

 b. Setting out the proportion of housing on major developments to be delivered to requirements M4(2) and M4(3) of the Building Regulations. Requirements should meet or exceed local levels of need, and should ensure that no less than 40% of homes on major developments are delivered to M4(2) standards (subject to any appropriate exemptions set out in the development plan);

 c. Identifying sites which can provide specific types of accommodation where there is an identified need, including (but not limited to):

  i. Specialist housing for older people;

  ii. Purpose-built accommodation for students;

  iii. Plots for self and custom build housing and community-led development; and

  iv. Sites suitable for gypsies and travellers and travelling showpeople, including sites suitable for mixed residential and business uses, having regard to the safety and amenity of the occupants and neighbouring residents. Sites identified for travelling showpeople should have regard to their need for mixed-use yards with both residential accommodation and space for storage of equipment.

 d. Setting expectations for an appropriate mix of tenures to be provided on allocated sites where this would be appropriate and deliverable, taking into account the needs of different groups including those assessed under policy HO1.

HO6: Planning for a diverse mix of sites

1. To support the provision of a diverse mix of sites, local plans should:

 a. Allocate land to accommodate at least 10% of the housing requirement on sites no larger than one hectare, and a further 10% on sites of between one and two and a half hectares, unless there are strong reasons why these targets cannot be achieved; and

 b. Allocate sites which will support and enhance the vitality of rural communities and enable villages to grow and thrive, especially where this will support local services.

National decision-making policies

HO7: Meeting the need for homes

1. In applying the policies in this Framework, substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence. This includes, but is not limited to, homes needed for different groups assessed under policy HO1.

HO8: Providing affordable homes

1. Development proposals should meet or exceed up-to-date development plan requirements for the proportion and mix of affordable housing tenures relevant to the location, including the minimum proportion of Social Rent. This should be provided on-site unless:

 a. Off-site delivery on an alternative nearby site would optimise the quality or quantity of affordable homes built; or

 b. A cash payment in lieu of on or off-site provision can be justified robustly, and the agreed approach contributes towards the objective of creating mixed and balanced communities.

2. Development proposals that include military affordable housing should not be required to meet development plan requirements for the mix of affordable housing tenures (including the minimum proportion of Social Rent). These proposals should:

 a. Demonstrate an evidenced unmet need for military affordable housing (as provided by the Ministry of Defence); and

 b. Meet development plan requirements for the proportion of affordable housing on the site. This includes where military affordable housing is the only form of affordable housing provided, or where military affordable housing is delivered alongside other tenures of affordable housing.

3. Where development proposals meet or exceed up-to-date development plan requirements for the proportion and mix of affordable housing tenures, including the minimum proportion of Social Rent properties, a flexible approach should be taken to the application of any development plan requirements relating to the number of bedrooms provided in market homes, taking into account prevailing market conditions.

4. Where development proposals include the reuse or redevelopment of vacant buildings, any affordable housing contributions which are due should be reduced by a proportionate amount, equivalent to the gross floorspace of the existing building or buildings. This does not apply to vacant buildings which have been abandoned, or to major development on land within or released from the Green Belt (to which the requirements in policy GB8 apply).

HO9: Specialist forms of accommodation

1. Development proposals to address specialist housing needs should provide living conditions and access to services which are appropriate to the needs of their residents and users. This includes:

 a. Specialist housing for older or disabled people:

  i. Being located where residents will be able to access frequently-used services easily and safely by walking, wheeling (including mobility scooters) and by public or on-site transport services; including through facilities provided as part of the scheme; and

  ii. Being delivered to M4(2) or M4(3) accessibility standards.

 b. Specialist community-based accommodation:

  i. Being supported by a management plan or other supporting evidence which shows how the development will provide a safe and secure environment for residents; and

  ii. Being located where residents will be able to access frequently-used services easily and safely.

 c. Purpose-built student and large-scale shared living accommodation:

  i. Being located where residents will be able to access frequently-used services (and, for student accommodation, relevant education facilities) easily and safely by walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport;

  ii. Providing adequate living and storage space and sufficient shared cooking, laundry and amenity areas (other than where cooking and laundry facilities are provided within student rooms, in which case these do not need to be available on a shared basis); and

  iii. Being supported by a management plan which shows how the development will be managed and maintained to ensure the continued quality of the accommodation, communal facilities and services.

HO10: Exception sites

1. Development proposals for housing on land not already allocated for this purpose, and which are located outside settlements, should be supported where they are:

 a. A rural exception site (as defined in the glossary at Annex B) that will provide affordable housing to meet identified local needs – as evidenced through a local housing needs survey or secondary data which is no more than five years old; or

 b. Sites which comprise community-led development as defined in the glossary at Annex B.

2. Unless otherwise specified in the development plan, exception sites brought forward in accordance with paragraph 1 of this policy should:

 a. Adjoin or be physically well-related to a settlement;

 b. Not involve built development which is greater than one hectare in extent, or exceed 5% of the size of the existing settlement, whichever is greater (unless specific provision to exceed these limits is made in the development plan); and

 c. Include one or more types of affordable housing. A proportion of market homes may be allowed on the site where essential to enable the delivery of affordable units without grant funding.

HO11: Isolated homes in the countryside

1. Development proposals for isolated homes in the countryside should only be supported where one or more of the following circumstances apply:

 a. There is an essential need for a rural worker, including those taking majority control of a farm business, to live permanently at or near their place of work in the countryside;  

 b. The development would be appropriate enabling development to secure the future of heritage assets in accordance with policy HE4;

 c. The development would reuse a redundant or disused building and enhance its immediate setting, including proposals which would secure the long-term reuse of a vacant or underused listed building (subject to taking into account any harm to its significance, as set out in policy HE6);

 d. The development would involve the subdivision of an existing residential building; or  

 e. The design is of exceptional quality, in that it:  

  i. Is truly outstanding, reflecting the highest standards in architecture, and would help to raise standards of design more generally in rural areas; and  

  ii. Would significantly enhance its immediate setting, and be sensitive to the defining characteristics of the local area.

HO12: Traveller sites

1. Development proposals for traveller sites should be located so that they:

 a. Provide a settled base while recognising the extent to which traditional lifestyles (whereby some travellers live and work from the same location thereby omitting many travel to work journeys) can contribute to sustainability and may also mean that locations not well-related to existing settlements may be appropriate; and

 b. Enable access to frequently used services, such as education, welfare and health services, including ensuring that children can attend school on a regular basis.

2. When considering proposals for traveller sites, including for the purposes of considering need under policies S5 and GB7, local planning authorities should take into account the existing level of local provision and need for additional sites and other personal circumstances which may be relevant. Applications from any traveller should be considered and not just those with local connections.

3. Where development proposals require the permanent or temporary relocation of an authorised traveller site, an alternative site should be identified and provided. Suitable alternative sites should take into account the views of existing residents as well as existing family or community groupings where possible.

HO13: Build out of residential and strategic sites

1. To significantly boost the supply of homes, it is important that land with permission is developed without unnecessary delay. Proposals for major development involving the provision of housing should be capable of bringing the housing forward within a reasonable period, taking into account the proposed tenure mix for the development, local market conditions (including absorption rates) and the development history of the site.

2. For all proposals involving housing, consideration should be given to whether to impose a planning condition requiring that development begins within a timescale shorter than the relevant statutory default period, where this would expedite the development without threatening its implementation or viability.

3. In relation to development proposals for strategic sites, the consenting framework should:

 a. Set out the parameters and requirements for the design, infrastructure and other features of the development (including the quantity and type of affordable housing to be provided), with the level of initial and subsequent detail tailored to the proposed scale and phasing of the development; and

 b. Be flexible enough to respond positively to changing circumstances as phases are brought forward, including changes to housing need, infrastructure requirements, viability and design.

4. Where an emerging development plan (however advanced) proposes to allocate one or more strategic sites, development proposals should not be inconsistent with the proposed scale, location and phasing of those strategic sites. This applies notwithstanding the application of policy DM4(2) where relevant.

5. Paragraph 1 of this policy applies to strategic sites involving the provision of housing, and to other major development involving the provision of housing. Paragraph 2 applies to all development involving the provision of housing. Paragraphs 3 and 4 apply to all strategic sites.

This is Chapter 6 of the National Planning Policy Framework

Continue to Chapter 7: Building a strong, effective economy (E1–4).

Return to the National Planning Policy Framework homepage.

Footnotes

29. This requirement may be set as a single rate or be set at differential rates, and should:

 i. Be set at a higher level than that which would apply to land which is not within or proposed to be released from the Green Belt; and

 ii. Require at least 50% of the housing to be affordable, unless this would make the development of these sites unviable (when tested in accordance with national planning practice guidance on viability). ↩

 Sign up for emails or print this page

 Get emails about this page

 Print this page

 Contents

Explore the topic

Planning system

Is this page useful?

 Maybe

 Yes this page is useful

 No this page is not useful

 Thank you for your feedback

 Report a problem with this page

Help us improve GOV.UK

Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

 This field is for robots only. Please leave blank

 What were you doing?

 What went wrong?

 Send

 Cancel

Help us improve GOV.UK

 To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
 Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab).

 Cancel

Services and information

 Benefits

 Births, death, marriages and care

 Business and self-employed

 Childcare and parenting

 Citizenship and living in the UK

 Crime, justice and the law

 Disabled people

 Driving and transport

 Education and learning

 Employing people

 Environment and countryside

 Housing and local services

 Money and tax

 Passports, travel and living abroad

 Visas and immigration

 Working, jobs and pensions

Government activity

 Departments

 News

 Guidance and regulation

 Research and statistics

 Policy papers and consultations

 Transparency

 How government works

 Get involved

Support links

 Help

 Privacy

 Cookies

 Accessibility statement

 Contact

 Terms and conditions

 Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg

 Government Digital Service

 All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated

 © Crown copyright

