                                                         PLANNING
                                                       NEWSLETTER

By Email Only


Message from Chief Planner
4 June 2026
The Chief Planner Newsletter provides updates on the latest announcements from
the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG), other
government departments and agencies relating to planning policy and practice.
Please see overleaf for the list of contents.

This newsletter outlines details of the significant updates on plan-making and wider
planning reforms. These include the introduction of new data standards regulations
for local plans, marking an important step towards a more open and data-driven
planning system, as well as continued rollout of the new plan-making framework
and engagement with authorities on indicative plan timetables.

The newsletter also highlights updates on compulsory purchase, and forthcoming
regulations from the Department for Transport to enable cost recovery for certain
services. There is also an update on the expanding role of Active Travel England in
plan-making, alongside new guidance and support being developed.

In addition, we are sharing new guidance and resources, including a Good
Practice Guide on archaeology and solar farms from Historic England, and the
transfer of neighbourhood planning toolkits onto GOV.UK.

Finally, this edition also covers recent research on demolition and retrofit decisions,
as well as opportunities for authorities to strengthen planning capacity through the
Public Practice programme.

With kind regards,

Joanna Averley
Chief Planner

All previous Chief Planner Letters and Newsletters are available on GOV.UK here.



                                                                                          1
                                                                                       PLANNING
                                                                                     NEWSLETTER

Newsletter Contents
Policy and Guidance Updates ..........................................................................................3
  New Plan-Making System Update .................................................................................3
  Compulsory Purchase .....................................................................................................5
  National Scheme of Delegation for Planning Decisions ..............................................5
  Department for Transport: forthcoming cost recovery regulations ............................6
  Active Travel England: new statutory role in local plans and supplementary plans 7
  Update from Historic England on Good Practice Guide on archaeology and solar
  farms..................................................................................................................................8
  Neighbourhood Planning Guidance and Toolkits ........................................................9
Funding Opportunities, Research and Events ................................................................10
  Demolition or retrofit? What we have learned from recent research .....................10
  NSIP Innovation and Capacity Fund ...........................................................................10
  Update on Planning recruitment .................................................................................11
  MHCLG Planning Skills and Capacity Survey ..............................................................12




                                                                                                                                        2
                                                        PLANNING
                                                      NEWSLETTER

Policy and Guidance Updates

New Plan-Making System Update

New data standards regulations for plan-making
For the first time, communities, developers, and planners will be able to see clearly,
in one place, how plan-making is progressing and how many homes each area is
planning for. Regulations introducing mandatory data standards for local plans
came into force on 7 May 2026 - a significant step towards a more open, data-
driven and efficient planning system, and the first use of the planning data powers
in the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023.

LPAs bringing forward plans under the Create or update a local plan using the new
system - GOV.UK are now required to publish their plan timetables and housing
requirements in a standardised format. Guidance is available on the 'publish your
plan data' page on the Planning Data platform, which also includes a 'check and
provide' service to help you check your data meets the standard.

This consistent, openly published data will build a clear national picture of plan-
making progress and housing ambitions across England. It will make it easier for
citizens and organisations to find and use planning information, and create
opportunities for new tools and services that make planning more accessible for
everyone.

LPAs bringing forward a plan under the new system should follow the guidance,
publish data to the approved standard and can share their experience by
emailing digitalland@communities.gov.uk. For more details read the MHCLG Digital
blog post: Data standards: Laying the groundwork for an open, faster, data-driven
planning system.


Request for indicative plan timetables

There are a range of interfaces between MHCLG and LPAs depending on where
they are in the process of preparing a local plan, as follows:


                                                                                         3
                                                         PLANNING
                                                       NEWSLETTER

   •   MHCLG has written to authorities who will soon be preparing a plan in the
       new plan-making system requesting an indication of key milestone dates for
       plan preparation. The information is being requested to enable MHCLG and
       PINS to understand when plans are anticipated to help manage
       resources. Thank you to those LPAs that have already provided the
       information.
   •   If an LPA has not been contacted by MHCLG and will be preparing a plan
       early in the new system please complete this form as soon as possible.
   •   LPAs who are due to be commencing preparation of a plan in the near future
       are encouraged to contact newsystemplans@communities.gov.uk to request
       a meeting with MHCLG to provide an update on progress and opportunity to
       ask MHCLG questions about preparing a plan in the new system.
   •   In addition, thank you to those local authorities who have published their plan
       timetable and issued their notice to commence plan-making. MHCLG are
       reaching out to these early starters to offer an informal meeting with MHCLG.
       If LPAs are yet to receive an offer of a meeting,
       please contact newsystemplans@communities.gov.uk.

Strategic Environmental Assessment in the new system
The requirement to carry out sustainability appraisal (Planning and Compulsory
Purchase Act, 19(5)) was removed for new system local plans by the Levelling Up
and Regeneration Act 2023. The requirement for local plans to be subject to
Strategic Environmental Assessment remains. The 30-month local plan process: an
overview - GOV.UK guidance says:

  “SEA is a process for the environmental assessment of certain plans and
  programmes which are likely to have significant effects on the environment. Your
  plan will need to carry out SEA if it meets certain criteria set out in regulation 5 of
  The Environmental Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004 . We
  expect that all local plans will need to carry out SEA.”

MHCLG will shortly be publishing guidance on SEA for new system plans, as set out
in the roadmap: New local plan-making system roadmap - GOV.UK

Get emails about updates to local plans guidance on GOV.UK

                                                                                        4
                                                        PLANNING
                                                      NEWSLETTER

Choose from a range of email updates, depending on the scope of interest. To get
email updates for additions and changes to:
• the CULP guidance collection, select 'Get emails about this page' on the Create
  or update a local plan using the new system page
• individual pages within the CULP guidance collection, select 'Get emails about
  this page' on the relevant page
• everything published on GOV.UK about local plans (including guidance,
  services, news stories and research), select 'Get emails for this topic' on the Local
  Plans topic page

Unsubscribe or make changes to your email subscriptions at any time.


Compulsory Purchase

Since March 2024, the MHCLG has published a register of decisions on all
compulsory purchase orders in England submitted to the Department for
confirmation since 2019. The intention behind publishing the register is to increase
transparency around how decisions are taken, and to improve knowledge and
awareness of the purposes for which compulsory purchase powers may be used.
The register is updated quarterly and the latest version, which was published on 28
April, can be found here.


National Scheme of Delegation for Planning Decisions

MHCLG have laid draft regulations in Parliament on 1st June that will, subject to
Parliamentary approval, introduce a national scheme of delegation for planning
decisions across England. They place planning applications into two categories:

   •   Schedule 1: those which must always be delegated to planning officers for a
       decision; and

   •   Schedule 2: those which are presumed to be delegated to officers but
       which, in certain defined circumstances (known as the gateway test), can be
       considered by planning committees.



                                                                                       5
                                                        PLANNING
                                                      NEWSLETTER

The types of applications in Schedule 1 which must be determined by an officer
include applications for minor residential and commercial development,
householder development, discharge of condition applications and reserved
matters applications for proposals, where the outline is below 500 dwellings.

The types of applications in Schedule 2 which are presumed delegated but could
go to committee subject to the gateway test include larger applications for
planning permission not sent out in Schedule 1, reserved matters applications where
the outline is above 500 dwellings, and applications for listed building consent.

The Gateway Test to take Schedule 2 applications to committee requires the
nominated officer (usually the chief planner or equivalent) and the nominated
member (usually the chair of the committee) to agree that the application meets
one of the following criteria:

   •   A. where the application raises an economic, social or environmental issue of
       significance to the local area

   •   B. where the application raises a significant planning matter having regard to
       the development plan and any other material considerations

There are separate provisions allowing the committee to consider applications
linked to the local planning authority for propriety reasons where they do not need
to meet the Gateway Test.

The Regulations also set a maximum cap on the size of planning committees of 13
members. The draft Regulations must first be considered by Parliament. Following
that, if approved the final version will be laid and they will come into effect on 31
October 2026.

Department for Transport: forthcoming cost recovery regulations

The Planning and Infrastructure Act 2025 has received Royal Assent, giving local
authorities new powers to recover costs for services they provide on casework
under the Highways Act 1980 and the Transport and Works Act 1992. The
Department for Transport (DfT) is developing regulations and guidance to
implement these new powers through secondary legislation. This will give effect to:

                                                                                        6
                                                        PLANNING
                                                      NEWSLETTER

   •   Section 31 of the Act, covering services provided under the Highways Act
       1980
   •   Section 42 of the Act, covering services provided under the Transport and
       Works Act

Taken together, these measures will allow specified public bodies – including local
authorities – to charge fees for relevant services provided to applicants. This will
help ensure that costs can be recovered appropriately, bringing these regimes
more closely into line with other infrastructure consenting processes. Local
authorities will be included as prescribed bodies under these new
regulations, maintaining their statutory role while enabling cost recovery
where appropriate.

DfT is working at pace to progress this legislation and is keen to discuss the
proposed approach with local authorities. If there are any questions at this stage or
a wish to discuss the proposals in more detail, please do contact the Infrastructure
Planning Reform team at DfT: InfrasPlanningRefo@dft.gov.uk


Active Travel England: new statutory role in local plans and
supplementary plans

Active Travel England is an executive agency, sponsored by the Department for
Transport, whose aim is to increase the number of local journeys being
walked, wheeled or cycled by 2030. ATE has been a statutory consultee for
planning applications above certain thresholds since June 2023.

With effect from 25 March 2026, ATE also has a new statutory role as a specific
consultation body for new style local plans and supplementary plans prepared
under the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2026.
Where local authorities consider that ATE may have an interest in the preparation of
a development plan, they must invite ATE to make representations at the relevant
stages of plan making.

In response to this new role, ATE is developing a Spatial Plan Service to support local
authorities preparing local plans, accompanied by new guidance. The service is

                                                                                       7
                                                       PLANNING
                                                     NEWSLETTER

being shaped in close collaboration with a group of local authorities and will evolve
over time as planning reforms progress and as ATE’s role develops. ATE aims to work
with local planning authorities to ensure that active travel is considered early in
the plan making process, including within the evidence base, site allocations and
policies.

Supplementary plans are a new type of plan, and ATE are currently considering
how its role in relation to these plans should develop in practice. ATE would
welcome feedback and ideas as this part of the system emerges.

Please send formal notifications and consultations on plans prepared under the
Local Planning Regulations 2026 to: Planning-
Consultations@activetravelengland.gov.uk.

ATE is also hosting ‘Making Active Places 2026’ in Manchester this September. This
two-day conference brings together industry professionals, local authority officers
and community leaders for lectures, workshops and guided tours led by local and
international experts in town planning, placemaking and highway design. Further
information is available at: https://activetravelengland.gov.uk/conference-2026


Update from Historic England on Good Practice Guide on archaeology
and solar farms

A Good Practice Guide has been published on archaeology and solar farms,
helping solar developers to integrate archaeological considerations from early in
the project planning processes through to final design.

Funded by the UK Government and Historic England the guide has been produced
collaboratively with representatives from the archaeology and solar sectors and is
jointly badged by the Association of Local Government Archaeological Officers
(ALGAO), the Chartered Institute for Archaeologists (CIfA), the Federation of
Archaeological Managers and Employers (FAME), Historic England and Solar Energy
UK (SEUK).




                                                                                      8
                                                          PLANNING
                                                        NEWSLETTER

It is structured in two parts: Part 1 outlines principles for good practice, underscoring
the importance of collaborative working practices, which balance the need for
efficient and timely project delivery with the requirement to uphold policies that
protect the historic environment; Part 2 provides practical tools and useful
information on the context for solar farm development, defining the main elements
of the development, key roles, the timing of specific actions and the range of
techniques available. Also, Part 2 includes a model checklist of potential impacts
for the applicant to complete and provide to the archaeological adviser, and
advice on developing appropriate planning conditions / DCO requirements.

The Guide provides a framework for assessing and evaluating impact and design
mitigation for the effects of solar farm development on the archaeological
resource, promoting consistent approaches to the process and timing of
archaeological work. It does not cover the setting of heritage assets or impacts on
historic landscapes; nor is it intended to apply to small-scale installation of ground-
mounted solar panels.

Written for developers, archaeological advisers, planning case officers,
archaeological consultants and contractors, the Guide will be formally launched in
late Spring. Meanwhile, it is available for immediate use and can be downloaded
from the CIfA website: Professional Practice Papers | CIfA


Neighbourhood Planning Guidance and Toolkits

Following the end to government funded support for neighbourhood planning the
neighbourhood planning website, operated on MHCLG’s behalf by Locality, has
closed. To preserve the guidance and toolkits previously hosted on that
website, the Department is in the process of transferring them to GOV.UK. Each
toolkit sets out the processes and activities required to produce a neighbourhood
plan and includes practical guidance and best practice throughout.

Some toolkits are already available, and more are being added gradually. All will
be available in due course. Separately, all of the toolkits will be updated to reflect
changes to planning policy. This is expected to be complete by April 2027. MHCLG


                                                                                          9
                                                          PLANNING
                                                        NEWSLETTER

is also aware that the existing planning practice guidance updating and that work
will be progressed to a similar timeframe to ensure consistency.


Funding Opportunities, Research and Events

Demolition or retrofit? What we have learned from recent research

Decisions on whether to demolish and redevelop an existing building or retrofit and
reuse it are often made early in the planning process and have significant
implications for carbon, viability and local character. Research commissioned by
MHCLG, and carried out by Verian, examined how national planning policy and
guidance supports decision making on demolition and retrofit, how it is interpreted,
and how it is applied in practice. The study draws on interviews and survey
responses from nearly 1000 professionals across the built environment.

The findings show that planning policies are not providing clear or consistent
direction. Demolition is commonly driven by viability, delivery and tax
considerations, while retrofit is motivated by sustainability and reuse. Uptake of
whole life carbon assessment remains low, with respondents supporting several
measures that could bring greater clarity and consistency to decision making,
including a ‘retrofit first’ approach, better aligned financial incentives for both new
build and retrofit, and the introduction of standardised whole life carbon guidance
to help the sector move towards net zero goals.

Read the full report here: Demolition and redevelopment or retrofit: research report
- GOV.UK


NSIP Innovation and Capacity Fund

MHCLG is launching a third round of the Innovation and Capacity (I&C) Fund to
support host local authorities involved in Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects
(NSIPs). This is part of the Government’s wider programme of reform to make the
NSIP consenting system more streamlined, effective and responsive. From 8 June
2026, new regulations will also enable host local authorities to recover costs for

                                                                                       10
                                                       PLANNING
                                                     NEWSLETTER

relevant services provided to applicants and proposed applicants throughout the
Development Consent Order process, where they have published a statement
setting out their fee charging schedule.

Round 3 of the I&C Fund is designed to help authorities get ready for these changes
by building the systems, processes and capability needed to implement statutory
cost recovery and strengthen their role in the DCO process. Local authorities are
central to the effective operation of the NSIP regime, and MHCLG hope this funding
will support practical, locally led approaches that build resilience, improve
readiness and support effective engagement in the reformed system. Further
information, including how to apply via the Microsoft Form, is available in the NSIP
Innovation and Capacity Fund (Round 3) Application

Applications can be submitted from midday Monday 8 June until midday 29 June
2026.

Update on Planning recruitment

Public Practice salary support programme

MHCLG’s partnership with Public Practice provides a targeted, proven route to
bring experienced, mid-career built environment professionals into local planning
authorities. Through the Associate Programme, Public Practice recruits, assesses,
and matches high-quality candidates from disciplines such as architecture, urban
design, infrastructure and environmental services into planning roles where
capacity pressures are most acute.

This offer is designed to address the most persistent workforce challenge facing the
sector: attracting and retaining experienced professionals. Public Practice enables
career transitions from the private sector into public service, bringing
multidisciplinary skills and fresh perspectives that complement existing planning
teams and strengthen delivery capability. Find out more about our Spring 2026
cohort here.

MHCLG are supporting this through a flexible funding offer to authorities. Salary
support helps to reduce the financial barriers to recruiting experienced staff,
alongside coverage of recruitment and development costs. Find out more here.
                                                                                    11
                                                        PLANNING
                                                      NEWSLETTER

Alongside this, Public Practice are launching “Planning Teams for the Future”, a new
report that explores how planning services can evolve to become more resilient,
digitally enabled, and strategically focused over the coming decade. Find out
more here.

Pathways to Planning second intake

As you may know, the Pathways to Planning programme is a key part of MHCLG’s
offer to build capacity in local planning authorities. While the deadline to secure
graduate trainees for an autumn 2026 deadline has now passed, there is remaining
funding available for the new second intake of the programme, to provide councils
with trainees to hire in Early 2027. Applications are open for graduates until 29 June,
so councils who sign up early can help promote the scheme in their local areas and
help bring in the most relevant talent pools.

This second intake is designed to support local planning authorities to recruit more
flexibly whilst still accessing top graduates who have passed the rigorous Pathways
to Planning assessment process. Educational bursaries are available for every place
on the programme, and a limited number of salary bursaries will be available for
authorities with high housing and local plan need. This is available to local and
strategic planning authorities.

To find out more or secure funding contact: pathways.planning@local.gov.uk or
sign up directly on the programme website for employers.


MHCLG Planning Skills and Capacity Survey

The Planning Skills and Capacity Survey has now closed, and MHCLG would like to
thank the local planning authorities who took the time to participate.




                                                                                    12
