

 Planning Inspectorate Casework Database - GOV.UK

Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

 Accept additional cookies

 Reject additional cookies

 View cookies

 Hide cookie message

 Skip to main content

 Navigation menu

 Menu

 Menu

 Services and information

 Benefits

 Births, death, marriages and care

 Business and self-employed

 Childcare and parenting

 Citizenship and living in the UK

 Crime, justice and the law

 Disabled people

 Driving and transport

 Education and learning

 Employing people

 Environment and countryside

 Housing and local services

 Money and tax

 Passports, travel and living abroad

 Visas and immigration

 Working, jobs and pensions

 Government activity

 Departments

Departments, agencies and public bodies

 News

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

 Guidance and regulation

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

 Research and statistics

Reports, analysis and official statistics

 Policy papers and consultations

Consultations and strategy

 Transparency

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

 Search GOV.UK

 ×

 Search GOV.UK

 Search

 Search GOV.UK

 Search

 Home

 Housing, local and community

 Planning and building

 Research and analysis

 Planning Inspectorate Casework Database

 Detailed information on a selection of the Planning Inspectorate's casework decisions over a 5 year rolling period. 

 From:

 Planning Inspectorate

 Published:
 21 March 2018
 Last updated:

 1 October 2026
 — 
 See all updates

 Get emails about this page

 Applies to England

 Documents

 Casework Database 

MS Excel Spreadsheet, 22.6 MB

This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.

 Request an accessible format

 If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email corpcomms@planninginspectorate.gov.uk. Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.

 Older Casework Data: casework decided between 5 and 10 years ago

MS Excel Spreadsheet, 11.8 MB

 Hints and tips for searching the dataset

MS Word Document, 1.1 MB

This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.

 Request an accessible format

 If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email corpcomms@planninginspectorate.gov.uk. Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.

 Appeals Data: Data notes and guidance

HTML

 Details

Local Plans Examinations data

We are currently reviewing the way we publish data in the Casework Database. The database previously included data on Local Plans Examinations casework. These data were incomplete and did not easily fit into the format of the database, which is designed primarily around Appeals casework. Moreover, most of the Local Plans-related information contained within the database is already available elsewhere in the publications found at Local plans: monitoring progress - GOV.UK (see tables “Plans containing strategic policies” and “Plans containing non-strategic policies”). As a result, we have taken the decision to remove the Local Plans Examinations data from the Casework Database. We are considering what data should be included to provide a more helpful publication on Local Plans Examinations casework in future. We would appreciate all feedback on this.

Unable to find what you are looking for?

If there is any Local Plans Examinations-related information that you would have previously found in the Casework database, that you cannot find at Local plans: monitoring progress - GOV.UK, please email us at statistics@planninginspectorate.gov.uk and we will be happy to provide this information.

Do you have requirements or suggestions for Local Plans Examinations data?

We are looking for ways to improve our data presentation. If you have any suggestions or particular requirements for future data releases relating to Local Plans Examinations, please let us know at statistics@planninginspectorate.gov.uk.

Updates

01 October 2026 update: From September 2026 we are publishing the ONS Local Planning Authority (LPA) code alongside the ONS Local Authority code. The ONS Local Authority code has moved from column D to column AR, and column D now contains the ONS LPA code.

Local Planning Authorities will sometimes cover different areas to Local Authorities (e.g. where there are National Parks). However, even when they cover the same area, the ONS codes will be different.

11 June 2025 update: A data processing issue has been identified, where the names of Inspectors involved in Local Plan cases were incorrect. This caused incorrect data for these cases, in previous versions of the casework database.

This has now been corrected and the names are now fixed. We are not aware of any other case types identified by this issue but will assess this in due course. If you have any questions about this please contact us at statistics@planninginspectorate.gov.uk

27 May 2025 update: There has been a data processing issue with Tree Replacement Notices (TRN) were they were being incorrectly labelled as Tree Preservation Order (TPO). This has now been corrected and the labelling is now fixed.

03 December 2024 update: We have discovered a data quality issue with the number of residences field. We are investigating this issue and advise caution is needed when using this field. Linked to this, we have discovered some inconsistencies with the major housing development and minor housing development. This is being investigated, and we will provide updates as we can.

We have made corrections to our data on decision dates for Tree Preservation Order (TPO) cases since the previous database release.

In previous releases of the database, cases belonging to Somerset, North Yorkshire or Cumbria were incorrectly flagged as No LPA Associated. This has been corrected in the current database release.

24 May 2024 update: We have returned inspector name to the database but advise there are still blank entries where the decision maker should be known. We have made some improvements to data quality but further investigations and changes are still in progress.

29 January 2024 update: There has been a data entry issue with Tree Preservation Order (TPO) cases where incorrect valid dates have been entered. This means we have removed the dates from this field for TPO cases.

If you have any questions on this please contact statistics@planninginspectorate.gov.uk.

12 June 2023 update: We apologise that due to a data processing issue, agents’ names are missing from casework decided after 31st March 2022.  This means it is not possible to say, for these cases, whether an agent was involved.

We are exploring this issue and will provide the missing names as soon as we can.

This data set includes detailed information on a selection of the Planning Inspectorate’s (PINS) casework decisions over a 5-year rolling period. Casework currently in progress and those which have been withdrawn or turned away are not included.

The number of appeals listed in the Casework Database may not match exactly with other Statistics published by the Planning Inspectorate, for example our Official Statistics that we publish each month.  This is due in part because the database and the Official Statistics were compiled on different days and that the data may have been updated in the intervening period.

We are looking into the possibilities for improving the publication of the Casework Database. If you would like to contact us about this, please do so by contacting statistics@planninginspectorate.gov.uk

In 2021 we removed the ‘Development or Allegation’ field in the Casework Database. A review found an unacceptable risk that the field could contain, and disclose, sensitive personal data. We take data protection very seriously and this action has been taken to ensure we comply with the UK General Data Protection Requirement (Data Protection Act 2018).

We have expanded the casework database to include the following specialist casework types:

Common Land

Community Infrastructure Levy

Environmental

Hedgerow

High Hedges

Purchase Notices

Rights of Way (including schedule 14 and Rights of Way modifications)

Tree Preservation Orders

Older Casework Database

The Older Casework Data gives details of appeals that have a decision date between 5 and 10 years ago. The database will allow users to compile summary statistics. Due to data retention policy we have removed all fields that could make an individual appeal, which was decided more than 5 years ago, identifiable. This is in line with the Appeals Casework Portal which does not have details of appeals decided more than 5 years ago.

Therefore, unlike the Casework Database, we do not record in the Older Casework data:

Case Number

LPAs Reference

Name of Appellant

Name of Agent

Site Address

The Older Casework Data Reference Number is used in connection with the Older Casework data only. It is not connected in any way with the Appeal Reference Number or the LPAs Reference, or with the reference number in any previous or future Older Casework Data set.

We record the first part of the site address Post code on the Older Casework Data.

The casework types recorded in the Older Casework database are the same as those in the Casework Database.

If you want information about appeals decided in the last 5 years please see our Casework Database.

Please Note

This dataset is drawn from Planning Inspectorate admin systems. There are some fields which have been left empty for particular appeals. There could be various reasons for this, for example:

the relevant information was not provided by the main parties

the relevant information was a negative reply and the respective field was left empty. E.g. The site is not in a SSSI

the case is a child case and the relevant information has been recorded against the lead appeal

We are looking at ways to make this database as complete as we can. If you need any help or advice in interpreting the database please let us know.

We have various mechanisms for checking our data and being alerted to changes - therefore data can change between different publications of this data set. If you spot a data error please tell us; statistics@planninginspectorate.gov.uk.

Please note that the Planning Inspectorate will not entertain a challenge to the appointment of any Decision Maker on the basis of this data.

all cases are considered on their individual merits, and on the basis of the evidence submitted

targets are not set for the percentage of allowed and dismissed cases

decision Makers do not select their own casework

casework is allocated to Decision Maker on the best balance of availability, geography, casework level and expertise. This may produce apparent patterns of outcome that are in fact artefacts of the way work is allocated and do not provide evidence as to an Inspector’s fitness for or approach to a particular case

decision Makers handle different numbers of cases in a year – some dealing with as few as one which would give a result of 100% allowed or 100% dismissed

decision Makers are rigorously trained to ensure that they develop and maintain the skills necessary to undertake the work that they are given. These skills will influence the type of cases they deal with

some appeals are linked together as they relate to the same or similar development on the same site

the Inspectorate has an exacting Ministerial target which requires all casework to be 99% free from justified complaint or legal challenge

a Decision Maker constitutes a selected person appointed to carry out: open, impartial, honest decisions on behalf of the Secretary of State

Updates to this page

Published 21 March 2018
 Last updated 1 October 2026
 — 

 Show all updates

 1 October 2026

update from October added to updates section.

 27 August 2026

Casework Database and Older Casework Data updated.

 30 July 2026

July casework database added

 25 June 2026

Casework Database and Older Casework Data updated

 1 June 2026

Casework Database and Older Casework Data updated

 30 January 2026

Casework database updated and updates and information to how we handle casework data has been added.

 4 November 2025

Q2 data added for the Casework Database and Older Casework Data documents

 28 July 2025

Casework Database and Older Casework Data: casework decided between 5 and 10 years ago updated with Q1 data

 11 June 2025

11 June 2025 update: A data processing issue has been identified, where the names of Inspectors involved in Local Plan cases were incorrect. This caused incorrect data for these cases, in previous versions of the casework database.
This has now been corrected and the names are now fixed. We are not aware of any other case types identified by this issue but will assess this in due course.

 27 May 2025

Casework Databases have been updated with Q4 data.

 4 February 2025

Casework Database and Older Casework Data updated with Q3 data

 3 December 2024

Q2 data sheets added and detail notes added

 20 September 2024

Casework Database and Older Casework Data: casework decided between 5 and 10 years ago files updated

 24 May 2024

Casework Database and Older Casework Data updated with Q3 data

 29 January 2024

We have discovered a data processing error, which means that the Inspector Name field entry is missing from some cases that, in fact, been allocated to an inspector. Where there is an Inspector Name the data is correct. We are investigating this issue. 

There has been a data entry issue with Tree Preservation Order (TPO) cases where incorrect valid dates have been entered. This means we have removed the dates from this field for TPO cases.

 27 November 2023

27 November 2023 update: We have discovered a data processing error, which means that the Inspector Name field is not giving reliable information. (In many cases it is wrongly showing as "No Inspector Associated").  As a result, please do not use this information until this error has been corrected.

We are working hard to correct the error and intend to provide corrected information by 01 December 2023.

If you have any questions on this please contact statistics@planninginspectorate.gov.uk

 20 July 2023

Casework Database and Older Casework Data: casework decided between 5 and 10 years ago documents updated with Q1 data

 7 July 2023

We have republished the Quarterly and Annual Volume Statistics and the Casework Database with minor amendments to table 5.2.

 12 June 2023

We apologise that due to a data processing issue, agents’ names are missing from casework decided after 31st March 2022. This means it is not possible to say, for these cases, whether an agent was involved.
We are exploring this issue and will provide the missing names as soon as we can.

 30 May 2023

The 2 databases have been updated to Q4 data.

The previous databases have included details of Planning and Enforcement appeal types only. The new databases include some types of Specialist Casework. As some Specialist Casework types are not actually ‘Appeals’, ‘Casework’ described the data more accurately and the page has been renamed.

 24 November 2022

The appeals database covering the period October 2017 - September 2022 was originally published on 14th November 2022. It has been reproduced and republished on 24th November 2022 with the addition of ‘LPA Decision Date’ field.

 14 November 2022

Appeals database and Older Appeals Data updated and wording at bottom of page updated

 21 July 2022

Appeals database and older appeals database updated with Q1 information

 21 June 2022

Appeals database updated for Q4 and Older Appeals Data: appeals decided between 5 and 10 years ago Q4 new document.

 26 January 2022

Quarter 3 data added

 10 December 2021

Quarter 2 appeals database added and hints and tips document updated.

 8 December 2021

Appeals Data: Data notes and guidance updated

 12 July 2021

Wording added. 
We have temporarily removed the ability to view the ‘Development or Allegation’ field in the Appeals Database. A review found an unacceptable risk that the field could contain, and disclose, sensitive personal data. We take data protection very seriously and this action has been taken to ensure we comply with the UK General Data Protection Requirement (Data Protection Act 2018). We are working on ways to manage this risk and hope that we can publish data in this field again soon.

 5 July 2021

Appeals database updated

 9 June 2021

The Appeals data file is temporarily unavailable. The dataset is currently being reviewed and revalidated and when this is complete the file will be republished. We apologise for any inconvenience caused.

 10 March 2021

01 January 2016 to 31 December 2020 data added

 3 December 2020

Planning Inspectorate - Appeals Data - 01 October 2015 to 30 September 2020 updated

 27 May 2020

Data sets updated: 1 April 2015 - 31 March 2020

 13 May 2020

We have delayed publication of our appeals statistics and appeals data set after our quality review identified problems with the data we intended to publish. Our normal review process has been affected by the need to carry out additional data extraction, reporting and analysis associated with the impact of Covid-19 on The Planning Inspectorate’s operations. We will now be publishing our statistics and data on Wednesday 27th May 2020 at 9.30am.

 28 February 2020

CSV removed from page as not suitable

 12 February 2020

01 January 2015 to 31 December 2019 data added

 13 November 2019

Appeals Data updated to 01 October 14 to 30 September 19

 19 August 2019

Data updated with 01 July 2014 to 30 June 2019 information

 15 May 2019

Appeals data updated

 13 February 2019

Appeals data updated - 01 January 2014 to 31 December 2018

 14 November 2018

Appeals data updated.

 15 August 2018

Appeals Data updated to 01 July 2013 to 30 June 2018

 16 May 2018

01 April 2013 to 31 March 2018 data added

 21 March 2018

First published.

 Sign up for emails or print this page

 Get emails about this page

 Print this page

Explore the topic

Planning and building

Is this page useful?

 Maybe

 Yes this page is useful

 No this page is not useful

 Thank you for your feedback

 Report a problem with this page

Help us improve GOV.UK

Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

 This field is for robots only. Please leave blank

 What were you doing?

 What went wrong?

 Send

 Cancel

Help us improve GOV.UK

 To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
 Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab).

 Cancel

Services and information

 Benefits

 Births, death, marriages and care

 Business and self-employed

 Childcare and parenting

 Citizenship and living in the UK

 Crime, justice and the law

 Disabled people

 Driving and transport

 Education and learning

 Employing people

 Environment and countryside

 Housing and local services

 Money and tax

 Passports, travel and living abroad

 Visas and immigration

 Working, jobs and pensions

Government activity

 Departments

 News

 Guidance and regulation

 Research and statistics

 Policy papers and consultations

 Transparency

 How government works

 Get involved

Support links

 Help

 Privacy

 Cookies

 Accessibility statement

 Contact

 Terms and conditions

 Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg

 Government Digital Service

 All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated

 © Crown copyright

