Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 June 2026
by R Dickson BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026




Appeal Ref: 6000405
41 Brent Park Road, Brent Cross, Barnet, London NW4 3HN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Owen against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Barnet.
•    The application Ref is 25/1337/FUL.
•    The development proposed is part single, part two storey rear extension with loft conversion and
     landscaping to create 2no self contained flats.


Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for part single, part two
       storey rear extension with loft conversion and landscaping to create 2no self
       contained flats at 41 Brent Park Road, Brent Cross, Barnet, London NW4 3HN in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/1337/FUL, subject to the
       conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appellant notes that the Council’s Officer Report was not available on the
       Council’s website at the time the appeal was lodged. The Officer Report has since
       been made available online. The Council also provided a Statement of Case as
       part of the appeal process, which the appellant had the opportunity to comment
       on. As such, no parties have been disadvantaged through the appeal process.
3.     During my site visit, I observed that the appeal property had been converted into
       two separate self-contained flats, one on the ground floor, accessed from the side
       of the building, and one on the first floor, accessed from the front of the building.
       The description of development includes reference to a part two storey rear
       extension and roof alterations, including a rear dormer window, which at the time
       of my site visit, had not been undertaken. For the avoidance of doubt, I have dealt
       with the appeal on the basis of the submitted plans.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the provision of family
       accommodation with particular regard to development plan policies.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site is a two storey end of terrace building, set behind a front garden,
       with an access driveway to the side, and a garden to the rear. From the outside, it

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006098


       appears to have been largely unaltered, although a small conservatory is situated
       on the rear elevation at ground floor level.
6.     The proposal would extend the existing building to provide two flats. Flat 1 would
       be on the ground floor, and the rear of the first floor, and would have three
       bedrooms which would accommodate 4 people. Flat 2 would be at the front of the
       first floor and within the loft conversion, and would be a one bedroom two person
       flat.
7.     Criterion B of Policy HOU03 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036 (2025) (Local
       Plan) requires sites proposed for conversion to provide at least one family sized
       home with three bedrooms that is capable of providing four bedspaces. Flat 1, as
       proposed, would be in accordance with this criteria, and would therefore be in
       accordance with the overarching aims of Policy HOU03.
8.     Criterion C requires the gross internal floor area of the property (at time of
       application) to be no less than 135 sq. m. where two self-contained residential
       units are proposed. The existing building falls below this requirement. Criterion C
       also specifies that where possible, additional units should have a gross internal
       floorspace of 61 sq. m. Flat 2, as proposed, would fall below this requirement. As
       such, the proposal would not comply with Criterion C.
9.     However, the Council has raised no objection in relation to the proposed
       extensions, and there is nothing before me to suggest that the extensions would
       result in harm. Although the resulting gross internal floor area of the building would
       fall marginally short of the requirements, it would still nonetheless provide a family
       sized home which would be in accordance with the overall aims of Policy HOU03.
       In addition, although Flat 2 would fall short of the requirement of Criterion C, it
       would provide a dwelling larger than that required by the Nationally Described
       Space Standards, providing an adequately sized flat in addition to the retention of
       one family sized home.
10. As such, the proposal would provide family accommodation, providing an
    additional flat. While the proposal would fail to meet the requirements of Policy
    HOU03 of the Local Plan, it would accord with its overarching aims, which are that
    proposals provide family sized homes. The proposal would be in accordance with
    Policy CHD01 of the Local Plan, which seeks to ensure that proposals provide a
    good standard of amenity and provide sufficient space.
Conditions
11. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out following the approved plans, for the avoidance of
    doubt and in the interests of certainty.
12. The Council has suggested a number of conditions, which I have considered. A
    condition has been imposed that requires the submission of a demolition and
    construction management and logistics plan, to ensure adverse impacts on the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers are avoided during the construction
    phase. A separate condition has been imposed to ensure that any machinery used
    during the construction phase does not result in an adverse impact in terms of
    pollution. A condition specifying the construction operation times is necessary to
    ensure that the proposal does not have any adverse impacts on neighbouring
    occupiers in terms of living conditions during the construction phase.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006098


13. Two conditions have been imposed to ensure that the proposal provides adequate
    vehicle parking and cycle parking, to prevent the proposal from prejudicing
    highway safety or causing inconvenience to other highway users.
14. Four conditions have been imposed which ensure that the development will
    comply with the optional Building Regulations standards in respect to accessibility
    and adaptability of housing design, water consumption, sound insulation and
    carbon dioxide emissions reduction, which are necessary to ensure that the
    proposal is sustainable. An additional condition requiring details of the boilers to be
    submitted to and approved by the local authority is also necessary for the same
    reason.
15. A condition requiring the external materials to match the existing is necessary to
    ensure that the proposal does not harm the character and appearance of the area.
    A separate condition to ensure that the roof is not used as outdoor amenity area is
    required to protect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with specific
    regard to noise and disturbance.
16. Details of enclosures and screened refuse and recycling storage is necessary to
    be secured by a condition to ensure that the facilities are provided, and they do not
    harm the character and appearance of the area. Similarly, a condition requiring the
    details of the subdivided amenity areas, and a condition requiring the details of the
    hard and soft landscaping to be submitted to the Council are also necessary for
    the same reason.
17. Finally, It is necessary to ensure that the use of the proposed development is
    restricted to Class C3a for certainty. A condition requiring the removal of the
    permitted development rights for the appeal site was suggested by the Council.
    However, I have not imposed it as it would be overly restrictive, and therefore not
    necessary.
Conclusion
18. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan but material
    considerations indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with it.

R Dickson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006098




                                           SHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing numbers: 5469 03, 5469 PL 02, 5469 PR 02A.
     3)       a) Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied cycle parking
              spaces and cycle storage facilities shall be provided in accordance with a
              scheme to be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority.
              b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
              details as approved under this condition and the spaces shall be permanently
              retained thereafter.
     4)       a) Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, details of
              enclosures and screened facilities for the storage of recycling containers and
              wheeled refuse bins or other refuse storage containers where applicable,
              together with a satisfactory point of collection shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
              b) The development shall be implemented in full accordance with the details
              as approved under this condition prior to the first occupation and retained as
              such thereafter.
     5)       a) Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, details of the
              sub division of the amenity area(s) shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority.
              b) The development shall be implemented in accordance with the details
              approved under this condition before first occupation or the use is
              commenced and retained as such thereafter.
     6)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extensions shall match those used in the existing building.
     7)       a) No development or site works shall take place on site until a ‘Demolition
              and Construction Management and Logistics Plan' has been submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Construction
              Management and Logistics Plan submitted shall include, but not be limited to,
              the following:
                         i.   details of the routing of construction vehicles to the site, hours of
                              access, access and egress arrangements within the site and
                              security procedures;
                         ii. site preparation and construction stages of the development;
                         iii. details of provisions for recycling of materials, the provision on site
                              of a storage/delivery area for all plant, site huts, site facilities and
                              materials;




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
Appeal Decision 6006098


                         iv. details showing how all vehicles associated with the construction
                             works are properly washed and cleaned to prevent the passage to
                             mud and dirt onto the adjoining highway;
                         v. the methods to be used and the measures to be undertaken to
                            control the emission of dust, noise and vibration arising from
                            construction works;
                         vi. a suitable and efficient means of suppressing dust, including the
                             adequate containment of stored or accumulated material so as to
                             prevent it becoming airborne at any time and giving rise to
                             nuisance;
                         vii. noise mitigation measures for all plant and processors;
                         viii. details of contractor’s compound and car parking arrangements;
                         ix. details of interim car parking management arrangements for the
                             duration of construction;
                         x. details of a community liaison contact for the duration of all works
                            associated with the development.
              b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
              measures detailed within the statement.
     8)       All Non-Road Mobile Machinery (NRMM) of net power of 37kW and up to and
              including 560kW used during the course of the demolition, site preparation
              and construction phases shall comply with the emission standards set out in
              chapter 7 of the GLA's supplementary planning guidance "Control of Dust
              and Emissions During Construction and Demolition" dated July 2014 (SPG),
              or subsequent guidance. Unless it complies with the standards set out in the
              SPG, no NRMM shall be on site, at any time, whether in use or not, without
              the prior written consent of the local planning authority. The developer shall
              keep an up to date list of all NRMM used during the demolition, site
              preparation and construction phases of the development on the online
              register at https://nrmm.london/
     9)       The units shall be used as self-contained units as shown in the hereby
              approved drawings under Class C3(a) and no other purpose (including any
              other purpose in Class C3 or C4 of the Schedule to the Town and Country
              Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, or in any provision equivalent to that
              Class in any statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order, with or
              without modification).
     10)      No construction work resulting from the planning permission shall be carried
              out on the premises at any time on Sundays, Bank or Public Holidays, before
              8.00 am or after 1.00 pm on Saturdays, or before 8.00 am or after 6.00pm
              pm on other days.
     11)      Prior to the first occupation of the new dwellinghouse(s) (Use Class C3)
              hereby approved they shall all have been constructed to have 100% of the
              wholesome water supplied to them by the mains water infrastructure
              provided through a water meter or water meters and each new dwelling shall
              be constructed to include water saving and efficiency measures that comply
              with Regulation 36(2)(b) of Part G 2 of the Building Regulations to ensure
              that a maximum of 105 litres of water is consumed per person per day with a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      5
Appeal Decision 6006098


              fittings based approach should be used to determine the water consumption
              of the proposed development. Any use of grey water and/or rain water
              systems needs to be separate from the potable (wholesome) water system
              and needs to meet the requirements and guidance set out in Part G of the
              Building Regulations. The development shall be maintained as such in
              perpetuity thereafter.
     12)      Notwithstanding the details shown in the drawings submitted and otherwise
              hereby approved, prior to the first occupation of the new dwellinghouse(s)
              (Use Class C3) permitted under this consent they shall all have been
              constructed to meet and achieve all the relevant criteria of Part M4(2) of
              Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010 (or the equivalent standard in
              such measure of accessibility and adaptability for house design which may
              replace that scheme in future). The development shall be maintained as such
              in perpetuity thereafter.
     13)      Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby approved it shall be
              constructed incorporating carbon dioxide emission reduction measures which
              achieve an improvement of not less than 10% in carbon dioxide emissions
              when compared to a building constructed to comply with the minimum Target
              Emission Rate requirements of the 2013 Building Regulations. The
              development shall be maintained as such in perpetuity thereafter.
     14)      Prior to installation, details of the boilers shall be forwarded to the Local
              Planning Authority for approval. The boilers shall have dry NOx emissions
              not exceeding 40 mg/kWh (0%), and shall be installed in full accordance with
              the details approved.
     15)      Prior to the first occupation of the units, copies of Pre-completion Sound
              Insulation Test Certificates shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority,
              confirming compliance with Requirement E of the Building Regulations 2010
              (or any subsequent amendment in force at the time of implementation of the
              permission).
     16)      The roof of the extension hereby permitted shall only be used in connection
              with the repair and maintenance of the building and shall at no time be
              converted to or used as a balcony, roof garden or similar amenity or sitting
              out area.
     17)      Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied or the use first
              commences the parking spaces shown on Drawing No. 5469 PL 02 shall be
              provided and shall not be used for any purpose other than the parking of
              vehicles in connection with the approved development.
     18)      a) A scheme of hard and soft landscaping, including details of existing trees
              to be retained and size, species, planting heights, densities and positions of
              any soft landscaping, shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority prior to the occupation of the hereby approved
              development.
              b) All work comprised in the approved scheme of landscaping shall be
              carried out before the end of the first planting and seeding season following
              occupation of any part of the buildings or completion of the development,
              whichever is sooner, or commencement of the use.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006098


              c) Any existing tree shown to be retained or trees or shrubs to be planted as
              part of the approved landscaping scheme which are removed, die, become
              severely damaged or diseased within five years of the completion of
              development shall be replaced with trees or shrubs of appropriate size and
              species in the next planting season.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
