Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by B Phillips BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6001896
Land at Castle End, Lea, Hereford HR9 7JY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Clive Grindon against the decision of Herefordshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 251639.
•    The development proposed is the erection of up to six dwellings.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    I have removed wording from the description of development above which does
      not describe development.
3.    The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
      advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
      housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
      the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
      suitable in-principle and the second, ‘technical details consent’ stage is when the
      detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
      these 2 stages.
4.    The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
      land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
      considered as part of a subsequent TDC application if permission in principle is
      granted. The Council’s objections relate to location and the subsequent effect on
      the character an appearance of the surroundings, the setting of the Grade II* listed
      Castle End and the River Wye Special Area of Conservation (SAC). I have
      determined the appeal accordingly.
5.    The Government published in August 2026 a revised version of the National
      Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The Council and the appellant have
      had opportunity to comment on this and I have taken into account any
      representations received. I have also therefore not addressed representations
      made referring specifically to the previous Framework.
Main Issues
6.    The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
      regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development, with



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6001896


         specific to the effect of the development on the setting of the Grade II* listed
         Castle End and the character an appearance of the surroundings.
Reasons
Castle End
7.       Castle End is a Grade II* listed1 property that adjoins the appeal site. First listed in
         1953, it comprises of an impressive two storey manor house of sandstone rubble
         with a hipped slate roof, originating in the 17th century, and subsequently altered.
         The property comprises a number of elements, including the main house, a
         cottage and other outbuildings and structures, including a dovecote listed
         separately at Grade II, walled gardens and more extensive grounds.
8.       Given the above, I find that the special interest and significance of the listed
         building to be primarily associated with its historic and architectural interests as an
         exceptional illustration of 17th century vernacular architecture. Important
         contributors in these regards which are pertinent to the appeal are its extant
         architectural form, historic fabric; and key historic features and detailing.
9.       Recent modern nearby development has reduced the once open countryside
         surroundings associated with the manor house. The setting of the property has
         therefore clearly evolved, and the property is set behind strong boundary
         treatments, such as wall, Leylandii hedge, trees and shrubs which limits views.
10. However, the remaining open countryside to the north and the appeal site, in
    retaining an open undeveloped character, ensures that there is an enduring link
    between the property and its original wider historical grounds and landscape
    setting which befits its status, and allows this to be appreciated. This is particularly
    the case with the appeal site, as it is the one remaining buffer between
    development in this direction and Castle End, providing a visual separation that
    increases the prominence of the listed building. The space allows the building and
    its merit to be appreciated and is key to the way the heritage asset is experienced.
11. Therefore, the listed building’s immediate setting, which includes the appeal site,
    also, in part, supports and contributes in a positive way to its special interest and
    significance.
12. Whilst a layout is not provided at this first stage, the proposed introduction of up to
    6 dwellings on this site would irrevocably encroach upon the openness of the site.
13. The connection and historical relationship between this open space and the
    heritage asset would be diminished, and the final remaining buffer of open space
    in this direction would be eroded. The encroachment of built form when viewed
    from this direction would reduce the legibility of the historic use of the site and
    would diminish the way the listed building is experienced.
14. In this respect therefore, I find that the proposed development would not preserve
    the setting of the Castle End. In this respect, and in accordance with Policy HE6(1)
    of the Framework, it would therefore amount to harm to the significance of this
    designated heritage asset.



1
    List Entry Number: 1348810


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6001896


15. The appellant references development considered at appeal2 on the other side of
    the A40. Given the specific circumstances set out above regarding the current
    appeal site, these developments and decisions are therefore materially different.
16. Given the significant boundary treatment and retention of open countryside to the
    north, I find the degree of harm to the heritage asset to be at a moderate level but
    nevertheless is of considerable importance and weight.
17. The development would add up to six dwellings to the district’s housing stock.
    Framework Policy HO7 is clear that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. In this case the Council accepts that it
    cannot provide a 5 year housing and supply.
18. There would also be associated social and economic benefits related to the
    construction of the development and the contributions of future occupiers to
    services and facilities in the area. I attach moderate weight to these benefits.
19. The Framework indicates that, when considering the impact on the significance of
    a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation. This is irrespective of whether any potential harm amounts to
    positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. On balance,
    in giving considerable importance and weight to the harm to the significance of this
    designated heritage asset, I find that this would not be outweighed by the public
    benefits that the proposal would generate.
20. Consequently, the harm identified to the significance of the designated heritage
    assets has not been supported by clear and convincing justification. The works
    therefore would conflict with the statutory presumptions set out in section 66(1) of
    the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act, 1990 (the Act), and
    fail to satisfy the historic environment conservation and enhancement policies of
    the Framework. There is also conflict with CS Policy LD4 which requires
    development proposals to protect, conserve and where possible enhance heritage
    assets.
Character and appearance
21. The appeal site comprises of an open undeveloped parcel of land, immediately
    next to the A40 highway, with trees and mature native hedging around its
    periphery. The site is neighboured by built form on 3 sides, with a primary school
    to its rear and residential properties on both sides. Additionally, on the opposite
    side of the A40 lies further residential properties.
22. As such, whilst free of development, the site is seen in the context of and has the
    character of being within the wider built form rather than the nearby open
    countryside.
23. The wider pattern of development is dispersed as it extends along the A40 out of
    the settlement into the open countryside, however, as set out above, the appeal
    site, in being surrounded by built form, does not contribute to this wider character.
    The proposed residential development would appear in keeping with the
    surrounding built form and there are no views of any note which would be imposed


2
    Appeal references APP/W1850/W/15/3135023 & APP/W1850/W/17/3174980


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decision 6001896


      upon or harmed. The proposal would not therefore lead to harm to the character
      and appearance of the surroundings in this specific way.
24. On this matter I conclude that there is no conflict with Policies LD1 and SD1 of the
    Herefordshire Local Plan Core Strategy 2011-2031 (2015) (CS), which collectively,
    amongst other matters require landscape and townscape to influence design and
    site selection and create well integrated environments.
Other Matters
25. The site is within the hydrological catchment which comprises part of the River
    Wye Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Site of Special Scientific Interest,
    recognised as being of international importance for its aquatic flora and fauna. The
    Council’s Ecologist also sets out that the site is nearby the Wye Valley and Forest
    of Dean Bat SAC, significant for its population of Horseshoe Bats.
26. The Council maintain that insufficient detailed information regarding the
    management of foul and surface water discharges has been provided, however, as
    I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, I am not pursuing this matter further
    because it could not lead me to a different decision.
Overall Planning Balance
27. Having regard to the economic, social and environmental objectives of the
    Framework, the benefits which would accrue from the proposal are as set out
    above in the heritage balance. These benefits are tempered by the modest amount
    of development that is proposed but, nevertheless, each carry moderate weight in
    the appeals’ favour.
28. As set out above, substantial weight is given to the to the benefits of providing
    homes.
29. However, Framework Policy HE6 (3) sets out that any harm to a designated
    heritage asset will be a matter of ‘considerable importance and weight’. Moreover,
    this policy (1) is clear that the more important the asset, the greater the weight
    should be given to its conservation. As a Grade II* asset, Castle End is a rare
    example of special architectural and historic interest and therefore is extremely
    important in this regard.
30. I find therefore that, in accordance with Framework Policy S5, the benefits of the
    proposal would be substantially outweighed by the identified adverse effects.
31. This would also be the case if the site was within the settlement and Framework
    Policy S4 was relevant. Whilst heritage maters are not expressly included in the
    examples of adverse effects substantially outweighing benefits set out in both
    Policies S4 and S5, this is not a closed list.
Conclusion
32. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan. There are no
    material considerations which indicate that the decision should be made other than
    in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

B Phillips INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
