Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by B Phillips BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6001939
Adsdean House, Adsdean Park Road, Adsdean PO18 9DN
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by David Collins against the decision of South Downs National Park Authority.
•      The application Ref is SDNP/25/02152/LIS.
•      The works proposed are the installation of a lift.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       Adsdean House is Grade II listed. In reaching my decision, I have considered the
         statutory duty under section 16(2) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
         Conservation Areas) Act, 1990 (the Act).
3.       The Government published in August 2026 a revised version of the National
         Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The Council and the appellant have
         had opportunity to comment on this and I have taken into account any
         representations received.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is whether the proposed works would preserve the Grade II listed
         building, or any features of special architectural or historic interest that it
         possesses.
Reasons
5.       Adsdean House is sited in a mostly open landscape with views over former
         parkland and fields towards the south. To the side of the house are former staff
         cottages and various outbuildings, now in separate ownership.
6.       The property is Grade II listed,1 constructed in about 1850, altered and enlarged
         by Norman Shaw in 1877, with later internal alteration by Ernest George. The
         listing description notes its two storeys and attic form, with three windows and two
         dormers to the main portion. It is faced with flints with stone dressings and quoins
         and has a slate roof and casement windows with stone mullions and transoms.
         Internally, whilst the dwelling has been altered and extended significantly since its
         construction, the property retains numerous historic features.


1
    List Entry Number: 1234531

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6001939


7.       Given the above, I find that the special interest and significance of the listed
         building to be primarily associated with its historic and architectural interest as a
         fine example of Gothic architectural composition that has evolved over time.
         Important contributors in this regard are its architectural detailing, visible evolution
         and remaining historic integrity, to which surviving historic fabric and features
         contributes.
8.       The proposal seeks consent to insert a through floor lift from ground to first floor.
         The base of the lift would be installed into a modern cupboard and the lift would
         travel through the lath and plaster ceiling and softwood floorboards. The submitted
         The Design, Access and Heritage Statement2 date both these elements to
         approximately 1900, and from the information before me and what I have
         observed, I have no reason to disagree. The top of the post would be connected to
         the walls either side via a beam which will sit above the existing door frames.
9.       Floorboards would be removed in order to facilitate the lift opening. These will be
         replaced with a plywood floor section that can be cut into shape. Given the siting of
         the lift in front of two doors at the end of the first floor corridor, the doors, serving a
         dressing and storage room) would have to be sealed shut.
10. The siting of the lift would be within a non-original later addition to the property.
    Nevertheless, given its age and history of this part of the property, it contributes
    positively to the evolution and architectural phasing of the building. That it is not
    included in the list description does not indicate a lack of special interest or
    significance.
11. In addition to the visual impact of the inelegant and awkward siting of the lift in
    front of doors and a window, there would be some loss of historic fabric.
12. I conclude that the proposed works would fail to preserve the special architectural
    and historic interest of the Grade II listed building, Adsdean House and, in
    accordance with the Framework, result in harm to its significance.
13. Given the existing works to the service buildings and fairly localised nature of the
    works relative to Adsdean House, I find the harm to the heritage asset to be, at a
    low level of harm but nevertheless is of considerable importance and weight.
14. The appellant provides some guided tours of the property and keeps some
    historical memorabilia illustrating the history of the property. Additionally, it is
    evident that the property is used for meetings by the local community. This is a
    public benefit. However, this is done on an informal ad-hoc basis, and as such,
    there is no guarantee of this continuing in any formal manner. Therefore, even if
    there is a direct link between the proposed works and this public benefit, I can only
    give it modest weight.
15. Even if they were retained, a condition to require the reinstatement of the historic
    floorboards and removal of the lift when no longer required would not be
    sufficiently precise in relation to when the reinstatement works would be required.
    It would not therefore meet the test set out in the Framework.
16. There would be some economic benefits brought about through the investment
    into the property and the construction phase. Also, social benefits would be gained
    through improvements to the local housing stock and standard of accommodation.
2
    By Ian Wightman, Historical Building Consultants, May 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6001939


17. The Framework indicates that, when considering the impact on the significance of
    a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation. This is irrespective of whether any potential harm amounts to
    positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. On balance,
    in giving considerable importance and weight to the harm to the significance of this
    designated heritage asset, I find that this would not be outweighed by the public
    benefits that the proposal would generate.
18. Consequently, the harm identified to the significance of the designated heritage
    assets has not been supported by clear and convincing justification. The works
    therefore would conflict with the statutory presumptions set out in section 16(2) of
    the Act and fail to satisfy the historic environment conservation and enhancement
    policies of the Framework. There is also conflict with Policies SD5, SD12 and
    SD13 of the South Downs National Park Local Plan 2014-33 (2019) (LP) insofar as
    these collectively require high-quality design that conserves or enhances the
    historic environment including the significance of listed buildings.
19. LP Policy SD1 refers to development proposals and planning applications and as
    such, it is not determinative to this listed building consent application.
    Nevertheless, as the relevant authority I must seek to further the purposes of the
    National Park.
20. One of its statuary purposes is to conserve or enhance the cultural heritage of the
    South Downs National Park. The Together Now for Nature, Climate and People
    Partnership Management Plan 2026-31 includes listed buildings as part of the
    cultural heritage of the National Park.
21. Given my findings above, the proposal would not conserve nor enhance the
    cultural heritage of the National Park, and as such would not accord with the
    Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 in this regard.
Other Matters
22. The Equalities Act 2010 sets out the need to advance equality of opportunity
    between persons who share a relevant protected characteristic and persons who
    do not share it. This involves having due regard, in particular, to the need to
    eliminate discrimination, advance equality of opportunity and foster good relations
    between people who share a relevant protected characteristic and those who do
    not.
23. Amongst other things, for the purposes of the Act protected characteristics
    includes age and disability. I have given the appellant’s personal circumstances
    very careful consideration. The proposed works would be of benefit to the
    appellant in terms of ease of access to the upper floor. However, there is modest
    compelling evidence that the lift is the only way to provide improved access or
    accommodation in this regard. As such, this carries modest weight in favour of the
    proposal.
24. The possible future use of the property should the appellant move out is not
    certain and is not subject to any planning policy before me. This therefore carries
    no weight in favour of the proposal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6001939


Conclusion
25. For the above reasons and having regard to all other matters raised I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

B Phillips
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
