Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 September 2026
by E Catcheside BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6001859
5 More London Place, Southwark, London SE1 2BY
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr A Lister (Individual Restaurants) against the decision of the London
       Borough of Southwark Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/AP/1051.
•      The development proposed is extension of outdoor seating area together with erection of pergola
       structure, glazed side screens, planters and retractable awning.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
         published on 17 August 2026. The parties were invited to comment on the revised
         Framework, and I have taken account of the comments received.
3.       The site lies close to but outside of the Tooley Street Conservation Area (TSCA).
         No statutory protection for the setting of the TSCA is present under section 72(1)
         of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
         However, the Framework requires the effects of development on the significance
         of any heritage asset, including by development within its setting, to be taken into
         account, and I shall consider the appeal accordingly.
4.       Because the site is proximate to the Grade I listed building, entitled ‘Tower Bridge
         (That Part That Lies Within the Borough of Southwark) on the list entry1 (Tower
         Bridge), I have had regard to section 66(1) of the Act, which requires special
         regard to be had to the desirability of preserving a listed building or its setting.
Main Issue
5.       The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
         the area, and the settings of the TSCA and Tower Bridge.
Reasons
6.       The appeal site lies on More London Place, which is a pedestrian route linking
         Tooley Street with the river Thames. The walkway is flanked on two sides by large
         buildings, and as such there is a strong sense of enclosure around the appeal site.


1
    List entry number 1385980

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6001859


7.     The buildings on More London Place have a contemporary appearance, owing in
       part to the materials, including metallic elements and glazing, and the staggered
       overhangs of different shapes and sizes, which add visual interest to the upper
       floors of the building whilst maintaining design cohesion.
8.     At ground floor level, the host restaurant is set-in slightly from the alignment of the
       cafés closer to the river on this side of the walkway. However, there is nonetheless
       visual continuity along the frontage due, in part, to the tall height of the windows
       that are common to most of the ground floor premises on this side of the walkway.
9.     Several of the eating establishments on this part of More London Place, including
       the appeal restaurant, have loose chairs and tables placed within the walkway.
       This furniture is generally low in height, lightweight, and tucked-in close to the
       building and so it has a discrete presence in the street scene. In contrast, the
       existing pergola, with its pale, heavier-weight wooden frame, and large planters is
       a more visually dominant structure that partially conceals views of the host
       building; and it is at odds with the sleeker materials and overall appearance of the
       surrounding buildings.
10. The TSCA lies at the Tooley Street end of More London Place, and it
    encompasses parts of the riverside roughly between London Bridge and Tower
    Bridge. The Tooley Street Conservation Area Appraisal (July 2003) describes how
    the street was a key route to the river crossings from the historic docklands, and
    therefore it was integral to the growth and development of this part of the city.
    Based on the evidence that is before me, and insofar as it is relevant to this
    appeal, the significance of the TSCA is derived from the historic buildings and
    street patterns which reveal information about the evolution of the area over time.
11. More London Place provides a key physical link between the TSCA and the river
    crossings. However, there is very limited visual connection between the walkway
    and the Tooley Street area, with its historic buildings and spaces, due to the height
    and siting of the modern buildings beside the walkway and beyond London Bridge
    station. Consequently, whilst the site lies within the setting of the TSCA, it is of
    limited contribution to its significance.
12. Tower Bridge, which is thought to date from 1886-1894, has many distinctive
    features, including the two Gothic stone towers supporting the low-level bascules
    and the high-level footbridges which link the towers together. The list entry notes
    several of the towers’ features, including the stone cladding with ashlar dressings,
    the high pitched slate roofs behind stone parapets, and the distinctive corner
    turrets surmounted by pinnacles. The bridge structure is not only evidence of a
    great civic engineering feat from the time in which it was constructed, but it is also
    now an internationally recognised and iconic landmark of London. Amongst other
    things, the bridge has a high level of architectural and evidential value, which
    contribute to its significance as a designated heritage asset of high importance.
13. Given its historic role in providing connectivity over the water, the riverside setting
    of the bridge forms a key part of its significance. However, much of the former
    docklands on the south bank have been replaced by modern buildings, including
    those on More London Place; and views of the bridge from much of this area is
    concealed by the built form. Nonetheless, and notwithstanding the presence of an
    advertisement screen within the footway, striking views of the bridge can be
    enjoyed from More London Place. These views aid our ability to experience and to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6001859


       feel connected to the long history of this part of London; and so the setting
       contributes to the bridge’s significance insofar as it is relevant to this appeal.
14. The proposed development would be sited close to the host building, broadly in
    alignment with the advertisement screen that I observed on More London Place.
    Consequently, the proposal would not obscure views in either direction from the
    central part of the walkway which, from my observations, is the most heavily
    trafficked part by pedestrians. For this reason, the development would not interrupt
    the ability to observe and experience a connection to either Tower Bridge or the
    TSCA, and there would be no harm caused to the significance of these designated
    heritage assets as a result of this proposal within their settings. The proposal
    would, therefore, accord with the guidance set out in Southwark’s Historic
    Environment Supplementary Planning Document (September 2021) insofar as it
    seeks to ensure development proposals conserve heritage assets; and there
    would be no conflict with the historic environment provisions of the Framework.
15. However, the proposed development would be a substantial structure which, at 2.8
    metres high, and with a solid frame and tall planters extending along most of the
    restaurant frontage, would conceal significantly more of the ground floor elevation
    of the host building than the existing pergola even though there would be some
    visual permeability through the open and glazed sections. Moreover, whilst the
    proposed materials would broadly reflect those used in the locality, the form of the
    openings and glass screens would not be consistent with the size and shape of the
    tall windows that are a common ground floor feature here; and the flat cross rail
    and awning would sit awkwardly just below the nearest overhang. Thus, the
    structure would fail to integrate sympathetically with the existing building.
16. Overall, due to the combined effect of its height, depth, length, and its overall form
    and design, the development would have an incongruous appearance, and it
    would be harmfully conspicuous in views from the walkway. It would therefore
    detract from the otherwise largely cohesive character of the buildings on this part
    of More London Place. Moreover, unlike the lightweight nature of the loose
    furniture that is characteristic of the alfresco seating offer in this area, the heavy-
    weight proposal would, in all reasonable likelihood, be a steady fixture in the street
    scene and the harm arising from it would be longstanding.
17. It follows that there would be conflict with Policy DP3(1) of the Framework, which
    expects proposals to respond to their context, and to integrate with and enhance
    their surroundings.
18. I have had regard to the Council’s decision in respect of an outdoor seating area at
    5A More London Place. However, No. 5A lies within a relatively open area of
    public space that is heavily influenced by the buildings of mixed ages and styles
    along the busy Tooley Street. These contextual differences between the two sites,
    mean the schemes are not directly comparable.
19. Overall, there would be no harm caused to the settings and significance of the
    TSCA and the Grade I listed Tower Bridge. Therefore, there would be no conflict
    with Policies HC1 of The London Plan (March 2021) (the LonP) and Policies P19
    and P20 of the Southwark Plan 2019-2036 (Adopted 23 February 2022) (the LP),
    which seek to conserve heritage assets. However, there would be harm to the
    character and appearance of More London Place. This harm brings the proposal
    into conflict with Policy D4 of the LonP and Policies P13 and P14 of the LP insofar


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6001859


       as they expect proposals to achieve high standards of design and to respond
       positively to the existing character and context.
20. The decision notice references Policy P21 of the LP. However, the relevance of
    this policy is not clear as I have not been directed to effects on the assets that are
    referred to in the policy. Therefore, Policy P21 is not pertinent to my decision.
Planning Balance
21. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Due to the site’s location within a settlement, this means that Policy
    S4 of the Framework applies. Policy S4 states that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
22. The proposal would facilitate safe, weather-protected outdoor seating for an
    existing commercial premises in the centre of the city. It would therefore assist in
    improving the leisure and dining experience for customers, and it would help to
    attract trade, adding to the area’s vibrancy and supporting the local economy. In
    that regard, I am mindful of the Mayor of London’s stated support for alfresco
    dining in the city to which the evidence refers. Policy TC2 of the Framework states
    that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of supporting the overall
    vitality and viability of town centres, and this is relevant here.
23. However, the social and economic benefits that would arise from the proposed
    development would be modest, and this limits the weight that they carry in this
    case.
24. Policy S4(2)(a)(c) of the Framework sets out that the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects where
    the proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances. I have found that the proposal would fail to comply with Policy
    DP3(1), and the Framework states such proposals should be refused if they are
    without clear justification. In my judgement, the scheme lacks clear justification
    and its benefits would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
25. Although the proposal would not harm the settings of designated heritage assets,
    the harm to the character and appearance of the area brings the proposal into
    conflict with the development plan when read as a whole. The material
    considerations, including the provisions of the Framework, do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.


E Catcheside
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
