Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by Lewis Condé BSc, MSc, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002971
Prow Park Business Village, Treloggan Industrial Estate, Newquay, Cornwall
TR7 2SX
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant consent, agreement or approval to details required by a condition of a
    planning permission.
   The appeal is made by RT Julian & Son Ltd against the decision of Cornwall Council.
   The application Ref PA25/08160 sought approval of details pursuant to conditions Nos. 3, 4 and 5 of
    planning permission Ref PA22/05334, granted on 24 March 2025.
   The application was refused by notice dated 17 December 2025.
   The development proposed is Change of Use of Land for parking, storage and the siting of storage
    containers.
   The details for which approval is sought are:

    Condition 3 - Prior to any further clearance and construction works on site, a landscaping scheme
    shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The scheme shall
    include: details of all remaining trees and hedgerows on the land, showing those to be retained and
    measures for their protection to be used in the course of development; planting plans with written
    specifications including full schedule of proposed plants, details of the mix, size, distribution and
    density of all proposed trees/shrubs/hedges; and cultivation proposals for the maintenance and
    management of the soft landscaping. The approved protection measures shall be implemented in
    accordance with the approved scheme before any further clearance and construction works on site
    proceed and shall thereafter be retained until the works are completed. All planting, seeding or
    turfing comprised in the approved landscaping scheme shall be carried out in the first planting
    season following the local planning authority’s written approval of the landscaping scheme. Notice
    shall be given to the Local Planning Authority when the approved scheme has been completed. Any
    trees or plants which die, are removed or become seriously damaged or diseased within a period of
    five years from being planted shall be replaced in the next planting season with others of a similar
    size and species as those originally planted. In the event that:
    • no details in accordance with this condition are submitted within three months of the date of this
    decision, or
    • no scheme in accordance with this condition is approved within nine months of the date of this
    decision, or
    • any approved scheme is not implemented within the first planting season following its written
    approval,
    the use of the site shall cease, and all equipment and materials brought onto the land for the
    purposes of such use shall be removed, until such time as a scheme approved by the local planning
    authority is implemented. In the event of a legal challenge to this decision, or to a decision made
    pursuant to the procedure set out in this condition, the operation of the time limits specified in this
    condition will be suspended until that legal challenge has been finally determined.

    Condition 4 - Unless within three months of the date of this decision, a Biodiversity Management
    Plan (BMP) is submitted in writing to the local planning authority for approval, and unless the
    approved BMP is implemented and carried out at all times in accordance with the approved details,
    the use of the site shall cease and all equipment and materials brought onto the land for the
    purposes of such use shall be removed until such time as a scheme is approved and implemented.
    The BMP shall ensure that there is a minimum 10% net gain in biodiversity within a 30-year period as
    a result of the development and shall include full details of all on-site and off-site measures required

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002971


       to achieve this, a timetable for provision of the measures and how they are to be secured, and a
       maintenance and monitoring plan. If no BMP in accordance with this condition is approved within
       nine months of the date of this decision, the use of the site shall cease and all equipment and
       materials brought onto the land for the purposes of such use shall be removed until such time as a
       BMP approved by the local planning authority is implemented. In the event of a legal challenge to
       this decision, or to a decision made pursuant to the procedure set out in this condition, the operation
       of the time limits specified in this condition will be suspended until that legal challenge has been
       finally determined.

       Condition 5 – Unless within three months of the date of this decision, details confirming that the
       scheme for the disposal of surface water has been completed in accordance with Drawing No 100,
       Rev C (New land groundworks/drainage strategy plan) and a management and maintenance
       schedule are submitted in writing to the local planning authority for approval, the use of the site shall
       cease and all equipment and materials brought onto the land for the purposes of such use shall be
       removed until such time as a scheme is approved and implemented. If no scheme in accordance
       with this condition is approved within nine months of the date of this decision, the use of the site shall
       cease and all equipment and materials brought onto the land for the purposes of such use shall be
       removed until such time as a drainage scheme approved by the local planning authority is
       implemented. Upon implementation of the approved scheme specified in this condition, that scheme
       shall thereafter be retained and maintained in accordance with the approved details. In the event of a
       legal challenge to this decision, or to a decision made pursuant to the procedure set out in this
       condition, the operation of the time limits specified in this condition will be suspended until that legal
       challenge has been finally determined.


Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.       An application for the award of costs has been made by RT Julian & Son Ltd
         against Cornwall Council. An application for the award of costs has also been
         made by Cornwall Council against RT Julian & Son Ltd. These are subject to
         separate decisions.
Preliminary Matters
3.       The appeal follows the refusal by the Council to approve various details required
         by conditions on planning permission ref: PA22/053341. The conditions relate to
         approval of details of landscaping in the interests of the character and appearance
         of the development (Condition 3); the approval of Biodiversity Management Plan
         that would ensure a minimum 10% net gain, consistent with the ecological
         objectives of the condition (Condition 4); and verification of the completed surface
         water drainage system, along with an associated management and maintenance
         schedule, in the interests of flood risk (Condition 5).
4.       The appeal is made under section 78(1)(b) of the Town and Country Planning Act
         1990 (as amended) (the Act). It concerns the refusal of details required by
         conditions attached to the permission. It does not reopen the merits of the
         permission or the necessity of the conditions, nor can the conditions be varied or
         removed through this appeal.
5.       A new National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026.
         There are no changes material to this appeal that require further consultation with
         the main parties.

1
    Allowed under appeal reference: APP/D0840/W/24/3351090


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6002971


Main Issue
6.    In light of the above the main issue is whether the details submitted satisfy the
      requirements of Conditions 3, 4 and 5.
Reasons
       Condition 3 - Landscaping
7.    Condition 3 requires, among other matters, details of all remaining trees and
      hedgerows on the land, identifying those to be retained and the measures to
      protect them during construction.
8.    Although the submitted details state that the existing woodland would remain in its
      current state, with trees protected at the outer edges from construction machinery,
      they do not provide specific measures for that protection.
9.    The condition also requires the provision and approval of planting plans with
      written specifications including a full schedule of proposed plants and details of the
      mix, size, distribution and density of all proposed trees, shrubs and hedges.
10. Details of the proposed living wall have been provided, but they do not specify its
    height or planting density. Similarly, while areas of wildflower planting have been
    outlined the submitted details do not specify the seed mix or sowing.
11. Based on the submitted evidence, there is insufficient information to ensure that an
    appropriate landscaping scheme would be delivered in the interests of the
    character and appearance of the site and area.
12. The submitted details therefore fail to satisfy the requirements of Condition 3 of the
    planning permission. Consequently, the condition is not discharged.
       Condition 4 – Biodiversity Management Plan
13. Condition 4 requires approval of a Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) to secure
    a minimum 10% biodiversity net gain (BNG) over a 30-year period. It also requires
    full details of the on-site and off-site measures needed to achieve that gain, the
    timetable for their delivery, how they would be secured, and arrangements for
    maintenance and monitoring.
14. The submitted BMP relies, at least in part, on off-site measures at Perranporth
    Airport to achieve the required net gain. Although a letter of intent has been
    provided from the operators of the airport, whilst reference has been made to
    Heads of Terms, no completed legal agreement or other binding mechanism is
    before me to secure those off-site measures, or to ensure their long-term
    maintenance and monitoring.
15. The Planning Practice Guidance explains that off-site biodiversity gains must be
    secured by a planning obligation or conservation covenant in order to be
    registered. Without such a mechanism, I cannot be satisfied that the required gain
    would be delivered, maintained and monitored for 30 years
16. The previous Inspector was satisfied, on the evidence then available, that a
    minimum 10% BNG could be secured by condition. This appeal, however,
    concerns whether the submitted details satisfy Condition 4. The off-site measures



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6002971


       are necessary to achieve the required gain, but they have not been appropriately
       secured.
17. Whether the living wall should be treated as hedgerow for BNG purposes, or
    whether sufficient hedgerow units could otherwise be achieved within the
    submitted strategy, does not overcome the fundamental issue identified above.
18. Accordingly, through failing to demonstrate that the necessary BNG would be
    secured, the submitted details do not satisfy Condition 4. The condition is therefore
    not discharged.
       Condition 5 – Surface Water Drainage
19. Read alongside Condition 1 (approved plans), Condition 5 requires that a scheme
    for surface water disposal is completed in accordance with the approved drawing.
    It also requires details confirming that the relevant works have been carried out,
    together with a management and maintenance plan, to be submitted to and
    approved in writing by the local planning authority.
20. The appellant has raised concerns about the timing of, and lack of notice given for,
    the Council’s site visit to verify whether the drainage works had been undertaken.
    Nevertheless, based on the evidence before me and my own observations on site,
    I am not satisfied that the development has been constructed in accordance with
    the approved drainage strategy. In particular, ACO drains and manholes were not
    evident in the positions shown on the approved drawing. Although I could not
    verify the exact location of the approved soakaway, the conflicting evidence also
    indicates that its position is also unlikely to accord with the approved drawing. The
    submitted letter from the drainage contractor’s does not outweigh those concerns.
21. The installed drainage scheme may be equally or more effective than that
    approved. However, Condition 5 requires compliance with the approved details.
    This appeal concerns the refusal to discharge that condition; it is not an application
    under Section 73 of the Act to vary or remove its requirements. I therefore cannot
    assess the acceptability of an alternative drainage scheme under this appeal.
22. Accordingly, the submitted details fail to satisfy the requirements of Condition 5.
    Consequently, the condition is not discharged.
Other Matters
23. The appellant has raised various concerns with the local planning authority’s
    handling of the application. These matters are addressed in the corresponding
    costs decisions. They do not alter my assessment of the appeal on its planning
    merits.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons outlined above the appeal is dismissed.


Lewis Condé
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
