Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by Lewis Condé BSc, MSc, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002703
4 Ruthys Lane, Padstow, Cornwall, PL28 8AZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Eastmont Holdings against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/05946.
•    The application sought planning permission for ‘Proposed conversion of dwelling into two units with
     extended side extensions to the north and west (Resubmission of Application No. PA21/04719)’
     without complying with conditions attached to planning permission Ref PA22/03842, dated 25 July
     2022.
•    The conditions in dispute are Nos 2 and 3 which state that:
     Condition 2 - The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the plans
     listed below under the heading "Plans Referred to in Consideration of this Application".
     Condition 3 - Prior to first occupation of the dwellings hereby approved the temporary parking
     area shall be reinstated to garden and the front boundary wall shall we rebuilt in accordance with
     approved plans 898.15A and 898.17A
•    The reasons given for the conditions are:
     Condition 2: For the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper planning.
     Condition 3: To maintain the character of the conservation area in line with policy 24 of the Cornwall
     Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010-2030

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appellant has highlighted that the conditions attached to planning permission
       ref: PA22/03842 include typographical errors in reference to the approved
       plans/drawings. The appellant has indicated that it is potentially seeking to rectify
       this through an application under Section 96A of the Town and Country Planning
       Act 1990 (as amended). I am satisfied, however, that based on the information
       before me an appropriately informed decision can be made upon the appeal
       proposal.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. I have taken this into consideration as part of the appeal. However,
       as far as it relates to the appeal scheme, there have not been any fundamental
       changes to national policy that have necessitated re-consultation with the main
       parties.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002703


Background and Main Issue
4.       Planning permission (ref: PA22/03842) was granted in 2022, subject to conditions.
         The conditions included one requiring compliance with the approved
         plans/drawings (condition 2) and another requiring a temporary parking area to be
         reinstated as garden to serve the proposed dwelling, including through rebuilding a
         front boundary wall (condition 3). The temporary parking area was allowed to help
         facilitate construction activities associated with the approved development. The
         permission has been commenced and at the time of my site visit appeared to be
         nearing completion, while the front boundary wall detailed under conditions 2 and
         3 had been removed, with the previous garden space appearing largely open to
         the streetscene, whilst it had been laid to hardstanding.
5.       The appellant is now seeking to vary condition 2 and remove the requirements of
         condition 3 of planning permission ref: PA22/03842. In effect this would enable a
         permanent area of vehicular parking to be provided to serve the previously
         approved dwellings. It would also involve the creation of a cobble lined gulley to
         the front of the properties.
6.       The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
         the Padstow Conservation Area.
Reasons
7.       The significance of Padstow Conservation Area (the Conservation Area) derives
         principally from its historic maritime character, medieval origins and distinctive
         urban form around the harbour and estuary. Its special interest is expressed
         through its tight-knit townscape, narrow lanes, irregular historic plot pattern, varied
         building forms and strong relationship with the harbour and surrounding
         landscape. Together, these features provide a clear sense of historic evolution and
         a distinctive sense of place.
8.       Traditional boundary treatments, including stone walls enclosing gardens, yards
         and individual plots, make an important contribution to that significance. They help
         define the historic urban grain, reinforce the sense of enclosure and add texture
         and intimacy to the street scene. The appeal property, an attractive stone-built
         dwelling within the historic core, forms part of this context1.
9.       On my site visit, I viewed nearby examples where boundary enclosures had been
         removed to provide parking, including adjacent to the appeal site. Some may have
         benefited from planning permission2, but I do not have the full background
         circumstances of those cases. In any event, such changes have often weakened
         rather than reinforced the character of the area, yet stone boundary walls remain a
         common and positive feature within the Conservation Area.
10. The evidence before me indicates that the boundary wall was in a poor state of
    repair and had partially collapsed as a result of damage from a long-term
    undetected water leak. Although reinstatement of the boundary wall may require
    the use of new materials, that should not prevent a sympathetic boundary
    treatment consistent with the character of the Conservation Area from being
    achievable. In contrast, the proposed permanent loss of a substantial part of the
    traditional stone boundary and its replacement with open parking would erode the
1
    Notwithstanding alterations to convert it to two residential units
2
    Including references: E1/2009/01585 and PA23/09474 referred to by the appellant.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6002703


       historic plot enclosure, weaken the sense of enclosure and introduce a more open,
       vehicle-dominated frontage. This would harm the character and appearance of the
       Conservation Area.
11. The harm to the designated heritage asset would be less than substantial. Still, the
    Framework outlines that substantial weight should be given to the conservation of
    designated heritage assets and that any harm is a matter of considerable
    importance and weight.
12. The removal of the separate modern concrete dwarf boundary wall and
    replacement of the concrete gulley to the front of the appeal site would provide
    some visual improvement. However, the former had already taken place by the
    time of my site visit and, in any event, the public benefits of these works would be
    modest.
13. The appeal scheme would provide private parking that would primarily benefit the
    occupiers of the proposed development. Some public benefit would though arise
    from reducing parking pressure within Padstow. However, although vehicle
    congestion and parking availability have been identified as local concerns, the
    scale and nature of the proposal mean that this benefit would be limited.
14. Overall, I find the public benefits would be minor and together would not outweigh
    the identified harm to the Conservation Area.
15. The appeal development would therefore harm the character and appearance of
    the Padstow Conservation Area. Accordingly, it conflicts with Policies PAD4 and
    PAD15 of the Padstow Parish Neighbourhood Plan 2018 – 2030 and Policies 1, 2,
    12 and 24 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030. Together,
    amongst other matters, these policies seek to secure high-quality design that
    protects the historic environment.
Other Matters
16. In support of the proposal the appellant’s submitted evidence includes reference to
    an appeal decision (ref: APP/D0840/W/24/3357907). However, that appeal related
    to an alternative development in an entirely different part of Cornwall, such that the
    precise contexts would differ.
17. Compliance with other development plan policies, for example in respect of
    highway safety or the living conditions of residents, are neutral matters that do not
    overcome the above identified harm.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons outlined above, the appeal scheme conflicts with the development
    plan, and there are no material considerations, including the approach of the
    Framework, that indicate a decision other than in accordance with it. The appeal is
    therefore dismissed.


Lewis Condé
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
