Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by B Phillips BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002708
Land at Castle End, Lea, Ross on Wye HR9 7JY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Stuart Hall against the decision of Herefordshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 251948.
•    The development proposed is a residential development of a max of 3 dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have removed wording from the description of development above which does
       not describe development.
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
       the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
       suitable in-principle and the second, ‘technical details consent’ stage is when the
       detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
       these 2 stages.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent TDC application if permission in principle is
       granted. The Council’s objections relate to location and the subsequent effect on
       the character an appearance of the surroundings, the setting of the Grade II* listed
       Castle End and the River Wye Special Area of Conservation (SAC). I have
       determined the appeal accordingly.
5.     Drawing 1465.01 illustrates the position and footprint of three dwellings. This is
       indicative only.
6.     The Government published in August 2026 a revised version of the National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The Council and the appellant have
       had opportunity to comment on this and I have taken into account any
       representations received.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002708


Main Issues
7.       The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
         regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development, with
         specific to the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the
         surroundings and the setting of the Grade II* listed Castle End.
Reasons
Castle End
8.       Castle End is a Grade II* listed1 property that sits opposite the appeal site. First
         listed in 1953, it comprises of an impressive two storey manor house of sandstone
         rubble with a hipped slate roof, originating in the 17th century, and subsequently
         altered. The property comprises a number of elements, including the main house,
         a cottage and other outbuildings and structures, including a dovecote listed
         separately at Grade II2, walled gardens and more extensive grounds.
9.       Given the above, I find that the special interest and significance of the listed
         building to be primarily associated with its historic and architectural interests as an
         exceptional illustration of 17th century vernacular architecture. Important
         contributors in these regards which are pertinent to the appeal are its extant
         architectural form, historic fabric and surviving grounds; and key historic features
         and detailing.
10. Recent modern nearby development has reduced the once open countryside
    surroundings associated with the manor house. The setting of the property has
    therefore clearly evolved, and the property is set behind strong boundary
    treatments, such as wall, Leylandii hedge, trees and shrubs which limits views.
    Intervisibility between the appeal site and the asset is therefore limited.
11. However, the remaining open space around Castle End, in retaining an open
    undeveloped character, ensures that there is an enduring link between the
    property and its historical grounds and landscape setting which befits its historic
    status, and allows this to be appreciated. This is only a matter of proximity as the
    remaining visual separation increases the prominence of the listed building, allows
    the building and its merit to be appreciated and is key to the way the heritage
    asset is experienced.
12. Therefore, the listed building’s immediate setting also in part, supports and
    contributes in a positive way to its special interest and significance.
13. The appeal site consists of an overgrown and dilapidated site set back from the
    highway behind a close boarded fence. The site contains rubble, mounds of earth
    and some hardstanding. It is neighboured on two sides by built form, the property
    at Castle End Farm to its rear, and an extensive modern residential development
    to its side.
14. Nevertheless, in being mostly open from development, save for dilapidated
    outbuildings at the rear of the site, the appeal site does contribute positively to the
    setting of Castle End by being a remaining buffer between development and built
    form and the heritage asset in this direction.

1
    List Entry Number: 1348810
2
    List Entry Number: 1167287


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6002708


15. Whilst details of layout are not provided at this first stage, the proposed three
    dwellings would erode this open space. It would urbanise the site and encroach
    towards Castle End, diminishing the connection and historical relationship between
    this open space and the heritage asset. The encroachment of built form when
    viewed from this direction would reduce the legibility of the historic use of the site
    and would diminish the way the listed building is experienced.
16. The appeal decisions3 referenced by the appellant refer to the adjoining site,
    further from Castle End, which has been developed. These are set further from the
    heritage asset and are not comparable. The development of this adjoining site
    increases the importance of the remaining open space. It is noteworthy that the
    only appeal decision4 before me on the site itself also concluded that development
    would be harmful to the setting of Castle End by encroaching into an important
    buffer.
17. Whilst not included within the refusal reasons nor set out in the Officer Report, the
    Council raise objection to the loss of non-designated heritage (NDHA) assets on
    the site. This relates to an L shaped structure and a separate building which the
    Council contends is believed were the granary and barn that were associated with
    Castle End Farm, a farmstead group formerly part of the Castle End Estate. This is
    based on an assumption that the relatively similarly shaped buildings in
    approximately the same position on historic maps are the same ones standing
    today.
18. Planning Practice Guidance5 sets out that NDHA’s may be identified as part of the
    decision-making process on planning applications. However, the Council did not
    include the loss of these buildings within the refusal reasons in any of the previous
    appeals and applications that have been referenced on this site. No substantive
    explanation of why the demolition of these structures is now raised (although not a
    refusal reason) when previously it was not has been provided.
19. I observed on site that the structures in question are dilapidated and have little
    value other than some retained agricultural character. There is little sound
    evidence before me that these are structures of heritage merit, indeed the
    Council’s evidence suggest that even if they were, ‘a substantial percentage of the
    L-shaped range is no longer represented as a building’.
20. Based on the evidence before me and what I have observed, I conclude therefore
    on this matter that these structures do not merit NDHA status. There is no
    identified harm therefore in their potential loss.
21. Nevertheless, I find that the proposed development would not preserve the setting
    of Castle End. In this respect, and in accordance with Policy HE6(1) of the
    Framework, it would therefore amount to harm to the significance of this heritage
    asset.
22. Given the existing structures on site, the boundary treatment and retention of open
    countryside to the north and south of Castle End, I find the degree of harm to the
    heritage asset to be at a moderate level but nevertheless is of considerable
    importance and weight.


3
  Appeal references
4
  Appeal reference APP/W1850/W/22/3290424
5
  Paragraph: 040 Reference ID: 18a-040-20190723


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6002708


23. The development would add up to three dwellings to the district’s housing stock.
    Framework Policy HO7 is clear that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. In this case the Council accepts that it
    cannot provide a 5 year housing land supply.
24. There would also be associated social and economic benefits related to the
    construction of the development and the contributions of future occupiers to
    services and facilities in the area. Additionally, although such details are yet to be
    provided, given its current state there would be some improvements to the site in
    terms of landscaping. This could include hedgerow planting for example and
    generally be of benefit to ecology also. Given the modest scale of the site, I attach
    moderate weight to all these benefits.
25. The Framework indicates that, when considering the impact on the significance of
    a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation. This is irrespective of whether any potential harm amounts to
    positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. On balance,
    in giving considerable importance and weight to the harm to the significance of this
    designated heritage asset, I find that this would not be outweighed by the public
    benefits that the proposal would generate.
26. Consequently, the harm identified to the significance of the designated heritage
    asset has not been supported by clear and convincing justification. The works
    therefore would conflict with the statutory presumptions set out in section 66(1) of
    the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act, 1990 (the Act), and
    fail to satisfy the historic environment conservation and enhancement policies of
    the Framework. There is also conflict with Policy LD4 of the Herefordshire Local
    Plan Core Strategy 2011-2031 (2015) (CS) which requires development proposals
    to protect, conserve and where possible enhance heritage assets.
Character and appearance
27. The site is located at the northern edge of the settlement, and the Lea
    Neighbourhood Development Plan 2011-2031 (2018) (NDP) sets out that view D2,
    when entering the settlement from the north, is to be protected. This view
    comprises of the spacious verdant transition between the surrounding countryside
    and the built form of the settlement, with Castle End on one side of the highway
    and the entrance to Castle End Farm on the other.
28. The appeal site, whilst mostly free from development, consists, as set out above,
    of a mix of overgrown weeds, rubble, mounds of earth and some hardstanding. It
    is set behind a close boarded fence, immediately next to the access of the Lea
    End development from the A40. Immediately to the north is the heavily treed
    garden area of Castle End Farm and its access from the A40.
29. I observed that the appeal site is seen therefore in the context of the adjacent
    domestic built form rather than the nearby wider open countryside.
30. Nevertheless, there remains a verdant character on the appeal site side of the
    road as the appeal site is set back from the A40 behind some extensive shrubbery
    and the newer development at Lea End is partly obscured by the landscaping
    present on the roadside.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6002708


31. Subject to suitable siting and further landscaping, a scheme for three dwellings
    could be accommodated on the site that, whilst urbanising the site itself, would
    retain a verdant roadside quality. It would also not extend built form to the north
    much further than the existing buildings at Castle End Farm and would not appear
    as encroachment into the countryside.
32. When viewed from the roadside it would preserve the existing green and
    expansive transitional character of the surroundings. The existing view along the
    A40 when coming into Lea would therefore be protected, and the rural setting of
    the village would be unharmed.
33. Protected view D2 would therefore be maintained. Protected view A2 also runs in
    the direction of the appeal site, however again, the existing roadside landscaping
    and trees next to the Castle End Farm entrance would obscure the development.
    No protected views identified in the NDP would therefore be harmed.
34. On this matter I conclude that the proposal would not harm the character and
    appearance of the surroundings. There is therefore no conflict with CS Policies
    SS6, LD1 and SD1, which collectively, amongst other matters require landscape
    and townscape to influence design and site selection and create well integrated
    environments that conserve settlement patterns and landscape. There would also
    be no conflict with NDP Policy Lea 3 which seeks to protect or enhance the key
    features of the identified panoramic views and the area’s landscape quality.
Other Matters
35. The site is within the hydrological catchment which comprises part of the River
    Wye Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Site of Special Scientific Interest,
    recognised as being of international importance for its aquatic flora and fauna. The
    Council’s Ecologist also sets out that the site is nearby the Wye Valley and Forest
    of Dean Bat SAC, significant for its population of Horseshoe Bats.
36. The Council maintain that insufficient detailed information regarding the
    management of foul and surface water discharges has been provided, however, as
    I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, I am not pursuing this matter further
    because it could not lead me to a different decision.
37. The appellant questions the weight that should be given to the NDP Policies. In this
    instance, I have found no conflict with the referenced NDP Policies, and so they
    have not been determinative in any case.
Overall Planning Balance
38. Having regard to the economic, social and environmental objectives of the
    Framework, the benefits which would accrue from the proposal are as set out
    above in the heritage balance. These benefits are tempered by the modest amount
    of development that is proposed but, nevertheless, each carry moderate weight in
    the appeals’ favour.
39. As set out above, substantial weight is given to the to the benefits of providing
    homes. The lack of harm and policy compliance in regards to issues such as
    access and highway safety are not matters in favour of the scheme.
40. However, Framework Policy HE6 (3) sets out that any harm to a designated
    heritage asset will be a matter of ‘considerable importance and weight’. Moreover,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6002708


       this policy (1) is clear that the more important the asset, the greater the weight
       should be given to its conservation. As a Grade II* asset, Castle End is a rare
       example of special architectural and historic interest and therefore is extremely
       important in this regard.
41. I find therefore that, in accordance with Framework Policy S5, the benefits of the
     proposal would be substantially outweighed by the identified adverse effects.
Conclusion
42. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan. There are no
    material considerations which indicate that the decision should be made other than
    in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

B Phillips
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
