Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 26 May 2026
by J Moore BA (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026

Appeal A Ref: 6002400
Pavement outside Waterfront House, 35 Station Street, Nottingham NG2 3DQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Richard Wilson of NWP Street Limited against the decision of
     Nottingham City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01493/PFUL3.
•    The development proposed is new communications kiosk with integrated advertising display and
     defibrillator.

Appeal B Ref: APP/Q3060/Z/25/3376390
Pavement outside Waterfront House, 35 Station Street, Nottingham NG2 3DQ
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) (‘the 2007 Regulations’) against a
     refusal to grant express consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Richard Wilson of NWP Street Limited against the decision of
     Nottingham City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01494/ADV2.
•    The advertisement proposed is 1no. digital advertisement display within proposed new
     communications kiosk.

Decisions
1. Both appeals are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Both appeals are made in relation to the same appeal site. Appeal A concerns a
   freestanding communications kiosk, while Appeal B concerns its integrated digital
   advertisement. I have determined each appeal on its individual merits, but to avoid
   duplication, I have dealt with the two together, except where otherwise indicated.
3. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. The main parties have been provided with an
   opportunity to comment on this matter, and I have taken account of comments
   made.
4. The Regulations set out that powers shall be exercised only in the interests of
   amenity and public safety, taking into account cumulative effects. Development
   plan policies are therefore not determinative in Appeal B, but I have taken them
   into account insofar as they relate to amenity and public safety. The Council has
   not refused the proposed advertisement on the grounds of public safety, and I find
   no reason to consider otherwise.
5. The appeal site is within the Station Conservation Area (CA) and in proximity to a
   listed building. As per sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings
   and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (‘the Act’), I have had special regard to
https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6002400 and APP/Q3060/Z/25/3376390


     preserving a listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
     historic interest which it possesses; and paid special attention to the desirability of
     preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA. Both duties apply
     in respect of whether to grant planning permission (Appeal A). In respect of
     whether to grant consent for an advertisement (Appeal B), the duty for
     conservation areas applies only in so far as it relates to the consideration of
     amenity, and the duty for listed buildings does not apply. However, the Regulations
     state that factors relevant to amenity include the presence of any feature of
     historic, architectural, cultural or similar interest.
6. The evidence refers to certain policies of the Greater Nottingham Aligned Core
   Strategies Part 1 Local Plan 2014 (CS) and the Nottingham City Land and
   Planning Policies Development Plan Document 2020 (DPD), which have not been
   fully submitted to the appeals. I have therefore relied upon the publicly available
   version of these policies as they appear on the Council’s website and consider that
   no party is prejudiced by my doing so.
Main Issues
7. For Appeal A, the main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the
   character or appearance of the Station CA; the settings of the Grade II* listed
   building Midland Railway Station (Ref:1271301); and the non-designated heritage
   asset (NDHA) known as Trent House (Ref: HA 429). The main issue for Appeal B
   is the effect of the proposed advertisement upon the visual amenity of the area. To
   avoid duplication, I have considered the main issues for both appeals together.
Reasons
8. From the evidence before me, the significance of the CA stems in part from its
   origin as an industrial suburb in the mid-19th century following the arrival of the
   canal and the railway. Although the area once included residential uses, the
   character of the CA is now predominantly industrial and commercial, to include
   surviving historic and contemporary buildings, largely of significant height and
   scale.
9. The Grade II* Midland Railway Station was built in 1904, and is a rare, surviving
   example of a neo-baroque railway station of outstanding national importance. The
   listing description includes the ornate main station building fronting Carrington
   Street, platform buildings, covered overbridges, and the long platforms and tall
   boundary walling which extend alongside Station Street. Also included in the list
   description is the two-storey former parcels office (Forward House) about halfway
   along Station Street. It is of redbrick with stone detailing and slate roof, sited at the
   back of the pavement. The listed station is an important and outstanding complex
   of railway station buildings and structures, befitting its group value. The CA is
   centred around this linear station complex, and it therefore makes a key
   contribution to the significance of the CA.
10. Directly opposite Forward House is Trent House, which dates from 1951 and is by
    a named architect. This multi-level building is of the modern classical style to
    include a long façade of Portland stone. Its significance stems in part from being
    the former printworks for Boots the Chemist and its architectural interest. It was
    restored circa 2000 and makes a positive contribution to the character and
    appearance of the CA due to its architectural form and scale.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decisions 6002400 and APP/Q3060/Z/25/3376390


11. A key characteristic of the CA is large urban blocks of form, with buildings of
    significant scale sited at the back of the pavement, which contrasts with the
    smaller scale of the listed station complex. This pattern of development creates a
    strong sense of enclosure, with long and unbalanced vistas within the roads
    alongside the long length of the listed station complex. Buildings along the
    northern side of Station Street (including Trent House and Waterfront House) typify
    this unbalanced sense of enclosure and scale. However, Forward House is of a
    significant height and scale to create a strong presence on the opposite side of the
    street, which is also dominated by the red brick boundary walling of the station
    complex. It is the composition from both sides of the street which create the long
    vista where the significance of the heritage assets can be appreciated.
12. Insofar as related to the appeals, the key features of significance, special and/or
    local interest of the CA, the station complex and Trent House (the three heritage
    assets) are the siting, scale and architectural detailing of buildings; the tall
    boundary walling of the station complex; and the long vista along Station Street
    with its sense of enclosure. Insofar as related to the appeals, the long vista of
    Station Street is the immediate setting which allows the listed station complex and
    Trent House to be appreciated.
13. During my visit, I saw that part of Station Street near the main station building is
    pedestrianised, to include trees, benches and other street furniture as well as
    outside seating serving adjacent businesses offering food and refreshments.
    However, the carriageway of the remaining section from the junction with Trent
    Road to London Road is one-way and largely marked as a red route, to include
    lanes for vehicles and cyclists; some loading/parking bays parallel to the highway;
    and generous pavements. Street furniture along this long section includes street
    lighting columns, street poles with small highway related signs, a bus stand without
    a shelter, litter bins, and some ‘pay and display’ machines. A scooter bay in the
    form of a simple, short enclosure of black metal railings is sited next to a
    loading/parking bay and does not obstruct pedestrian movement. The arrangement
    of street furniture within this long section is such that it does not intrude upon views
    within the long vista, largely due to their respective and dispersed sitings at the
    front and back of the pavement in combination with their scale and materials.
14. The proposed kiosk would be about 2.45m high, 1.1m wide and 0.8m deep with an
    ‘L’ shaped footprint, positioned largely perpendicular to the carriageway on a
    section of pavement in front of Waterfront House, between the scooter bay and
    bus stand. Its outer face would include the proposed advertising display (about
    1.6m high and 0.9m wide) to face oncoming traffic, while the inner face would
    include the telephone and defibrillator. It would be about 80m away from Forward
    House, but closer to the nearest corner of the long façade of Trent House. The
    proposed materials would be black powder coated steel cladding, steel and safety
    glass.
15. Due to its scale, siting and materials, the proposed kiosk would appear as a solid,
    tall structure within the street. Depending on the angle of view, the kiosk would
    appear in lines of sight along the street, interrupting views of the listed station
    complex (including Forward House); and Trent House, and detracting from the
    long vista within the CA. It would also increase street furniture outside Waterfront
    House, creating a sense of street clutter at this point in the street.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decisions 6002400 and APP/Q3060/Z/25/3376390


16. Although the dark materials would harmonise with the scooter bay and Waterfront
    House (which includes contemporary black/charcoal cladding and steel railings),
    and a generous pavement width would remain, this would not overcome the effects
    that I have found.
17. The CA includes other illuminated advertisements, as befitting a largely
    commercial area. However, along this section of Station Street, such
    advertisements are predominantly fascia signs displaying the name of commercial
    premises or the occupier, attached to elevations at the upper levels of buildings
    and/or at entrance ways. In this context, the proposed illuminated advertisement
    would be somewhat at odds with the prevailing nature of advertisements within this
    part of the CA. It would therefore exacerbate the detracting effect of the kiosk,
    including during the hours of darkness.
18. The luminosity levels of the proposed advertisement would be controlled during
    hours of daylight and darkness in accordance with the established guidance1, and
    it would not operate between midnight and 05:00 hours. Therefore, the proposed
    advertisement would not result in excessive light intrusion. However, this would not
    overcome the detracting effect of the proposal.
19. The appellant draws my attention to a large format digital advertisement at the
    corner of Station Street where it meets London Road and the railway. The
    circumstances which led to this advertisement are not before me. I am not directed
    to any other large format advertisements within the CA, nor did I see any during
    my visit. In my view, this advertisement is atypical of the predominant form and
    nature of advertisements within this part of the CA. It appears as a rather dominant
    feature above the boundary walling of the station complex near London Road and
    detracts from views towards the station complex. For these reasons, the presence
    of this format of advertisement does not justify the proposal before me.
20. Drawing the above together, the proposed development would fail to preserve the
    character and appearance of the Station Conservation Area (CA); and would fail to
    preserve the settings of the Grade II* Midland Railway Station and the NDHA of
    Trent House. This would harm the significance of these heritage assets. The
    proposed advertisement would harm visual amenity.
         Public benefits and balance
21. Policy HE4 of the Framework advises that any harm to or loss of the significance
    of a designated heritage asset (including from development within its setting)
    should have a clear and convincing justification. Policy HE6 of the Framework sets
    out that when considering the potential effect of a development proposal on the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to
    the asset’s conservation (and the more important the asset, the greater the weight
    should be). This is irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a
    positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance.
22. The harm I have identified to the significance of the CA and the Grade II* listed
    station complex is not substantial. Nevertheless, it is of considerable importance
    and weight, most especially as the Grade II* listed station complex is a rare,
    surviving example of a neo-baroque railway station of outstanding national
    importance, and is a key aspect of the significance of the CA. In such

1
    Professional Lighting Guide 05/23: The Brightness of Illuminated Advertisements including Digital Displays


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    4
Appeal Decisions 6002400 and APP/Q3060/Z/25/3376390


     circumstances, Policy HE6 requires me to weigh this harm against any public
     benefits resulting from the proposal.
23. Policy HE7 of the Framework sets out that where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a NDHA, this should be weighed against the benefits of
    the proposal and a balanced judgement made, having regard to the scale of any
    harm or loss and the significance of the NDHA. The harm I have identified to the
    NDHA is not substantial.
24. For the avoidance of doubt, and as per footnote 63 of the Framework, the policies
    within the historic environment chapter of the Framework apply to the heritage-
    related consent regimes under the Act. My balancing exercise under such policies
    therefore only relates to the proposed development (Appeal A), and not to the
    proposed advertisement (Appeal B).
25. The proposal would provide social benefits as a public wireless
    telecommunications facility suitable for use by the accessibility impaired and for
    those without access to a landline or mobile phone. It would include a defibrillator
    and offer other services including calls to emergency services, interactive way
    finding, public information and messaging.
26. The need for telecommunications infrastructure is not a questionable matter within
    Policy CO1 of the Framework, which sets out that substantial weight should be
    given to the benefits of such development. However, this policy also sets out
    (among other things) that such proposals should be sited and designed to
    minimise the visual impact of proposals, especially where a new site or structure is
    proposed. In the absence of any compelling evidence to demonstrate any
    consideration of alternative sitings, I cannot be certain that the siting of the
    proposal is the least harmful one in heritage terms, which significantly limits the
    overall weight I attach to such benefits.
27. Although Policy E2 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be
    given to proposals that support business growth, such economic benefits would be
    limited by the scale of the development. Temporary economic benefits would also
    arise during the construction phase, with permanent benefits thereafter through
    ongoing maintenance activities, but again the scale of such benefits is limited.
28. As part of a charitable endeavour, the appellant seeks to plant a street tree in
    return for a kiosk granted permission by a Council, secured by a condition or
    alternatively an agreement under s278 of the Highways Act 1980. The appellant is
    willing to accept a condition to secure such a tree in this case. DPD Policy ENV7
    seeks to consider new trees and planting in the assessment of planning
    applications, and the justification text recognises the contribution of trees to
    various matters including (but not limited to) amenity. However, no specific location
    for any street tree is identified; there is no evidence before me of any agreement to
    provide a tree; nor am I satisfied that a condition to secure a street tree would
    meet the relevant tests. For these reasons, the potential benefit of a street tree
    carries very little weight in favour of the proposal.
29. Collectively, I attach moderate weight to the benefits of the proposed development,
    which are not sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified to the significance of
    the heritage assets.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
Appeal Decisions 6002400 and APP/Q3060/Z/25/3376390


30. Given the above, I conclude that on balance, the proposed development would fail
    to preserve the character and appearance of the Station CA; and fail to preserve
    the settings of settings of the Grade II* listed building Midland Railway Station and
    the NDHA known as Trent House. This would fail to satisfy the requirements of the
    Act and Policies HE6 and HE7 of the Framework.
31. The proposed development conflicts with CS Policies 10 and 11; and DPD Policies
    DE1 and HE1. Taken together, these policies seek to ensure that development is
    of high-quality design which makes a positive contribution to the public realm and
    protects amenity, taking account of various factors including (but not limited to)
    local context, important views and vistas, scale, materials and the setting of
    heritage assets. As a result, the proposed development would not accord with the
    development plan.
32. I also conclude that the proposed advertisement would harm visual amenity.
    Insofar as relevant, it conflicts with DPD Policy DE5 which seeks to ensure that
    advertisements do not harm visual amenity, taking account of various factors
    including (but not limited to) scale, position, design, illumination and impact upon
    heritage assets.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
33. Policy S3 of the Framework requires me to apply a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. As the appeal site is within a settlement, Policy S4 of the
    Framework applies, whereby developments should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Taking account of the benefits of the proposed development as set out earlier in
    my decision and the policies of the Framework, the benefits would not substantially
    outweigh the adverse effects that I have identified. The proposed development
    does not therefore benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development.
34. For the reasons above, and having regard to all matters raised, I conclude that the
    proposed development conflicts with the development plan, and the material
    considerations, including those of the Framework do not indicate that Appeal A
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. I further conclude that the
    proposed advertisement (Appeal B) would be detrimental to the interests of
    amenity. Therefore, both appeals are dismissed.

J Moore
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    6
