Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 July 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002880
Land South East of Haven Lodge, Lower Castle Road, St Mawes, Truro, TR2 5DR
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr William Cracroft-Eley (Trustees of the Haven and Oxhey Settlement)
       against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•      The application Ref is PA24/08310.
•      The development proposed is engineering works to sea cliff retaining structure and construction of
       steps.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
         was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
         parties with an opportunity to provide comments on the new Framework as part of
         the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
         decision.
Main Issue
3.       The original planning application comprised of two elements, namely engineering
         works to the sea cliff and also the construction of steps that would allow access to
         the water. It appears from the evidence before me that the Council had no
         concerns with the proposals to strengthen the retaining structure. I can see no
         reason to disagree with that assessment. Moreover, an application to carry out the
         engineering works in isolation has since been approved by the Council1.
4.       As such, the main issue at the heart of this appeal is the effect of the proposed
         steps on the scenic beauty of the Cornwall National Landscape and the character
         of the heritage coast, and also whether the proposal would preserve or enhance
         the character or appearance of the St Mawes Conservation Area.
Reasons
5.       The appeal site is a private garden area and section of sea cliff which is located on
         the opposite side of Lower Castle Road from the host dwelling which is known as
         Haven Lodge.



1
    Council ref: PA25/06272

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002880


6.     The site forms part of the designated heritage coast and the Cornwall National
       Landscape (the NL). Policy N4 of the Framework states that substantial weight
       should be given to conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas.
       Furthermore, the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023 requires decision
       makers to actively seek to further the statutory purposes of NL’s.
7.     The site is also located within the St Mawes Conservation Area. From the
       evidence before me, and from what I saw when I visited the site, the significance
       of the Conservation Area, in so far as it is relevant to this appeal, is derived from
       the value of the development of St Mawes as a coastal village over many years,
       and the architectural styles and tastes of the time. It has an aesthetic value due to
       the appearance of the buildings that comprise the Conservation Area and their
       visual relationship with the sea.
8.     In this instance, the sea cliff or wall below the garden area has a gabion basket
       stabilising structure. The proposed steps would be constructed of galvanised steel
       and would descend down the face of the gabion structure to a concrete slab
       below. Amendments to the proposal were made during the application process,
       including by adding an oak handrail to the balustrade and an oak stringer.
9.     The area of low lying cliffs in the immediate vicinity of the appeal site do of course
       contain many features which are man-made or have been heavily influenced by
       humans. However, as can be seen on the appellant’s CGI images, these features,
       such as the neighbouring private garden immediately to the north-east of the
       appeal site, simulate quite naturally into the natural landscape. There are therefore
       very few features which dominate the view or draw the eye. While the sea wall and
       gabion basket structure is quite an obvious feature, the fact that it is constructed of
       stone means that it successfully complements the surrounding character to a large
       extent.
10. In contrast, the steel stairs would appear as a contrived and artificial feature which
    would seem incongruous with the more natural materials or features in the
    immediate area. Furthermore, the stairs would sit in front of the sea wall, rather
    than being recessed. It would therefore be an obvious feature which would draw
    the eye and detract from the special character of the surroundings. The oak
    handrail and stringer would soften the appearance of the stairs slightly, but not
    sufficiently to avoid harm. The fact that the stairs would be in a particularly
    prominent location which is easily visible, both from the water and from Lower
    Castle Road, would only exacerbate this harm. On that basis, I disagree with the
    findings of the appellant’s heritage statement (November 2024) which concludes
    that any impacts would be acceptable.
11. I acknowledge that there are several examples of stairs in the surrounding area
    which provide access to the water. Indeed, the appellant has provided
    photographs to that effect. However, it is clear that the majority of the stairs are
    constructed from natural materials, particularly stone. Furthermore, in the main,
    they tend to be recessed into the cliff face meaning that they are not visually
    prominent features in the same way that the proposed staircase before me would
    be. One of the photographs, which is also included on page 3 of the appellant’s
    ‘Additional Information’ document (16th December 2024), does show a set of stairs
    with steel handrail and steel railings above. This is sited close to the appeal site. It
    is not clear to me when these steps were approved or why. However, from the
    appellant’s photographs, and from what I observed on my visit, this appears to be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6002880


       atypical of most stepped accesses to the water in the wider area. As such, their
       presence simply does not justify allowing an appeal where I have found clear
       harm.
12. Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires that special attention is paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
    the character or appearance of the Conservation Area. In this instance, due to the
    limited scale of the development, the harm would be relatively localised. However,
    the appeal site is located at a prominent point in the Conservation Area and is
    easily visible from land and sea. As such, this localised harm would also be
    harmful to the character and appearance of the Conservation Area as a whole.
13. The proposal would have a negative effect on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset and would result in harm, albeit at the lower end of the scale. In
    these circumstances, the Framework requires that this harm must be weighed
    against public benefits. Substantial weight must be given to a designated heritage
    asset's conservation and any harm to its significance requires clear and convincing
    justification.
14. In this instance, the benefits are almost entirely private in terms of providing
    access to the water. There would be very limited economic benefits in terms of the
    construction phase. The stairs may make it slightly easier to make some repairs to
    the gabion basket structure where required. However, it seems highly likely that
    any such repairs could still be undertaken without the stairs being there, and so
    this issue attracts limited weight. I therefore conclude that the public benefits do
    not outweigh the harm that I have identified.
15. Furthermore, given the prominent position of the proposed stairs on the cliff, it is
    inevitable that the harm I have described to the Conservation Area would also
    extend to the natural beauty of the NL and the character of the heritage coast.
16. As a result of the harm to the Conservation Area, NL and heritage coast, the
    proposal would conflict with Policies 1, 2, 12, 23 and 24 of the Cornwall Local Plan
    Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030 (the LP), as well as Policies LA1, LA2, CV1, CV3.
    GP1 and GP2 of the Roseland Parish Neighbourhood Development Plan (the NP).
    Taken together, the relevant aspects of these policies seek to ensure that new
    development is well designed, that it protects landscape character, including that
    of the NL and heritage coast, and that the significance of designated heritage
    assets is preserved. I do not find conflict with LP Policy 3 given that it solely
    concerns the spatial strategy for the area. There is also no conflict with NP Policies
    CR5, which relates to carbon reduction, or CV2 which seeks to preserve the
    setting of listed buildings.
17. There would also be conflict with the relevant aspects of the Cornwall AONB
    Management Plan, Cornwall Design Guide and Roseland Plan Design Guide
    which have similar aims.
Other Matters
18. The appeal site is close to a Grade II listed drinking fountain. Its significance
    derives from its attractive appearance, being constructed of polished granite, and
    interesting features such as the dolphin faucet over the scalloped shell basin.
    However, given its small size, it is appreciated from very close range from Lower
    Castle Road. As such, I am satisfied that the proposal would not result in harm to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6002880


       the setting of this listed asset. The Council does not appear to have concluded that
       there would be harm to the setting of any other listed building in the wider area. I
       can see no reason to disagree with that assessment.
19. The appellant has set out that the design of the proposed steps would represent
    an affordable solution and that a more subtle design would be very expensive.
    While that might be the case, this issue does not overcome the harm I have
    identified.
20. I acknowledge that there may not have been objections to the proposal from the
    Parish Council or the Council’s historic environment team. However, those matters
    do not alter my conclusions in this case.
Conclusion
21. The proposed development would result in harm to the character and appearance
    of the Conservation Area, NL and heritage coast, and as such it would therefore
    conflict with the development plan when considered as a whole. The scope of
    benefits would be limited, including support for local business in the construction
    phase and the potential to allow easier access to repair the sea wall. Any
    remaining benefits are private in nature and attract very little weight.
22. Policy S4 of the Framework concerns development within settlements. Part 1 of
    the policy notes that proposals in such locations should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse impacts. In
    this instance, I find that the combined harm would substantially outweigh the
    identified benefits.
23. Accordingly, there are no material considerations, including the updated
    Framework, that outweigh the identified harm and associated development plan
    conflict. The appeal is therefore dismissed



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
