Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 July 2026
by R Kent BA (Hons) MTP DipM MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002006
Uphill, Road From Covert House To Uphill Farm, Yelverton, Devon PL20 6DF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Uphill Farm Events against the decision of West Devon Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 0895/25/VAR.
•    The application sought planning permission for development described as ‘Use of walled garden for
     weddings, workshops & food events, construction of four ancillary buildings within the walled garden,
     use of part of adjacent barn for wedding ceremonies & construction of external staircase to barn (part
     retrospective) (resubmission of 2992/22/FUL)’ without complying with conditions attached to planning
     permission Ref 1769/23 /FUL dated 13 December 2023.
•    The conditions in dispute are Nos 11 and 12 which state that: ’11. The commitments included within
     the Noise Management Plan dated April 2023 (or succeeding revisions of this plan if agreed in
     writing by the Local Planning Authority) shall be complied with at all times during events at which live
     or amplified music is played’ and ’12. No amplified music shall be played on the premises in such a
     way that it is audible at the boundary of any nearby residence.’
•    The reason given for condition 11 is ‘To protect the amenity of residents in the vicinity from
     unacceptable noise levels in accordance with the provisions of Policy DEV1 of the Plymouth and
     South West Devon Joint Local Plan.’ The reason given for condition 12 is ‘To protect the amenity of
     local residents from music noise in accordance with the provisions of Policy DEV1 of the Plymouth
     and South West Devon Joint Local Plan. Note: In this case “audible” is defined as the specific music
     noise level (measured as Laeq, 15 min) which exceeds the background noise level (measured as
     La90,15 min) prevailing at the time’

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Use of walled garden
      for weddings, workshops & food events, construction of four ancillary buildings
      within the walled garden, use of part of adjacent barn for wedding ceremonies &
      construction of external staircase to barn at Uphill, Road From Covert House To
      Uphill Farm, Yelverton, Devon PL20 6DF in accordance with the application Ref
      0895/25/VAR, without compliance with condition numbers 11 and 12 previously
      imposed on planning permission Ref 1769/23/FUL dated 13 December 2023 and
      subject to the conditions set out in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    Whilst the description of the proposal on the planning application form also refers
      to listed building consent, that is a separate application process to that of seeking
      planning permission for carrying out development without complying with
      conditions attached to a previous planning permission. I have therefore determined
      the appeal on the basis that it is an application for planning permission for the
      development set out in the description above without complying with conditions 11


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002006


      and 12 of planning permission 1769/23/FUL. This is also the basis on which the
      Council determined the application.
3.    Although the description of development refers to the works being part
      retrospective and the resubmission of a previous application, these do not
      constitute development under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the Act). I
      have therefore not included them in my formal decision in paragraph 1 above.
4.    On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
      was published. The Council and the appellants have had the opportunity to make
      comments on the new Framework in so far as it relates to this appeal. I have taken
      account of the comments which were made and the 2026 Framework in my
      decision.
5.    Since the appeal was lodged, the Tamar Valley Management Plan 2026-2031 was
      published in June 2026. As this is updated information which was not available
      when the appeal was submitted I have taken it into account in my decision. The
      appellant has had the opportunity to make comments in so far as it relates to the
      appeal and I have taken those comments into account.
Background and Main Issues
6.    Planning permission 1769/23/FUL was granted by the Council in 2023 for the
      development described in the heading above which includes the use of the walled
      garden for weddings, workshops and food events and use of part of an adjacent
      barn for wedding ceremonies.
7.    The appellant seeks to vary the wording of conditions 11 and 12 of planning
      permission 1769/23/FUL. Condition 11 requires that the commitments in the Noise
      Management Plan dated April 2023 be complied with at all times during events at
      which live or amplified music is played.
8.    Condition 12 requires that no amplified music is played on the premises “in such a
      way that it is audible at the boundary of any nearby residence” . The reason for
      condition 12 contains a ‘note’ which states that in this case “audible” is defined as
      the “specific music noise level (measured as Laeq, 15 min) which exceeds the
      background noise level (measured as La90,15 min) prevailing at the time”. That
      definition however does not form part of the condition itself.
9.    Other conditions imposed to protect living conditions, but which are not the subject
      of this appeal, include condition 6, which states that no more than 55 events are
      permitted to take place throughout any calendar year; condition 7 which limits the
      hours during which events can take place; and condition 8 which states that no
      more than 120 guests shall be present during any event.
10. The appellant seeks to vary the wording of condition 12 of that permission to state
    that ‘the specific noise level from music at any event shall not exceed 5dBa above
    the prevailing background noise level at the facade of any residential property. The
    noise level to be measured as a 15 min Laeq.’ The appellant also seeks to vary
    condition 11 to refer to an updated Noise Management Plan.
11. Against this background, the main issues in this appeal are therefore the effect
    that varying the conditions would have on:
      • the living conditions of the occupiers of nearby dwellings;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6002006


          • the Tamar Valley National Landscape, with regard to tranquillity; and
          • the Plymouth Sound and Tamar Estuaries Special Area of Conservation (SAC).
Reasons
Living conditions
12. The site comprises a walled garden and barn. At the time of my visit a marquee
    containing tables and chairs, a bar, flooring, a drum kit and speakers was sited
    within the walled garden. Separate timber structures used for catering and to
    accommodate toilets were also sited along the southern side of the garden. The
    barn lies to the north of the walled garden and is accessed from the walled garden
    by a pathway.
13. The nearby farmhouse and farm cottage is occupied by the appellant and their
    family. There is a small number of dwellings in the vicinity of the site, including a
    small group of dwellings a short distance to the east, a farmhouse to the north and
    two further dwellings to the south east.
14. The reasons given on planning permission 1769/23/FUL for the imposition of
    conditions 11 and 12 vary slightly for each condition but show that the purpose of
    the conditions is to protect the amenity of residents in the vicinity from noise in
    accordance with the provisions of policy DEV1 of the Plymouth and South West
    Devon Joint Local Plan 2019 (JLP). Policy DEV1 states that development
    proposals will be required to safeguard the health and amenity of local communities
    by, amongst other things, ensuring that new development provides protection from
    noise disturbance for existing residents.
15. Policy DEV1 does not define how ‘noise disturbance’ should be measured or
    assessed. However, national development management policy (NDMP) P3 of the
    Framework states that development proposals should be appropriate for their
    location and, amongst other things, not result in levels of noise exposure which
    would have a significant observed adverse effect. The glossary to the Framework
    defines the ‘significant observed adverse effect level’ (SOAEL) as ‘the level of noise
    exposure above which significant adverse effects on health and quality of life occur’
16. The explanatory note to the Noise Policy Statement for England1 (NPSE) which
    sets the aims for the management of noise is also a relevant consideration setting
    out a range of observed effect levels. Having regard to the definition in the
    Framework, the NPSE explanatory note and the examples set out in the noise
    exposure hierarchy table in Planning Practice Guidance (PPG), in my judgement,
    the requirement of condition 12 that no amplified music is audible at the boundary
    of any nearby residence, is effectively requiring there to be a No Observed Effect
    Level (NOEL) of noise exposure.
17. Whilst policy DEV1 requires that residents are protected from noise disturbance
    and NDMP P3 requires that development mitigates and reduces to a minimum
    potential adverse impacts resulting from noise, they do not require that the level of
    noise generated by an activity must not be inaudible, that is to say must not exceed
    the NOEL.



1
    ‘ Noise Policy Statement for England’ Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, 2010.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                        3
Appeal Decision 6002006


18. The Noise Management Plan dated April 2023 referred to in condition 11 includes
    further commitments to manage noise. It is notable that its introduction states that
    “the specific noise level from music at any event shall not exceed 5dBa above the
    prevailing background noise level at the facade of any residential property. The
    noise level shall be measured as a 15 min LAeq”. As such it countenances some
    level of noise being heard at nearby dwellings. In other words, a noise exposure
    above NOEL.
19. Whilst condition 11 requires that the commitments included within the Noise
    Management plan dated April 2023 are complied with at all times, the noise control
    limitation in the introduction to the Noise Management Plan referred to above
    creates a tension with the more restrictive requirement of condition 12. Even
    though it appears from the Council’s evidence that the appellant was expected to
    submit a revised Noise Management Plan for approval to the local planning
    authority through the ‘tailpiece’ provision in the condition, I have not been provided
    with any clear evidence that a revised Noise Management Plan was agreed in
    writing by the local planning authority.
20. Notwithstanding this, whilst condition 11 is drafted to allow revisions to the Noise
    Management Plan to be agreed by the local planning authority, such ‘tailpiece’
    phrases can create a risk that significant changes can be made to the plan without
    following the statutory route to vary conditions. Amongst other things, such an
    approach can deprive third parties of the opportunity to comment and therefore be
    unreasonable. If condition 12 were to be amended as proposed by the appellant to
    reflect the wording already within the approved Noise Management Plan, the
    inconsistency between the two noise levels limitations would be removed.
21. The venue has been fitted with a ‘Zone Array’ sound system designed to keep
    sound on the dancefloor and minimise the noise levels heard at nearby properties.
    The Acoustic Impact Assessment2 (AIA) submitted by the appellant carried out
    environmental noise surveys in May and November 2024. These surveys took
    place at a time when there were no events taking place and were to establish the
    representative day and night-time background noise levels. The AIA identifies
    25dBA as the most representative day-time (07:00 – 23:00) background noise
    level, 24dB as the evening (19:00 – 23:00) background noise level, and 21dB as
    the night time (23:00 – 24:00) noise level. An increase of 5dB(A) above background
    noise levels would be equivalent to only a 2dB(A) increase over the equivalent
    existing ambient night time noise levels identified in the AIA which the appellant’s
    evidence indicates would be a barely noticeable difference.
22. Although Moray House, receptor 2 in the AIA, is not the nearest dwelling to the site
    it is identified in the AIA as the most sensitive receptor due to the nature of the
    local topography. The acoustic review carried out at Moray House in July 20233
    concluded that the proposal would be highly likely to result in a significant adverse
    impact on nearby dwellings. However, this report predated the installation of the
    Zone Array system at the appeal venue and the Council’s evidence indicates that
    noise complaints have fallen away since the new sound system was installed.
    Whilst the occupiers of Moray House have been able to hear music played at the
    venue on dates in June, July and August 2025 and representations from some


2
 ‘Uphill Farm Acoustic Impact Assessment Events Marquee’ Sustainable Acoustics 16 May 2025
3
 Acoustic review of planning applications 1769/23/FUL and 770/23/LBC at ‘The Walled Garden’ at Uphill, Yelverton, PL20 6DF. SB
Consulting. Date of issue 17.7.23


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    4
Appeal Decision 6002006


      other residents suggest noise levels have been harmful, no detailed
      measurements of those 2025 noise levels are before me.
23. The proposed revised Noise Management Plan 25/03/25 reflects the
    recommendations of the AIA. It commits that live music would cease at 23:00 and
    not exceed 93dB(A) at source. It also revises the commitment to the location of
    musicians and speakers within the venue. It states that musicians would be
    positioned at the back of the marquee next to the dance floor, and the speakers
    will be a ‘Direct Acoustics Zone Array’ suspended above the dancefloor with
    enforcement speakers facing into the marquee set 10dB(A) below the Zone Array.
    A phased reduction in output, bass and treble, would commence at 23:00 with a
    reduced limit of 85dB(A) at source.
24. The commitment that the specific noise level from music would not exceed 5dB(A)
    above the prevailing background noise level at the facade of any residential
    property would be consistent with the Noise Council’s ‘Code of Practice on
    Environmental Noise Control at Concerts’ regarding music noise levels generated
    by indoor venues used for up to 30 events per calendar year. Whilst the Code
    relates to concerts rather than private functions, it nevertheless provides useful
    guidance for assessing comparable music noise levels at the facades of noise
    sensitive premises.
25. The appellant’s evidence, including the AIA, indicates that these limits would
    ensure that the noise impact would not exceed a low observed adverse effect level
    (LOAEL). The PPG defines LOAEL as the level of noise exposure above which
    adverse effects on health and the quality of life can be detected. In my judgement,
    limiting the noise generated by amplified music to these levels, together with the
    provisions of conditions 6, 7 and 8, would mitigate and reduce to a minimum the
    potential adverse impacts and be below the SOAEL at the nearest dwellings and
    their adjacent outdoor, private amenity spaces. Although noise might be heard by
    the occupiers of those dwellings on evenings when amplified music is being
    played, the evidence indicates that it would not cause an unacceptable level of
    disturbance to the living conditions of those occupiers.
26. Whilst condition 6 permits up to 55 events throughout any calendar year, the
    appellant’s evidence states that their business plan is that only 20 of those events
    per year would play amplified music. I am satisfied that this could be made clear
    through an adjustment to the wording of condition 6 if the appeal is allowed. This
    would provide further clarity about the number of events where amplified music
    might be played and limit the effect of noise on the occupiers of nearby dwellings
    and the use of their gardens in the evenings.
27. Although the appellant has demonstrated that in some circumstances it is possible
    to play music that is not audible at identified residential locations, the evidence
    also indicates that whether a noise is ‘audible’ will depend on the hearing
    capabilities of the person listening to it. Therefore whether a noise is ‘audible’
    would be subjective according to the person to whom it might be audible. Whilst
    the Council seeks to provide a definition of ‘audibility’ in the reason for the
    condition, the definition is not contained within the condition itself which in my
    judgement weakens the reasonableness and precision of the condition.
28. The appellant’s proposed rewording of condition 12 would require measurement to
    be taken at the facade of any residential property. Whilst the operators of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6002006


      appeal site may not have rights of access to private land to carry out the
      measurements where necessary, I have not been provided with any sound
      evidence why Council officers would not be able to secure access to carry out
      noise measurements if required.
29. Therefore, for the reasons given, whilst conditions are necessary to protect the
    living conditions of the occupiers of nearby dwellings, the proposed revised
    wording of conditions 11 and 12 would achieve this purpose. The development
    with revised conditions 11 and 12 would therefore comply with JLP policy DEV1
    which seeks to protect the living conditions of residents. It would also comply with
    NDMP P3 regarding living conditions and noise.
National Landscape
30. The site lies within the Tamar Valley National Landscape in an area of attractive,
    rolling countryside characterised by open fields enclosed by trees and hedgerows.
    It is accessed via a tree lined, rural lane which serves a small number of other
    properties in the vicinity.
31. In addition to the statutory duty at section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way
    Act 2000, NDMP N4 of the Framework requires that substantial weight should be
    placed on conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of National Landscapes.
    Policy DEV25 of the JLP has similar objectives giving the highest degree of
    protection to the National Landscape and setting out a range of criteria that
    development proposals will be assessed against. These include requiring that
    development proposals are located and designed to prevent the erosion of relative
    tranquillity and, where possible, use opportunities to enhance areas in which
    tranquillity has been eroded.
32. Whilst not part of the development plan, the policies and priorities for action for
    the National Landscape set out in the Tamar Valley Management Plan 2026-2031
    (the Management Plan) includes LCSQ2 to ‘maintain and where possible
    increase, levels of tranquillity and dark skies, by minimising intrusive noise and
    light pollution to safeguard special qualities’.
33. Although policy DEV25 does not provide a definition of ‘tranquillity, the
    Management Plan provides some guidance defining tranquillity as ‘freedom from
    the noise and visual intrusion, including light pollution, associated with developed
    areas, roads, transport and traffic, and areas with intensive recreational activities
    and other uses that contribute to disturbance.’
34. Tranquil areas are also referred to in NDMP P3 as ‘those areas that have
    remained relatively undisturbed by noise from human sources and are prized for
    their recreational and amenity value for this reason’. NDMP P3 indicates that,
    amongst other things, development should maintain the character of tranquil
    areas.
35. Whilst it is apparent from some interested parties that they prize the amenity value
    arising from the relative peacefulness of the National Landscape around the site,
    by granting planning permission 1769/23/FUL, the Council has already accepted
    that some noise would be generated by its use for events.
36. The subjective judgement of the effect of the proposal on the tranquillity of the
    National Landscape is apparent from the representations from interested parties.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6002006


      Whilst some interested parties object to the proposals due to concerns about
      increased noise, some others have also made representations in support of the
      proposal, including on the basis that the new sound technology has reduced the
      noise impact and the noise is not intrusive.
37. As set out in the first main issue, the AIA has taken into account existing ambient
    and background noise levels. The noise which would be generated by the use
    would not exceed the LOAEL. Whilst some noise might be heard by the occupants
    of dwellings and in their gardens this would be limited to the days on which events
    would take place and be restricted by the hours of use.
38. Although the reasons for some conditions on planning permission 1769/23/FUL
    show the conditions have been imposed to limit the effect of the use on the rural
    landscape, the reasons for conditions 11 and 12 are to protect the amenity of
    residents from noise. By seeking only to control the audibility of noise at the
    boundary of residential properties, planning permission 1769/23/FUL implicitly
    accepts that noise in other locations in the National Landscape may be audible.
39. I have had regard to the statutory duty to seek to further the purposes of the
    National Landscape. Taking into account that the approved use is already a
    source of amplified music on days when events are held; that the number and size
    of events are controlled by other conditions; and the level of noise would not
    exceed the LOAEL; I am satisfied that the proposed variation to conditions 11 and
    12 would conserve the natural beauty of the National Landscape. In my
    judgement, its tranquillity relative to the use which has already received planning
    permission would not be eroded. The proposal would therefore comply with JLP
    policy DEV25 and NDMP N4 regarding nationally protected landscapes.
Effect on SAC
40. The site falls within the 12.3km Zone Of Influence of the SAC. Regulation 63(1) of
    the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 requires me to make
    an appropriate assessment of the implications of the proposal on the conservation
    objectives of the SAC if there are likely to be significant effects on the integrity of
    the protected site.
41. The qualifying features of the SAC are its Atlantic salt meadows, estuaries, large
    shallow inlets and bays, mudflats and sandflats not covered by seawater at low
    tide, reefs, sandbanks which are slightly covered by sea water all the time; and its
    populations of Allis shad and Shore dock.
42. I have screened the proposal to determine whether it would have a likely
    significant effect on the qualifying features of the SAC which would undermine its
    nature conservation interest. As the proposal would be some distance from the
    SAC and involves a variation to conditions on a development which has already
    received planning permission, I am satisfied that the proposed change to the
    conditions regarding noise would not affect the qualifying features of the SAC. As
    a result, it would not have a significant likely effect, either alone or in combination,
    on the SAC. The Council did not identify any significant likely effects of the
    proposal on the SAC and I have found no reason to disagree.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    7
Appeal Decision 6002006


Other Matters
43. I have had regard to the statutory duty under section 66(1) of The Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990. The site lies to the south of the
    Grade II* listed ‘Uphill’4. The building derives its significance from originally being a
    farmhouse of 16th century origins which has been little altered since the 18th
    century. The walled garden and barn form part of the surroundings from which the
    listed building is experienced.
44. However the use of the barn and walled garden for events would be contained and
    would not have an adverse effect on the significance of the listed building. I saw on
    my visit that 3 of the timber buildings have been erected. The timber buildings and
    marquee are largely screened from the listed building by the high garden walls.
    Whilst the noise generated by events would affect the experience of the heritage
    asset whilst events are taking place, this would be a transient effect. As a
    consequence the proposed variation to the conditions would not harm the
    significance of the listed building through development within its setting.
45. Whilst a Premises Licence has been granted which reflects the current planning
    conditions, the granting of a Premises Licence is a separate regulatory regime.
    The consideration of the Premises Licence is not within my remit to consider in an
    appeal under section 78 of the Act.
Conditions
46. As my decision would result in the grant of a new full planning permission, I have
    sought the parties’ comments on what conditions, including any still relevant from
    the previous planning permission, would be appropriate in the event that the
    appeal is allowed.
47. As the development has commenced, a time limit condition is unnecessary.
    However, a condition listing the approved plans is necessary in the interests of
    certainty.
48. It is necessary to include a condition to require the implementation of the updated
    Noise Management Plan submitted with the appeal. For the reasons given above,
    however, I have omitted the ‘tailpiece’ phrase from the existing condition. A revised
    noise measurement condition is also reasonable and necessary for the reasons
    given above and to accord with the terms of the appeal proposal.
49. A condition restricting the number of events is reasonable and necessary to
    safeguard the living conditions of occupiers of nearby dwellings and the tranquillity
    of the National Landscape. In the interests of precision, I have adjusted the
    Council’s wording to make clear that amplified music can be played at no more
    than 20 events as set out in the appellant’s evidence. Conditions limiting the hours
    during which events can take place and the number of guests who may attend are
    reasonable and necessary for the same reasons.
50. A condition requiring adherence to, and monitoring of, the Sustainable Travel Plan
    is reasonable and necessary. I have adjusted the Council’s wording to make it
    more precise as to when the results of annual monitoring should be submitted. A
    condition requiring compliance with the lighting plan is reasonable and necessary
    to protect the National Landscape. For the reasons given above, however, the
4
    Official list entry number: 1105490


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    8
Appeal Decision 6002006


      ‘tailpiece’ phrase in the Council’s condition is not reasonable and has been
      omitted.
51. Whilst the parties have confirmed that the measures in the Ecological Appraisal,
    the soundproofing of an existing nesting site, and the provision of a new nesting
    site have all been carried out, conditions regarding their long term retention are
    both necessary and reasonable to safeguard protected species. The submission of
    an annual monitoring report of the barn owl nesting is also reasonable for the
    same reason.
52. I have assessed the effect of the development on the significance of the nearby
    listed building. However, I am not convinced from the evidence before me that a
    condition seeking to prevent leasing or other disposal of the site is necessary or
    reasonable to safeguard the heritage asset as future material changes of use or
    new structures would be subject to normal development management procedures.
    That condition has therefore not been included in my decision. A condition
    requiring the removal of the timber structures is reasonable to restore the walled
    garden, and thereby the setting of the listed building, to its previous condition in
    the event that the approved uses cease.
Conclusion
53. For the reasons given above I conclude that the appeal should succeed. I will vary
    the planning permission by modifying the disputed conditions and restating those
    undisputed conditions, amended as appropriate, that are still subsisting and
    capable of taking effect as set out in the attached schedule.



R Kent
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6002006


                                           Schedule of conditions

1. The development hereby approved shall in all respects accord strictly with the
   following documents and drawing numbers
   - 2207 P.01 P2 (Location/Block Plan)
   - 2207 P.02 P2 (Site Plan Existing and Proposed)
   - 2207 P.04 P2 (Proposed Parking Plan)
   - 2207 P.06 P2 (Existing/Proposed Kitchen Plan and Elevations)
   - 2207 P.05 P2 (Proposed Drainage Plan)
   - 2207 P.08 P2 (Proposed Prep Kitchen Plan and Elevations)
   - 2207 P.07 P2 (Existing/Proposed Toilet Block Plan and Elevations)
   - 2207 P.10 P2 (Proposed Glass House Elevations)
   - 2207 P.11 P2 (Proposed Glass House Elevations)
   - 2207 P.09 P2 (Proposed Glass House Plan)
   - 2207 P.13 P2 (Barn Plans and Elevations)
   - 2207 P.12 01 (Proposed Glass House Abutment Detail)
   - 2207 P.03 01 (Proposed Landscape Plan)
   - 2207 P.13 01 (Barn Plans and Elevations)
   - 1802 P.04 (Existing First Floor Plan)
   - Schedule of Repairs


2. The proposed venue shall be used for weddings, workshops and food events and
   for no other purpose in Class E of the Schedule to the Town and Country Planning
   (Use Classes) Amendment Order 2020 (or any Order revoking, re-enacting, or
   further amending that Order).
3. All catering on the site shall only take place within the commercial space wedding
   venue (the walled garden), as shown on the approved plan 2207 P.03 01
   (Proposed Landscape Plan).
4. No more than 55 events are permitted to take place throughout any calendar year,
   of which amplified music shall be played at no more than 20 of those events, in
   accordance with the ‘Uphill Farm Business Plan’. Up to date records of events shall
   be kept and maintained and made available for inspection by the Local Planning
   Authority. For the purposes of this condition each “event” shall not exceed a 24
   hour period and a multi-day wedding, workshop and food event shall be considered
   to be more than one ‘event’.
5. No event shall take place outside the hours of 11:00 and 22:00 on Sundays,
   Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays and 9:00 and 23:59 on Fridays
   and Saturdays.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            10
 Appeal Decision 6002006


 6. No more than 120 guests shall be present during any event. Up to date records of
    the covers paid for shall be kept and maintained and made available for inspection
    by the Local Planning Authority upon request.
 7. The measures of the Sustainable Travel Plan dated April 2023 shall be fully
    implemented and adhered to at all times. Annual monitoring of the Sustainable
    Travel Plan against the targets set out shall be undertaken by the Travel Plan
    Coordinator and the results submitted annually to the Local Planning Authority.
 8. The commitments included in the Lighting Plan dated February 2023 shall be
    complied with at all times during any event.
 9. The commitments included within the Noise Management Plan dated 25/03/2025
    shall be complied with at all times during events at which live or amplified music is
    played.
10. The specific noise level from music at any event shall not exceed 5dBa above the
    prevailing background noise level at the facade of any residential property. The
    noise level shall be measured as a 15 min Laeq.
11.   The mitigation and enhancement measures of the Ecological Appraisal Rev B, by
      Rachel Hacking Ecology, dated 3 November 2023, shall be retained and
      maintained in perpetuity in accordance with the Ecological Appraisal.
12. The sound proofing of the existing nesting site and the new nesting site approved
    by the Council under reference 0052/24/ARC, shall be retained and maintained in
    perpetuity in accordance with the approved details.
13. Annual monitoring of the Barn Owl nesting area shall be undertaken by a licensed
    ecologist and an annual report of its findings shall be submitted to the Local
    Planning Authority.
14. The timber structures hereby approved shall be removed from the site as soon as
    reasonably practicable when they are no longer required for the uses hereby
    permitted, or when they cease to function, whichever is soonest.




                                            End of Schedule




 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        11
