Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 June 2026
by N Unwin BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002628
72 Prebend Street, Islington, London N1 8PR
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part
           3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
           Order 2015 (as amended).
     •     The appeal is made by Prebend Ltd against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
           of Islington.
     •     The application Ref is P2025/2589/PRA.
     •     The development proposed is described as the: conversion of Ground & First Floors to
           residential use as 4 self-contained units.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026. It does not change the planning policy context in
   respect of the main issue, and I have determined the appeal accordingly.
Background and Main Issue
3. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
   (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for a change of use of a building and
   any land within its curtilage from a use falling within Class E (commercial, business
   and service) of Schedule 2 to the Use Classes Order (UCO), to a use falling within
   Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of Schedule 1 to the UCO, subject to limitations and
   conditions. There is dispute between parties as to whether the appeal building and
   land within its curtilage falls within Use Class E of the UCO.
4. Having regard to MA.1.(1)(b), development is not permitted by Class MA unless the
   use of the building fell within one or more of the classes specified, for a continuous
   period of at least 2 years prior to the date of the application for prior approval. There
   is dispute between the parties that the appellant has sufficiently demonstrated that
   the existing use of the building falls within Class E, and that it meets the above
   requirement.
5. Therefore, the main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would be permitted development under Schedule 2,
                Part 3, Class MA of the GPDO; and if so


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002628


           •    whether the proposal would meet the requirements of Schedule 2, Part 3,
                Class MA MA.1(1)(b) of the GPDO; and if so
           •    whether prior approval should be granted, having regard to (i) the effect on
                the character or sustainability of the Arlington Conservation Area, (ii) the
                provision of adequate natural light in all habitable rooms of the
                dwellinghouses, and (iii) the impacts of noise from commercial premises on
                the intended occupiers of the development.
Reasons
6. The appeal site comprises a three-storey property with basement. The appeal
   property has a complex planning history. The appeal site was formerly a public
   house (sui generis) which occupied the ground and basement levels, with ancillary
   accommodation on the first and second floors.
7. Appeal decision APP/V5570/W/21/3281724 granted planning permission for the
   change of use from public house (sui generis) to cafe and juice bar (Use Class E(b))
   on ground and lower ground floors. The description of development is specific in its
   reference to the ground and lower ground floors with the appeal decision making no
   reference to the first and second floors. As such, based on the information before
   me, this appeal decision related to the ground and lower ground floors of the appeal
   building only. Whilst the use of the ground and lower ground floors of the appeal
   building is Use Class E, the first and second floors are not.
8. Within appeal decision APP/V5570/W/21/3284945 at the appeal site for the change
   of use of the first and second floors to an apart-hotel, the inspector comments that
   the Council’s concerns regarding the loss of ancillary public house accommodation
   are no longer applicable due to the absence of a public house. They do not however
   state that the first and second floors cease to have this sui generis use. Further, the
   description of development within this appeal includes “change of use of first and
   second floors of former public house (sui generis)”.
9. Whilst the delegated report of planning application P2025/1014/FUL may refer to the
   second floor of the appeal building as ancillary to the Class E use of the ground
   floor, this does not make it so.
10.Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the GPDO grants planning permission for the
   change of use of a building and any land within its curtilage from a use falling within
   Use Class E to Use Class C3. The proposal includes the change from sui generis
   use to Use Class C3 which is not permitted under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
   the GPDO. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not be permitted
   development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the GPDO and prior approval
   cannot be granted.
11.Consequently, it is not necessary for me to consider the further reasons for refusal.
   This is because even if I were to find the proposal to be acceptable in these regards,
   it could not alter my overall conclusion that the proposal is not permitted
   development under Schedule 2, Part 3 Class MA of the GPDO.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6002628


Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
