Appeal Decision
Inquiry held on 14 - 23 April 2026
Site visit made on 17 April 2026
by Stephen Normington BSc, DipTP, MRICS, MRTPI, FIHE, FIQ
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002168
Mytax Farm, 4 Bourbles Lane, Poulton-Le-Fylde, FY6 0PE
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by the Baxter Group Ltd against the decision of Lancashire County Council.
•      The application Ref is LCC/2023/0030.
•      The development proposed is the extraction and processing of sand and gravel including the
       construction of new site access roads, landscaping and screening bunds, minerals washing plant
       and other associated infrastructure with restoration to mixed grassland, arable/pasture farmland and
       biodiversity enhancement, using imported inert fill.

Decision
1.         The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.         The Preesall and Knott End against Quarry Application were granted Rule 6(6)
           Party status pursuant to the Town and Country Planning (Inquiries Procedure)
           (England) Rules 2000. The Rule 6 Party participated fully in the Inquiry.
3.         During the Inquiry the Council and the Appellant agreed an amended description
           of the proposed development. I have used the amended description in the banner
           heading above.
4.         The Inquiry was formally closed in writing on 26 May 2026 following receipt of
           information that I requested on the final day of the sitting sessions, as set out in
           Annex C of this decision. This included the submission of a completed planning
           obligation in the form of a Unilateral Undertaking 1 (UU) pursuant to section 106 of
           the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 which was signed on 12 May 2026. This
           makes provision for the submission of a Traffic Management Scheme to the
           Council. I shall return to the content of the UU later in this decision.
5.         A Statement of Common Ground (Main SoCG) was provided and signed by the
           Council and the Appellant on 2 February 2026. This identified that there is no
           dispute between the Council and the Appellant regarding the current landbank
           position and supply issues in relation to land won sand and gravel and inert waste
           backfilling. Matters relating to landscape, agricultural land, archaeology, water
           environment/flooding and ecology were also not identified as being in dispute.
           However, matters relating to unacceptable impacts on highway safety, noise, dust


1
    ID48

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002168


        and air quality were identified in the Main SoCG as matters in dispute which the
        Council intended to defend in the appeal.
6.      A SoCG signed by the Appellant and the Council in its capacity as highway
        authority (Highways SoCG) was also provided dated 5 March 2026. This identified
        that matters of dispute relate to the suitability of the proposed access, vehicular
        conflict, the route suitability of the local highway network, and the adequacy of the
        proposed highway mitigation strategy.
7.      A SoCG in relation to noise impacts (Noise SoCG), signed on 6 March 2026, and a
        SoCG relating to dust impacts (Dust SoCG), also signed on the same date, were
        also provided.
8.      The application was accompanied by an Environmental Statement (ES) prepared
        pursuant to the requirements of the Town and Country Planning (Environmental
        Impact Assessment) Regulations 2017 (as amended). The Council considered
        that further information was required pursuant to Regulation 25 of the EIA 2
        Regulations (Regulation 25). The requested information was submitted in
        December 2024 3.
9.      Having undertaken its own review on behalf of the Secretary of State, the Planning
        Inspectorate considered that further information was also required pursuant to
        Regulation 25. The requested further information was provided on 6 March 2026.
        Having undertaken further review, the Planning Inspectorate considers the
        submitted ES, as amended and supplemented by the two Regulation 25
        submissions, to be satisfactory in terms of Schedule 4 of the EIA Regulations.
        Having considered the overall ES, I am satisfied that it is fit for purpose and
        identifies the likely environmental effects arising from the application scheme and
        is satisfactory in terms of Schedule 4 of the EIA Regulations.
10. During the appeal the Appellant provided a Shadow Habitats Regulations
    Assessment (sHRA) dated 10 April 2026. This was subject to consultation with
    Natural England. I shall return to the sHRA later in this decision.
11. Several amendments were made to the appeal scheme prior to the opening of the
    Inquiry. These included increases in the height of some soil bunds ranging from
    0.1m to 1.5m; an increase in the length of a soil bund by 30m in the vicinity of the
    “Woodlands” garden; changes in the implementation period for the installation of
    some bunding; provision of acoustic fencing to be placed in three locations; and,
    potential changes to visibility splays at the junction of the site access road with the
    B5270 Lancaster Road.
12. I have considered the extent to which the above changes would be substantive or
    result in procedural unfairness should I be minded to accept them. It was clear
    that all parties were aware of these proposed amendments prior to the opening of
    the Inquiry. They were considered in the evidence of relevant witnesses and were
    fully discussed in the Inquiry. In my view, the proposed changes do not constitute
    a fundamental change to the scheme considered by the Council at application
    stage and in most cases are aimed at mitigating some of the impacts of the
    proposed mineral extraction operations. Furthermore, given the extent to which
    they were considered in evidence and discussed in the Inquiry, I do not consider

2
    CD3.01
3
    CD3.02 – CD3.11


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6002168


      that the determination of this appeal based on those amendments would constitute
      procedural unfairness. As such, I have determined the appeal on the basis of the
      proposed amendments which are shown on a revised suite of relevant plans.
13. Prior to my determination of this appeal the Government published a revised
    National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026 which
    replaced the previous version. I have taken into account the relevant provisions of
    the revised version in the determination of the appeal and any references to the
    Framework in this decision relate to the revised document. In having regard to the
    matters that are most relevant to this appeal, there are no material changes to the
    Framework of relevance to the substance of this appeal. Therefore, I am satisfied
    that no party to this appeal would be prejudiced by the changes to the national
    policy context.
Main Issues
14. Having considered the evidence before me and from what I heard at the Inquiry,
    the main issues in this appeal are:
      •      The need for the proposed development with particular regard to the
             landbank position for sand and gravel and the need for inert waste disposal
             in the County.
      •      The effect of the proposed development on highway safety and the free flow
             of traffic.
      •      The effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the
             occupants of nearby residential dwellings with particular regard to dust, air
             quality and noise.
Reasons
The appeal site and proposed development
15. The appeal site is located approximately 1km east of Preesall and comprises
    approximately 20.7 hectares (ha) of generally flat lying agricultural land with some
    small lakes and a “duck breeding pen”. The proposed mineral extraction area
    would be approximately 11.9 ha. Arable fields, an isolated farm and residential
    properties bound the site together with a small number of relatively small-scale
    commercial businesses including kennels, equestrian uses and a small caravan
    and camping site.
16. The site lies approximately 1.5km from the Morecambe Bay and Duddon Estuary
    Special Protected Area (SPA), the Morecambe Bay Special Area of Conservation
    (SAC) and the Morecambe Bay Ramsar. It also lies approximately 1.4km from the
    Lune Estuary Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and approximately 2.3km
    from the Wyre Estuary SSSI.
17. No part of the site is subject to any statutory landscape or ecological designations.
    However, Phases 2 and 3 are part of a wider Biological Heritage Site known as
    Pilling Moss/Head Dyke. This covers a large area of farmland being designated
    for its value for overwintering birds associated with the nearby European sites, with
    surrounding farmland identified in the sHRA as functioning as supporting habitat
    for SPA qualifying species.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
Appeal Decision 6002168


18. The proposed development would comprise the extraction and processing of
    approximately 500,000 tonnes of sand and gravel from four separate phases at an
    annual output rate of approximately 100,000 tonnes. The site would be
    progressively restored using in situ soils and overburden, together with
    approximately 220,000m3 of imported inert restoration materials. Following the
    completion of mineral extraction operations (approximately five years), a further
    two years would be required to complete restoration works thereby giving an
    overall duration of approximately seven years.
19. The phases include:
       • Phase A – Site Enabling Works (approximately 6 months)
       • Phase 1 – North-western area of site (approximately 18 months).
       • Phase 2 – North of Bourbles Lane (approximately 6 months)
       • Phase 3 – East of Bourbles Lane (approximately 18 months)
       • Phase 4 – Central area including duck pen (approximately 12 months)
       • Phase 5 – Completion of infilling, processing plant removal and final restoration
                   (approximately 12 months).
20. The site would be accessed via a new junction onto the B5270 Lancaster Road
    approximately 200 metres west of its junction with the A588 Blackpool to
    Lancaster Road. The proposal would be expected to generate an average of 74
    two-way heavy goods vehicle (HGV) movements per day (37 in and 37 out) with a
    maximum of around 120 two-way HGV trips associated with the export of minerals
    and importation of restoration materials.
The Development Plan
21. The Main SoCG confirms that the relevant Development Plan for the appeal
    comprises the following:
       •    The Joint Lancashire Minerals and Waste Development Framework Core
            Strategy Development Plan Document, adopted 2009 (Core Strategy) 4;
       •    The Joint Lancashire Minerals and Waste Local Plan - Site Allocations and
            Development Management Policies – Part I, adopted 2013 (Local Plan
            Part 1)5;
       •    The Joint Lancashire Minerals and Waste Local Plan - Site Allocations and
            Development Management Policies – Part 2, adopted 2013 (Local Plan
            Part 2)6; and
       •    The Wyre Local Plan 2011-2031, adopted 2019 (Wyre Local Plan) 7.
22. Local Plan Part 1 sets out the policies by which applications for minerals and
    waste development will be considered. Local Plan Part 2 shows maps and
    detailed background information relating to the site-specific policies. The appeal
    site is not allocated for the extraction of sand and gravel in the Development Plan.

4
  CD7.01
5
  CD7.02
6
  CD7.03
7
  CD7.04


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6002168


23. The Core Strategy and Local Plan Parts 1 and 2 had plan periods running to the
    end of 2020. There is disagreement between the main parties regarding the
    weight to be attached to the policies contained within the aforementioned plans.
    However, the Council accepts little weight can be attached to the restrictions on
    new permissions for minerals development set out in Core Strategy Policy CS3
    (Meeting the demand for new Minerals), Core Strategy Policy CS4 (Identifying
    Sites and Areas for Mineral Extraction) and Local Plan Part 1 Policy M1 (Managing
    Mineral Production).
24. I have considered the weight to be attached to the relevant policies of the
    Development Plan, and the extent to which any can be considered as being
    consistent with the National Decision-Making Policies set out in the Framework, in
    the consideration of the main issues below.
Need for sand and gravel and inert fill provision
Need for sand and gravel
25. The introductory text to Chapter 11 of the Framework states that a sufficient supply
    of minerals is essential to provide the infrastructure, buildings, green energy and
    goods that the country needs. Policy M2(a) sets out that the Development Plan
    should allocate sites and/or identify preferred areas to maintain landbanks of at
    least seven years for sand and gravel.
26. The Development Plan does not provide policy support for new sites for the
    extraction of sand and gravel aggregates. Policy CS3 sets out a provision for a
    quantum of aggregate minerals and, together with Policy CS4, provides policy
    support for the release of 4.1 million tonnes (mt) of sand and gravel by 2021.
    Policy M1 also does not provide any support for new releases of aggregates,
    including sand and gravel, due to planning permission having been granted at that
    time for sand and gravel extraction at Runshaw Quarry which were identified as
    being sufficient to meet the need identified in Policy CS3.
27. Both main parties recognise that due to the age of the Development Plan more
    recent information with regard to sand and gravel reserves, landbank provision
    and future need are required to be considered. In this regard, both main parties
    have referred to the Council’s Local Aggregate Assessment (LAA) 2023 8, which
    uses 2022 data, and the North West Aggregate Working Party Annual Monitoring
    Report 2025 9 (AMR) (using 2024 data).
28. The LAA sets out that at the end of 2022, Lancashire held approximately 4.46mt of
    permitted land-won sand and gravel reserves. The LAA notes that the minimum
    seven year landbank could begin to erode from 2026 in the absence of timely
    additional provision being granted planning permission. The Officer Report to the
    Council’s Development Control Committee (Officer Report) recognised that the
    current position is that the landbank of sand and gravel reserves in Lancashire is
    around 4.3 million tonnes which is at or slightly above the minimum landbank
    requirement of seven years.
29. The North West Regional Aggregate Working Party has identified that the sub-
    regional apportionment for sand and gravel supply in Lancashire is 440,000 tonnes
    per year. The supply position was considered in the 2023 LAA which notes that
8
    CD7.05
9
    CD7.07


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6002168


      sales had reduced considerably due to the closure/exhaustion of reserves at a
      number of existing sand and gravel quarries and that the remaining operational
      sites are not capable of producing at the level required to meet the sub-regional
      apportionment.
30. The remaining reserves are held in a very small number of quarries with the only
    active sites being Bradleys Sandpit (Preston) and Lydiate Lane (Leyland). By far
    the largest proportion of permitted reserves (4.1mt) is held in one site at Runshaw
    Quarry which is currently non-operational. Planning permission for Runshaw
    Quarry will expire in July 2026. I have no evidence to indicate whether a new
    planning application to extend the time period of the permission is to be submitted.
    Regardless of the status of Runshaw Quarry, I agree with the Appellant that the
    fact that the vast majority of the Council’s landbank is bound in a single site is itself
    contrary to the principle of Policy M1(2)(d) of the Framework. Even if the Runshaw
    site was to commence production, it is subject to an output restriction which limits
    heavy goods vehicles leaving the site to 60 per day thereby limiting the ability of
    this site to meet the forecast demand.
31. If Runshaw Quarry is removed from the landbank, there would be only 0.20mt of
    permitted reserves. Based on the 10 year average sales rate identified in the LAA
    of 0.37mt, this leaves the Council with a 0.5 year landbank. The 10 year average
    sales figure included within the latest AMR of 0.29mt leaves the Council with a
    0.69 year landbank. If the North West Regional Aggregate Working Party sub
    regional apportionment for sand and gravel supply in Lancashire of 0.44mt per
    year is used, this leaves the Council with only a 0.45 year landbank. Therefore,
    the ability for the County to ensure a steady and adequate supply of sand and
    gravel aggregates as required by national policy is severely constrained. The
    Main SoCG confirms that Lancashire faces a critical landbank and supply
    shortage, aggravated by the closure of a number of quarries and the over reliance
    on a single inactive site.
32. The Council is considering a planning application for sand and gravel extraction at
    Lower Hall Farm near Preston (LCC/2021/0012) with reserves of 3mt which is
    proposed to be worked at 150,000tpa over 20 years. However, this application
    has remained undetermined for over five years and appears to have a number of
    unresolved issues. I have no evidence to indicate when, or if, this application is
    likely to be determined, and the Council did not seek to rely on this proposal in the
    evidence regarding the landbank position in the County.
33. Although not previously considered in the Officer Report or Main SoCG, the
    Council also identified that other alternative sources of sand and gravel in the
    County including crushed rock fines, marine dredged aggregates and recycled
    aggregates could contribute to supply. Whilst I accept that such alternatives can
    make a useful contribution to aggregate supply, they do not materially alter the fact
    that a landbank of at least seven years for sand and gravel cannot be
    demonstrated in the County.
34. The LAA demonstrates that Lancashire is a net importer of sand and gravel. It
    predicts, based on housing forecasts, a higher than previous housing requirement
    annually, and in turn a higher annual requirement for sand and gravel reserve.
35. The updated standard methodology for calculating housing delivery will also likely
    result in an increase requirement for sand and gravel. The LAA suggests that the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    6
Appeal Decision 6002168


         forecast housing need results in a higher annual apportionment being required to
         be demonstrated (570,000tpa) than the current sub-regional annual apportionment
         of 440,000tpa.
36. The appeal site is located to the east/north east of the settlements of Fleetwood
    (approximately 3km), Thornton (approximately 5km), Cleveleys (approximately
    6km) and Poulton-Le-Fylde (approximately 8km) all of which are at the top of the
    Wyre Local Plan settlement hierarchy, classed as ‘Urban Town’ within Policy SP1.
    These locations (along with Normoss – a suburb of Blackpool), are to facilitate a
    planned 48.6% of all residential housing delivery during the plan period to 2031
    totalling 4,285 dwellings.
37. The appeal site is located within very close proximity to these areas of planned
    growth within Wyre. In addition, it is located approximately 10km northeast and
    approximately 18.8km northwest of the northern suburbs of Blackpool and Preston
    respectively. Both of these authority areas are also subject to significantly
    increase annual housing delivery requirements from the Standard Methodology.
38. Taking the above factors into account, little weight can be attached to the
    restrictions on new permissions for sand and gravel extraction as set out on
    policies CS3, CS4 and M1 of the Core Strategy. I am satisfied that there is a
    critical shortfall in sand and gravel supply in Lancashire, with the County being a
    net importer of sand and gravel mineral which, in my view, is not a sustainable
    strategy. The appeal proposals would make an important contribution to the
    provision of sand and gravel in Lancashire.
Inert waste material
39. I have no evidence to suggest that there is any disagreement between the main
    parties regarding the need for the deposit of inert waste material at the site. The
    Officer Report identifies that “There is a need to import material to allow the
    effective restoration of the site, and to permit the restoration of high quality
    agricultural land. The waste importation aspects of the development are
    considered to be acceptable in terms of the broad policies for waste
    management”10. In addition, I have no evidence of any Development Plan policy
    that would materially preclude sites for inert waste disposal from being brought
    forward.
40. Notwithstanding the age of parts of the Development Plan, the Core Strategy and
    Local Plan Part 1 are the relevant development plan documents for waste
    management considerations. Core Strategy Policy CS8 focuses on the process of
    identifying capacity for the management of waste across the plan period. In
    relation to inert waste, the policy states that: “The capacity and distribution of
    existing and planned provision for the use and disposal of inert waste in landfill
    and quarry voids will be assessed as part of the site selection process, to ensure
    an adequate, available and accessible capacity of sites to handle inert waste.”
41. Policy WM1 of the Local Plan Part 1 is the development plan policy with regard to
    construction, demolition and excavation waste arising to be dealt with in the Joint
    Local Plan area. This identifies that within the most recent six years of the plan
    period (2016 – 2020), an anticipated 1,093,500 tonnes of residual waste would
    need to be managed through recovery / landfill operations, including the use of

10
     CD6.02 – paragraph 70


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    7
Appeal Decision 6002168


         such waste in the restoration of quarry voids, equating to an average of 218,700
         tonnes per annum.
42. It is clear that in order to achieve the restored landform, the importation of
    restoration materials would be required as there would be insufficient
    non-marketable quarry material to achieve a suitable final landform. I have no
    evidence to suggest that the amount of material proposed to be imported into the
    site would be excessive. In addition, I have no evidence to suggest that the
    volumes proposed for importation would not available.
43. As identified above, there are a number of proposed and permitted large-scale
    development schemes situated in relatively close proximity to the appeal site,
    including both infrastructure and housing delivery. It is likely that large quantities
    of inert waste would arise from schemes which would likely need to be managed
    as close to the source of production as possible.
44. The Appellant indicates that there are three existing waste management facilities
    for inert waste within Lancashire 11 clustered to the southern extent of the County
    and located to the south of Preston, Chorley and Blackburn. The appeal site is
    located within relatively close proximity to Fleetwood, Thornton, Cleveleys and
    Poulton-Le-Fylde all of which are settlements positioned at top of the settlement
    hierarchy for Wyre Council. In addition, the appeal site would provide for the
    closest inert waste facility for the major settlement of Blackpool, and the northern
    Lancashire towns of Lancaster, Morecombe and Carnforth.
45. Although not raised as a matter of dispute on the Main SoCG, the evidence
    provided by the Council suggests that there is additional inert waste management
    capacity in the Borough’s of Lancaster, Fylde, Wyre and Preston in addition to that
    identified by the Appellant. Although the Council has not explicitly set out the
    implications of these additional sites on the appeal proposals, nor has it identified
    the precise location of these sites to new planned and permitted development, the
    overall inference of this evidence would suggest that new inert waste management
    capacity is not significantly required.
46. However, the Appellant considers that the additional sites identified by the Council
    are some distance (by road) from the appeal site ranging from 17km to 31km. As
    such, there would likely be a relatively considerable haulage distance to access
    these facilities. In the absence of any detailed assessment by the Council
    regarding the implications of these additional sites in respect of local waste
    management capacity and need, I have attached little weight to this evidence and I
    have no compelling reasons to depart from the agreed position set out in the Main
    SoCG.
47. I accept that there is a significant benefit of the appeal site in providing for inert
    waste capacity relatively close to planned and permitted new development
    proposals. The use of this material in the restoration scheme, aligns with the
    ethos of the proximity principle and, in my view, would constitute sustainable
    development in this regard.
48. Overall, I have no contrary compelling evidence to suggest that there would be no
    lack of availability of inert fill. The proposed development would make a useful
    contribution to the management of exaction waste arising from construction

11
     PoE Liam Toland – paragraphs 5.52 – 5.53


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        8
Appeal Decision 6002168


      projects in the locality. I consider that there are no compelling reasons to suggest
      that the proposed principles of phased working and restoration would not be
      achieved.
Conclusion on need
49. The extraction of sand and gravel from the site would make a much needed
    contribution to the supply of sand and gravel in the County. It would provide a
    sustainable source of sand and gravel to the urban areas where most of the future
    planned development is likely to occur.
50. I have no substantive and compelling evidence to suggest that there would be a
    shortage of infill material that would compromise the delivery of the principles of
    the phased working and restoration or that there would be a delay in the
    achievement of the proposed restoration scheme.
51. In conclusion, I am satisfied that there is a demonstrable need for the proposed
    development to contribute to the future supply of sand and gravel in this part of
    Lancashire. I have attached significant weight to the identified need for the
    proposed development in the determination of this appeal.
Highway safety and the free flow of traffic
Highways background
52. The Appeal proposal includes the construction of a new access road into the
    quarry site off Lancaster Road (B5270), located approximately 250m east of the
    junction with the A588. Lancaster Road is single carriageway which varies in
    width from around 5m to 6m and is subject to a 30mph speed limit. The proposed
    access has been designed to ensure that all HGV movements associated with the
    development would turn right into the site and left out. There are no footways
    along this part of Lancaster Road with the carriageway bound by a narrow verge
    and hedgerow. The closest section of footway is located approximately 300m to
    the west of the proposed site access.
53. The proposal would be expected to generate an average of 74 two-way HGV
    movements per day (37 in and 37 out) over the mineral exportation period. It
    would also generate a small number of staff trips by car associated with the range
    of 5 to 11 employees who would be on site per day. As the Appellant is intending
    to promote sustainable travel means for employees working on the site it is not
    possible to quantify with any degree of certainty the number of cars likely to be
    accessing and egressing the site but given that operatives of plant and machinery
    associated with an extraction site are usually transient workers it is reasonable to
    assume that there would be a number of cars using the site per day in addition to
    any maintenance/delivery vehicles.
54. The Highways SoCG identifies that HGV movements would be routed to and from
    the B5270 Lancaster Road/A588 junction. Movements would then be split at the
    junction and the Highways SoCG suggests that it is a reasonable assumption that
    HGV traffic associated with the development would be distributed 50% east of the
    site along Head Dyke Lane (A588) and 50% south along Burned House Lane
    (A588). It also sets out that general delay on the highway network as a
    consequence of the proposed development is not a concern to the Council in its
    capacity as highway authority.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
Appeal Decision 6002168


55. From my observations at my site visits, and from the Council’s evidence 12, I have
    no compelling reasons to doubt the Council’s view that Lancaster Road is
    frequently used by equestrian users and organised cycling groups, as well as by
    individual cyclists.
56. The Council contend that safe and suitable access to the site is not agreed. There
    is a potential for vehicle conflict with resulting highway safety concerns; the local
    highway network is not suitable to safely serve the proposed development; and,
    the proposed measures to mitigate identified highway risks to an acceptable
    degree are not adequate.
57. Lancaster Road also provides pedestrian access to the nearest bus stops located
    on Head Dyke Lane, approximately 300m east of the site access outside Ranch
    House, and on Sandy Lane approximately 560m west of the site access outside
    Willow House. Both stops operate on a "hail and ride" basis and are served by
    commercial services to Lancaster and Knott End‑on‑Sea via services 88 and 89,
    as well as several school services (528, 541, 567, 901, 902, 903, 904 and 905).
    Lancaster Road additionally provides access to a Public Footpath located
    approximately 165m east of the proposed site access at Pointer Farm and to
    Bourbles Lane.
58. The Council has identified the equestrian holdings located in the vicinity of
    Lancaster Road including those at Pointer Stables (located opposite the proposed
    site access), Hillfield House (located approximately 100m to the east of the
    proposed site access), Pointer Farm (located approximately 160 m to the east
    proposed site access), and Pointer Cottage (located approximately 220m to the
    east proposed site access) 13. It is clear from the evidence of the interested parties
    and the Council’s evidence that Lancaster Road is frequently used by equestrian
    users, particularly to access the local bridleway network.
Access junction
59. The site would be accessed via a new priority-controlled junction on the B5270
    Lancaster Road, with the junction incorporating a traffic‑island arrangement
    separating the ‘in’ and ‘out’ movements, ensuring that HGVs enter and exit the site
    from the east, directing all HGV traffic to and from the A588.
60. The Council considers that visibility splays in both directions of 2.4m (x-distance) x
    52m (y-distance) are required to ensure that drivers have a safe stopping distance.
    The required visibility splays are based on the recorded 85th percentile speeds as
    set out in the agreed traffic survey dated 6 - 12th October 2023 14 and an
    allowance for wet weather conditions. The Council calculated the necessary
    visibility splays using the advice provided in paragraph 10.1.5 of Manual for
    Streets 2 15. The traffic survey found that the recorded 85th percentile dry speeds
    along Lancaster Road were 37mph in both directions. To allow for wet weather
    conditions, the Council has used the guidance provided in paragraph 3.1.1 within
    the Design Manual for Roads and Bridges CA 185 16 which suggests that the 85th
    percentile speeds should be deducted by 2.5 mph. This means that the wet
    weather 85th percentile speeds will be 34.5mph. The Council’s evidence provides

12
   PoE Ryan Derbyshire – Appendix 8
13
   PoE Ryan Derbyshire – Appendix 10
14
   Highways SoCG
15
   CD11.01
16
   CD11.02


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6002168


      the calculation methodology to demonstrate how the suggested visibility splays of
      2.4m x 52m have been determined 17.
61. The Council contends that using a setback distance of 2.4m, as recommended in
    Manual for Streets, minimum visibility splays to the west of the access cannot be
    achieved to allow vehicles to emerge safely due to the presence of hedgerows.
    The visibility splays that are necessary run over third-party land occupied by the
    hedgerows and are therefore outside the control of the Appellant and the Highway
    Authority. Consequently, there is no mechanism to prevent obstructions
    exceeding 1m in height within the required visibility envelope. Any change to the
    height of the hedge lies outside the Appellant’s control, meaning that the visibility
    splays required to achieve a safe site access cannot be delivered with certainty.
62. The resultant safety issues of the visibility splay not being achieved are identified
    as vehicles at the access not being able to view approaching vehicles and other
    road users including pedestrians, cyclists and equestrians with the risk of exiting
    the site into moving traffic. In addition, the Council expresses concerns that
    vehicles at the access would not be able to judge safe gaps within live traffic due
    to potential obstructions, leading for a greater risk of shunt or side impact collisions
    occurring; and that vehicles may need to creep into the running lane to obtain a
    view of oncoming vehicles and road users. This would obstruct through traffic and
    potentially increase the risk of collisions.
63. The access would be used by all vehicle types including cars when operatives are
    entering and exiting the site. The Council therefore considers that the vehicular
    visibility splays should be setback a minimum of 2.4m. Applying a setback
    distance of 2.4m would result in a residual concern that operatives using smaller
    vehicles will lack the adequate vehicular visibility to the east of the access to
    emerge safely. This is because the access is likely to achieve visibility splays of
    approximately 2.4m x 30m in this direction, which is a shortfall of 28m given the
    85th percentile speeds.
64. The Appellant contends that the normal visibility splay requirement for new
    junctions onto a 30mph road is 2.4m x 43m. It is further suggested that prior to the
    determination of the planning application the Council had agreed a reduced
    x-distance of 1.2m to reflect the fact that drivers of HGVs sit much further forward
    in the cab than car drivers and that other non-HGV use of the junction will be very
    low. The Appellant is of the view that 1.2m x 43m visibility splays would be
    suitable for an access used predominantly by HGVs onto a 30mph road.
65. Notwithstanding the above, the Appellant considers that the Council’s required
    visibility splays are achievable within land within the Appellant’s control and
    adopted highway land, subject to cutting back of some vegetation within the
    highway boundary 18. Subject to these measures 2.4m x 58m visibility splay in
    both directions is achievable from the access, drawn to the edge of the
    carriageway.
66. During the Inquiry a number of drawings were submitted by the Appellant 19 to
    demonstrate how visibility splays of 2.4m x 49.5m and 1.2 x 43m could be
    achieved with minimal impact on hedges that are not in the control of the

17
   PoE Ryan Derbyshire – Appendix 13
18
   AppendixJRB7
19
   ID34


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6002168


         Appellant. In addition, the plans included stopping sight distances east and west
         of the proposed access. Furthermore, the Appellant’s highways evidence also
         suggests that a speed-indicator signage on the eastbound approach to the junction
         could be funded to help enforce the 30mph speed limit on Lancaster Road.
67. It is clear that the attainment of the visibility splays suggested by both main parties
    would require the management of varying stretches of hedgerow, particularly to
    the west of the access. There was considerable debate in the Inquiry regarding
    the ownership of the hedge and this whether there was certainty that the hedge
    could be maintained at height of 1m.
68. The Council considers that the extent of highway immediately to the west of the
    proposed site access extends to the root stock of the hedge. My attention was
    drawn to case law regarding this matter 20. It is contended that firstly a
    determination must be reached as to whether or not the hedge was grown by
    reference to the highway. This would usually arise by an act of the landowner to
    separate his land from the highway and keep his stock from straying onto the
    highway, but it could arise from actions of a Highway Authority itself in the case of
    highways which were created under statutory authority or through the acquisition
    of land for that purpose.
69. It is the Council’s view that the hedge was grown by reference to the highway. This
    inference is drawn from the Council having no record of cutting or maintaining the
    hedges along Lancaster Road, and that the space between the hedgerows on
    either side would historically have provided the width needed for carts and
    carriages to pass with there being no available highway space to create a footway,
    for example. This section of highway predates 1786, when the first highways plan
    showing this area was produced. This evidence gives rise to the "hedge to hedge"
    presumption, with the highway being taken to extend to the carriageway side of the
    rootstock of the boundary hedge. As such, it is contended that the hedges to the
    east and west of the proposed access do not form part of the highway and are not
    highway assets but private assets. I observed at my site visit that considerable
    parts of the hedge on the highways side along Lancaster Road are managed close
    to the root stock.
70. The Appellant has made reference to an extract from the Council’s internal
    mapping software, Mapzone, issued in 2020 showing the indicative highway
    extents along Lancaster Road. This is purported to suggest that the hedges form
    part of the adopted highway. However, the information is accompanied by a
    disclaimer which makes it clear that the extract is indicative only and not definitive
    evidence of the extent of the adopted highway.
71. It is clear that the highway authority firmly consider that the hedgerows along the
    northern section of Lancaster Road in the vicinity of the proposed access do not
    form part of the adopted highway. Although the Appellant disputes this view, I
    have no compelling contrary evidence to unambiguously demonstrate that the
    hedges are part of the highway as opposed to private assets. In these
    circumstances, the extent to which the hedge may be considered part of the
    adopted highway can only be resolved by further evidence and potential legal
    proceedings which are outside the scope of this appeal. In the absence of any
    compelling evidence to the contrary, I have determined this appeal on the basis of

20
     Hale v Norfolk CC CA (2001) Ch


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     12
Appeal Decision 6002168


         the view of the statutory highway authority that the hedges do not form part of the
         adopted highway.
72. I have no compelling reason to doubt the Council’s determination of the required
    visibility splay which is clearly based on the recognised guidance provided in
    Manual for Streets 2 and the Design Manual for Roads and Bridges CA 185. I
    have also taken into account the narrow nature of this part of Lancaster Road, as
    is discussed in more detail below, the fact that the highway has no pedestrian
    facilities, and the fact that the site will be used by vehicles other than HGVs. In my
    view, these characteristics and the relevant technical guidance documents lead
    me to conclude that the required visibility splays of 2.4m x 52m proposed by the
    Council are necessary in the interests of the safety of all users of the highway.
73. I have taken into account the various plans showing visibility splays of 2.4m x 58m,
    2.4m x 43m, 1.2 x 43m, 2.4 x 43m and 2.4m x 49.5m provided by the Appellant.
    Notwithstanding my view that the Council’s calculated splay should be used, all of
    the preceding options impinge to some extent on hedgerows that are not in the
    control of the Appellant with the 1.2m x 43m having the least degree of effect.
74. I have also taken into account the Appellant’s view that an x-distance of 1.2m is
    sufficient for an access predominantly proposed to be used by HGV’s, supported
    by the guidance provided in paragraph 10.5.5 and 10.5.9 of Manual for Streets 2,
    particularly stating that “a reduction in visibility below recommended levels will not
    necessarily lead to a significant problem”. However, in my view, this does not
    provide a compelling justification to depart from the clear and evidenced based
    calculation of the required visibility splays suggested by the highway authority.
75. Evidence was presented to the Inquiry of the land registry title of the ownership of
    the land to the east of the access, including the hedgerow adjoining the highway21.
    The owner of this land is an objector to the proposed development and is not
    inclined to sell the land or any rights over it.
76. Without a suitable legal agreement with the relevant landowners or by purchasing
    appropriate land is there is no mechanism to fully prevent any obstructions higher
    than 1m, impacting visibility splays, particularly to the west. Such obstructions
    could occur due to natural hedge growth. I have no evidence of any agreement
    with relevant landowners to ensure the land occupied by a hedge where the
    visibility splay passes over would be kept free of obstruction. Without such an
    agreement it would not be possible to secure the required visibility splays that I
    consider are necessary. This would mean that vehicles exiting the site would have
    substandard visibility which could lead to accidents occurring on this road to the
    detriment of highway safety. As such, the proposed development cannot provide a
    safe access to and from the site for all highway users.
77. I have considered the Appellant’s view that a Grampian condition could be used to
    require works on land, in the form of hedgerow maintenance, that is not controlled
    by the Appellant. However, the PPG states that this should not be used where
    there are no prospects at all of the action being performed. Taking into
    consideration the comments received by the third-party owner of part of the land
    fronting Lancaster Road, the lack of any evidence whatsoever of any agreement
    with relevant third party owners, and the views of the highway authority regarding
    the extent of the adopted highway, I consider that, on the basis of the evidence
21
     ID40 – ID42


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      13
Appeal Decision 6002168


         before me, there are no prospects at all that the requirements of a Grampian
         condition could be delivered. As such, a Grampian condition would not be
         appropriate in this instance.
78. I have also taken into account the Appellant’s suggestion of the provision of
    vehicle speed-indicator. I do not consider that the signage suggestion has any
    material bearing on the calculation of the visibility splay proposed by the Council
    which is based on the “as is” road characteristics uninfluenced by a signage
    suggestion which may or may not have an effect on vehicle speed.
79. Taking all of the above factors into account, the appropriate visibility splays cannot
    be achieved. The consequence is that vehicles waiting to egress the site may not
    be able to acceptably view approaching vehicles and other road users with a risk
    of vehicles exiting the site doing so into moving traffic. In addition, safe gaps
    within live traffic may not be able to be safely judged and vehicles may have to
    creep into the highway to obtain a clear view of oncoming vehicles and other road
    users. Therefore, the proposed access arrangement would present an
    unacceptable highway safety risk.
        Highway Safey on local road network
80. The Council has no capacity issues associated with the road corridor proposed to
    be used by HGV’s accessing and egressing the site. However, there is concern
    regarding the suitability of the route to support the additional HGV movements.
    This is due to the highway not being of sufficient width to support the needs of two-
    way HGVs, on Lancaster Road and the A588. The Council considers that this has
    highway safety implications as this proposal would increase conflict and
    subsequently the number of occurrences that HGVs will be required to reverse on
    the live network to allow another HGV to pass. This increases the risk of HGVs
    having to reverse, potentially without suitable visibility, notwithstanding the
    consequences on the stopping needs of approaching vehicles or the safety
    implications on vulnerable road users including pedestrians, cyclists and
    equestrians. This is along a part of the local highway network which has no
    physical pedestrian segregation from the live carriageway.
81. In particular, the Council considers that the concerns in respect of highway safety
    of the surrounding road network relate to sections of Lancaster Road (including the
    Vine House bend), and two locations along the A588 (including at the access
    serving Fold House Farm, approximately 3.3 km east of the A588/B5270
    Lancaster Road junction), and at the A588 Burned House Lane/B5377 Park
    Lane/U22436 Cemetery Lane junction (located approximately 1.5 km south of the
    A588/B5270 Lancaster Road junction). It is contended that these locations cannot
    safely accommodate the HGV traffic that would be generated by the proposed
    development due to the lack of physical carriageway width to enable two‑way
    vehicular movements to safely pass.
82. The Council’s evidence considers the clearance required between the two passing
    HGV’s vehicles, and the clearance between the HGV and the edge of the
    carriageway. This is based on a straight section of carriageway where vehicle
    wing mirrors do not overhang beyond the carriageway. This demonstrates that a
    minimum width of 6.2m is necessary to accommodate 2-way HGV movements 22.


22
     PoE Ryan Derbyshire – Appendix 16


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      14
Appeal Decision 6002168


83. A 6.2m carriageway width allows a 100mm clearance between passing HGVs
    (3.05m in width including door mirrors). However, 6.2m is a minimum width
    necessary on a straight road and does not include consideration of design speeds,
    traffic levels, traffic composition, highway curvature and gradients.
84. Lancaster Road at the Vine House Farm bend in the vicinity of the proposed
    access has carriageway widths varying between 5.4m and 7.2m 23. Existing
    carriageway widths along the A588 at the Fold House Farm bend vary between
    5.1m and 5.8m on approach to the bend. At the A588 Burned House Lane/B5377
    Park Lane/U22436 Cemetery Lane junction carriageway widths vary between
    5.2m and 6.8m on the approach to the junction 24.
85. The Council contend that to prevent any conflict with hedgerows located in close
    proximity of the carriageway and street infrastructure, HGVs are likely to be off-set
    from the edge of the carriageway which would likely narrow the true running width
    of the highway in areas where there is a constrained width, particularly on
    Lancaster Road, which would likely cause lane discipline not to be maintained.
    This would cause vehicular conflicts should the carriageway be accommodating
    two-way HGV movements. This could result in one or both of the HGVs reversing
    on the live highway network to find a suitable passing place to wait while another
    HGV passes. Such reversing movements would be detrimental to the interests of
    highway safety. There does not appear to be any suitable locations on the local
    highway network where development related HGVs could wait for other vehicles to
    pass without creating a highway safety risk for other road users with a
    consequence that HGV drivers may resort to unsuitable locations to wait.
86. I observed at my site visit that HGVs meeting each other and traveling in opposite
    directions at the above locations encounter areas of the highway which
    necessitate sharp braking movements and require considerable driver skill and
    care to enable vehicles to pass at slow speed. I have no reason to doubt the
    Council’s view that there may be occasions where the insufficient room to pass
    may lead to one or both vehicles reversing to create room. Reversing HGVs
    would have limited rear vision and such reversing may occur at locations
    frequented by pedestrians, cyclists and equestrians. In such scenario there is also
    limited verge provision for pedestrians to seek refuge whilst vehicles are passing
    or reversing.
87. These issues are also present at the Fold House Farm bend in Pilling where there
    is evidence of damage to properties and street furniture, and the Burned House
    Lane junction with Park Lane and Cemetery Road which has a severe 90-degree
    bend with poor intervisibility between road users on the A588. This is a location
    where large vehicle movements necessitate encroaching into the opposing
    carriageway. Therefore, the existing highway safety issues at this location may be
    exacerbated by the increase in HGVs generated by the appeal scheme resulting in
    an increased potential for large vehicles to meet each other at the bend.
88. At the A588 Burned House Lane/Park Lane/Cemetery Lane junction, there have
    been four personal injury collisions recorded in the last five years. Two out of the
    four collisions involved HGVs with one of the two involving an HGV and a
    pedestrian.


23
     PoE Ryan Derbyshire – Appendix 6
24
     PoE Ryan Derbyshire – Appendix 12


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
Appeal Decision 6002168


89. The recent road safety record (2000-2024) for Lancaster Road shows that there
    has only been one personal injury accident in the last five years. This occurred in
    2023 to the south of Vine House and involved two vehicles – a single decker bus
    and a car. There have been no recordable accidents in the last five years at the
    Fold House Farm bend.
90. Traffic survey data recorded in 2023 and measured directly adjacent to the
    proposed site access on Lancaster Road suggests that the average weekday
    traffic flows recorded during the busiest weekday hour was 08:00-09:00 during
    which there were 302 vehicle movements and the average number of hourly
    movements throughout the core 12-hour daytime period (07:00-19:00) was 231,
    which averages at around 4 vehicle movements per minute.
91. The survey data shows that there were 16 HGV movements along Lancaster Road
    during the course of an average weekday, with 8 of these in the westbound
    direction and 8 in the eastbound direction. Lancaster Road is used by public
    buses and school buses. There are two public bus services that route along
    Lancaster Road and eight school bus services.
92. The Appellant’s evidence identifies potential mitigation works including the
    potential widening of carriageway widening along parts of Lancaster Road by
    approximately 0.3m on both sides involving the removal of parts of the verge and
    provision of new signage. At the A588 Fold House Farm Bend and the
    A588/Cemetery Lane/Park Lane Junction new signage is also proposed.
93. The Council considers that insufficient evidence has been provided to demonstrate
    the delivery of the proposed widening scheme works particularly as street furniture
    and infrastructure may provide constraints to the deliverability of the scheme.
    Removal of parts of the existing relatively narrow verge would likely reduce the
    available extent of the refuge area to the detriment of pedestrian and equestrian
    safety. Moreover, I have no clear evidence of an implementation mechanism to
    secure such widening proposed by the Appellant. There is some ambiguity
    whether the proposed widening scheme forms part of the mitigation strategy.
94. I recognise that the provision of signage could be made the subject of a planning
    condition. However, there is no clear evidence to demonstrate that proposed
    signage could be accommodated within the extent of the adopted highway without
    the need to occupy third party land. The Council highlight the fact that such
    signage must comply with the relevant guidance, including requirement that signs
    do not encroach within 0.5m of the carriageway edge and are located within the
    highway boundary unless supported by a legal agreement. However, I consider
    that the proposed signage would not mitigate the underlying constraints but would
    merely highlight them.
95. Both main parties have provided detailed evidence regarding these suggested
    mitigation measures. Although I have been provided with a suggested planning
    condition relating to off-site highway works, there remains some degree of
    ambiguity regarding which aspects of these mitigation works are firmly proposed.
    The Appellant’s highways witness is quite clear in that he does not consider that
    widening works are necessary 25 and suggests that signage would be necessary
    “should the Inspector deem it essential”26. As such, there is some degree of

25
     PoE Jim Budd – paragraph 4.54
26
     PoE Jim Budd – paragraph 4.60


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
Appeal Decision 6002168


      uncertainty on behalf of the Appellant’s highway witness regarding the need for
      mitigation measures.
96. Mitigation measures are also proposed at the A588/Lancaster Road junction which
    comprises a remodelling of the junction. I have no evidence to suggest that the
    Council is otherwise content with this proposed mitigation which is included in an
    agreed suggested planning condition.
97. I also have taken into account the proposed Traffic Management Scheme provided
    in the UU which could enable the phasing of outbound HGV movements exiting
    the site to minimise conflict with other incoming HGVs and other HGV traffic. This
    also provides for restrictions on HGV movements during the morning and
    afternoon school opening and closing times.
98. The Council’s evidence sets out that the A588 in particular already exhibits
    multiple, well‑documented deficiencies. The key issues include insufficient forward
    visibility, inadequate carriageway width, verge overrun, loss of carriageway edge
    support, repeated vehicle strikes on boundary walls and traffic signs, and locations
    where HGVs are unable to maintain lane discipline. My site visit observations lead
    me to conclude that these issues are not hypothetical as they are occurring under
    existing traffic conditions. I accept that the proposed Traffic Management Scheme
    provided in the UU may mitigate some degree of conflict between HGVs arising
    from the proposed development. However, it cannot acceptably mitigate the risk
    of HGVs associated with the proposed development encountering other HGVs
    travelling along the local highway network.
99. The Appellant accepts that there will be a notable percentage increase in HGV
    usage on the local highway network as a consequence of the appeal scheme,
    although I accept that such usage would be low in absolute terms. Whilst there is
    no survey data of existing pedestrian activity on Lancaster Road, or indeed other
    areas of the local highway network, I do not consider that it can be concluded that
    the road is rarely used be pedestrians. In addition, there is no compelling data
    regarding the frequency and level of use of the local highway network by cyclists
    and equestrian users. Notwithstanding the lack of data regarding other road
    users, it is clear that Lancaster Road and other parts of the local network are used
    by such users and that there will be a notable increase in HGV traffic associated
    with the proposed development.
100. It is clear that the local highway network proposed to be used by HGVs arising
     from the proposed development has width and alignment constraints that do make
     it difficult for two-way HGV movements to pass. Whilst some mitigation,
     predominantly in the form of signage is proposed there is no clear evidence that
     this could be installed within the highway boundary without the need to utilise third
     party land for which I have also no evidence of any agreements to enable such
     land to be used. Furthermore, as set out above, there appears to be some degree
     of conflict between the proposed mitigation works considered by the Council at the
     planning application stage and the evidence presented in this appeal where the
     Appellant’s highway witness does not appear to consider that the extent of the
     initial proposed mitigation is wholly necessary.
101. Overall, the proposed development would result in the potential for reversing
     movements to occur on the live carriageway in areas of constrained road width or
     the potential for sharp braking. This has highway safety implications not only for


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
Appeal Decision 6002168


      other vehicles but also for the most vulnerable road users including pedestrians,
      cyclists and equestrians who are known to travel in the area and have limited
      verge protection. This situation potentially increases the likelihood of collisions
      and accidents to the detriment of highway safety and can only be considered as
      resulting in a severe impact from a safety perspective to the local highway
      network.
Highway safety conclusion
102. Policy TR6(4) of the Framework sets out that development proposals should be
     refused if they would have an unacceptable impact on highway safety. This
     National Decision-Making Policy is unambiguous.
103. I have considered the extent to which Policy DM2 of the Local Plan Part 1 and
     Policy CDMP 6 of the Wyre Local Plan remain consistent with the Framework.
     These policies set out, amongst other things, that minerals development should
     demonstrate that harmful environmental impacts can be eliminated or reduced to
     acceptable levels and that road safety and the safe, efficient and convenient
     movement of all highway users is not prejudiced and that safe and adequate
     vehicular access to and from a proposal site would be provided. These polices
     remain consistent with the provisions of Policy TR6(4) of the Framework and
     therefore should be afforded full weight.
104. I have found above that the proposed access arrangements would present an
     unacceptable highway safety risk as a consequence of the required visibility splays
     not being attained. In addition, there is the potential that the proposed
     development would exacerbate existing highway safety issues as a consequence
     of an increased number of HGVs using the local highway network that has width
     constraints. Proposed mitigation measures would not satisfactorily address these
     underlying constraints but would merely highlight them.
105. For the above reasons, the proposed development would present an unacceptable
     highway safety risk. Consequently, it would contrary to the provisions of Policy
     TR6(4) of the Framework, Policy DM2 of the Local Plan Part 1 and Policy CDMP6
     of the Wyre Local Plan.
Living conditions
Amenity Dust
106. The planning application was supported by a Dust and Air Quality27 chapter of the
     ES and an Air Quality Assessment Report 28. This was supplemented by an
     “Updated Air Quality Assessment” 29 (Updated AQA). The assessment considered
     potential dust sources associated with the proposals and best practice measures
     were recommended in order to minimise any such disturbance at sensitive
     receptors. It was concluded that any dust occurrence event would be limited and
     of short duration and minimised by the implementation of the dust control
     measures. It also considered potential impacts due to PM10 (particles less than 10
     micrometres in diameter) and PM2.5 (particles less than 2.5 micrometres in
     diameter) dust particle sizes and concluded that air quality objectives (AQOs)
     would not be exceeded.

27
   CD1.08
28
   CD1.22
29
   CD3.06


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    18
Appeal Decision 6002168


107. It was considered unlikely that cumulative impacts would arise and the proposed
     operations were deemed to likely have a negligible effect on nearby sensitive
     receptors. The assessment included proposed in-design mitigation measures
     along with a summary of management and control measures that could be
     implemented specifically in relation to fugitive dust.
108. The above information was reviewed and supplemented by the evidence of the
     Appellant’s dust and air quality witness. The assessment considered the guidance
     provided in the Institute of Air Quality Management (IAQM) ‘Guidance on the
     Assessment of Mineral Dust Impacts for Planning’ 30. It followed the recommended
     qualitative approach in considering the potential for any such dust to impact
     existing nearby properties and land uses through assessment of the distance and
     orientation to receptors, prevailing weather conditions, topography and screening.
     The IAQM Guidance advises that for a dust event to occur there must also be a
     failure of dust control measures.
109. Particles greater than 30µm (micrometres) make up the greatest proportion of dust
     emitted from mineral processing and largely deposit within 100 m of sources.
     Particles between 10 and 30µm are likely to travel from 250m to 400m, while sub
     10µm particles, which make up a small proportion of dust emitted from most
     mineral processing operations, may travel up to 1 km from sources.
110. The IAQM guidance is clear that adverse dust impacts from sand and gravel sites
     are unlikely beyond 250m as measured from the nearest dust generating activities.
     Accordingly, the guidance advises that where receptors are not located within
     250m of a sand and gravel site, it can normally be assumed that a detailed dis-
     amenity dust assessment would not be required.
111. The Updated AQA sets out the distances from the nearest receptors to the closest
     working area. However, I accept the Council’s view that these distances should
     more realistically be shown to the property boundary rather than the building
     façade. The appeal proposals would place six of the receptor properties identified
     being classed as “close”, i.e. within 100m of the closest working area.
112. The Appellant’s evidence considers the likely dis-amenity dust impact at a number
     of sensitive receptors including Whinmoor Fold, Woodlands, Red Lea, Bourbles
     Farm, Ourhome, Mytax/New England Cottage, which are identified as being close.
     Other properties including, amongst others and Greenacres, The Beeches and Old
     Nickson’s Cottage are also considered which are situated in excess of 100m from
     the closest working area. Dis-amenity dust is generally accepted to be greater in
     size than 10 microns and can cause dust soiling.
113. The evidence provided by the Appellant in the Inquiry includes an outline of
     measures that would form the basis of a Dust Management Plan (DMP) to mitigate
     the effect of dust on sensitive receptors. In my experience the submission of, and
     adherence to, a DMP is a usual requirement for mineral development and is
     predominantly secured by means of a planning condition. It also recognises that
     the greatest risk of any dust deposition at the properties nearest the extraction
     boundary would be during the initial soil stripping and other near-surface activities,
     including restoration works.



30
     CD12.11


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   19
Appeal Decision 6002168


114. Although the Council expresses some doubt that the DMP would necessarily
     control dust impacts to acceptable levels, including those arising from the use of
     internal haul roads, I have no compelling evidence to suggested that the draft
     measures contained therein would be insufficient to control dust emissions.
     Moreover, the submission of a DMP would be the subject of a planning condition,
     were I minded to allow this appeal, which would provide an opportunity for the
     Council to undertake a degree of scrutiny of the measures contained therein.
     Indeed, the Council’s dust witness did recognise that the proposed mitigation
     would likely require enhancement.
115. Subject to the measures in the suggested DMP, as could be supplemented by the
     imposition of a suitable planning condition, the Appellant’s evidence suggests that
     there would be slight adverse dust impacts during soil stripping and soil bund
     construction and removal at Bourbles Farm, Ourhome, Red Lea, Woodlands, Old
     Nicholsons Cottage and Mytax, the latter property is also predicted to receive
     negligible to slight adverse dust impacts during some extraction and processing
     operations. In respect of other properties in the vicinity of the site, the dust
     impacts were identified as being negligible.
116. I recognise that initial soil stripping, bund formation and removal, and soil
     replacement operations are usually short-lived activities of around 4 - 6 weeks
     duration per phase of the proposed development. Whilst weather conditions such
     as high winds and prolonged dry conditions could exacerbate the potential for dust
     impact, this can be addressed by the implementation of the DMP secured by a
     planning condition. The proposed mitigation measures are consistent with the
     IAQM guidance which recognises that dust mitigation is a dynamic process
     involving the review of the mitigation applicable to site conditions.
117. In addition, the importation of the inert fill material for restoration would be
     controlled under an Environmental Permit to be issued by the Environment Agency
     under the requirements of the Environmental Permitting (England and Wales)
     Regulations 2016. The Permit would require the management and operation of
     the permitted operations and directly associated activities using Best Available
     Techniques (BAT) to prevent, or where that is not practicable, reduce emissions.
     The Permit would likely include several conditions and would be expected to
     include standard boundary conditions in relation to dust and other aerial
     emissions.
118. There is no qualitive and quantitive guidance or any UK statutory standards that
     can clearly define the amount of dust by which amenity impacts can be readily
     assessed. However, I have no reasons to doubt the findings of the Appellant’s
     dust witness that the worst-case scenario of operations on the site would result in
     slight adverse dust impact at the properties identified above.
119. I recognise that the categorisation by the Appellant of “slight adverse” dust impact
     is a subjective view for which there is no guidance available to make an informed
     judgement of the disamenity effect of this view. The Council considers that the
     magnitude of dust soiling effects at some receptor locations are underestimated by
     the Appellant. However, in my view, the Appellant’s dust witness is well
     experienced to enable a comparative judgement to be made of the magnitude of
     dust impact in terms of its amenity effects. Whilst I recognise that those properties
     identified as being sited “close” to the site operations are more likely to be affected
     by dust deposition this does not suggest that such dust impact cannot be managed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   20
Appeal Decision 6002168


         to remain within acceptable levels as a consequence of the active employment of
         a robust DMP.
120. In my view, the amenity effects of dust in this case would not be sufficient to
     warrant the dismissal of this appeal and the resulting significance of disamenity
     effects from fugitive dust emissions would not be significant.
Air Quality
121. Fugitive dust (particulate matter) that could be generated by the proposed
     operations will include a proportion of ‘fine particulate matter’, also referred to as
     ‘suspended particulate matter’ (as PM10 and PM2.5). The Updated AQA
     accordingly also included a PM10 and PM2.5 Assessment.
122. I accept that the main potential effect from mineral sites is disamenity dust due to
     deposition of large (>30 μm) and intermediate (10-30 μm) sized dust particles
     which are not respirable 31. The sand and gravel material itself is much larger than
     PM10 or PM2.5 (sand being described as having a grain size of 62-200 μm and
     gravel >200μm) and none of the proposed on-site activities would not involve any
     abrasive processes that would break the sand into smaller particles, particularly
     PM2.5.
123. The Updated AQA made reference to the Air Quality Annual Status Report (ASR)
     published in 2021 by Wyre Borough Council. This details the results of ambient air
     quality monitoring undertaken by the Council up to the end of 2020 and at the time
     was the most up to date publicly available ASR. Wyre Borough Council has since
     provided an updated ASR (June 2025) 32, which details the ambient air quality
     monitoring undertaken by the Council up to the end of 2024.
124. The 2021 ASR did not identify any areas of concern in relation to PM10 or PM2.5
     and consequently the Council did not undertake any monitoring for PM10 or PM2.5
     within its area. The 2025 ASR identified that this remains the situation with no
     areas of concern identified with regards PM10 or PM2.5.
125. The PM10 and PM2.5 concentrations provided in the Updated AQA were therefore
     based on predicted background concentrations provided by Defra. This data is
     published by Defra in the form of predicted background concentration maps for
     1km x 1km grid squares across the UK.
126. This latest predicted data is based on 2021 ambient monitoring and meteorological
     data. The maximum average background PM10 and PM2.5 concentrations for the
     grid squares in which the site and nearest receptors are located are predicted to
     be substantially below the relevant objectives. These are predicted to fall slightly
     over time. Predicted background concentrations of PM2.5 are also well below the
     interim (non-legal) target for 2028 of 12 μg/m3, new interim (non-legal) target for
     2030 of 10 μg/m3 and future legal target for 2040 of 10 μg/m3.
127. The Rule 6 Party provided evidence of an Air Quality Mesh Pod Particulate Study.
     This reports the results of a particulate matter monitoring exercise over a 3-week
     period in September-October 2023. I accept the Appellant’s view that a Mesh Pod
     is recognised as providing ‘indicative’ result. The corresponding report does not
     provide any specific details or photographs of the monitor location, and no

31
     Page 17 IAQM guidance on mineral dust
32
     CD12.20


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     21
Appeal Decision 6002168


      indication that the location met recommended stringent criteria for the siting of
      such monitors. Results are only provided for PM2.5 and not PM10. Furthermore,
      only the raw hourly mean results are presented with no statistical analysis,
      calculation of 24-hour means and overall means. Therefore, I accept that the data
      has only limited utility.
128. The Rule 6 Party report states that the recorded results show a baseline level of
     PM2.5 of 6.48 µg/m3 at the site which is higher than that reported by the Appellant
     of 5.68 µg/m3. However, I accept the Appellant’s view that these figures are not
     directly comparable, not least due the very different averaging periods referred to,
     and the Mesh Pod forming no more than an ‘indicative’ analyser.
129. The IAQM Guidance on mineral dust advises that where the long-term background
     PM10 concentration is less than 17 µg/m3 there is little risk that additional
     contributions from a mineral site would lead to an exceedance of the annual mean
     air quality objective. The guidance advises that if this is the case then no further
     consideration is typically required. The Defra data predicts annual mean
     background concentrations of 8.47-9.61 µg/m3 in the locality of the Site. These
     are well below the recommended screening value of 17 µg/m3. On this basis, I
     accept that no further consideration of potential PM10 impacts from the proposed
     development would be required.
130. With regard to PM2.5 emissions, any PM10 generated by the proposed activities
     would also include a proportion of PM2.5 as a sub-fraction. The IAQM Guidance
     advises that for quarries most of any suspended dust generated will be in the
     coarse sub-fraction (PM2.5-10), rather than in the fine (PM2.5) fraction. The Updated
     AQA included further assessment of PM2.5. This assumed an additional load of 0.5
     µg/m3 PM2.5 attributable (as an annual mean) to the proposed operations to the
     existing background level.
131. As set out above, current predicted background PM2.5 concentrations in the area
     are well below all these future targets already at 4.77-5.39 µg/m3, 48-54% of the
     more stringent target of 10 µg/m3. Any additional contribution of the quarrying
     operations to background concentrations total annual mean PM2.5 concentrations
     would still remain well below these targets.
132. The suggested proposed dust mitigation measures to manage fugitive dust
     emissions would also serve to reduce potential PM10 and PM2.5 emissions. Taking
     into account the submitted evidence, I consider that contributions of PM10 and
     PM2.5 from any fugitive dust from the proposed development to local air quality at
     relevant receptors would not result in significant adverse effects.
Vehicle Emissions
133. The Updated AQA also considered the HGV movements to and from the proposed
     development which would result in NOx / NO2 and PM10 emissions and hence
     potential adverse impacts on local air quality. The appeal site does not lie within
     an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA). The nearest AQMA is located
     approximately 8km to the southwest of the site and within the centre of Poulton-le-
     Fylde.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   22
Appeal Decision 6002168


134. IAQM guidance on air quality and planning 33 provides screening criteria for
     additional traffic movements to be introduced as part of a development above
     which an air quality assessment is advised. The evidence suggests that the
     proposed development would result in Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT) of 50
     2-way movements. The screening criteria for HGVs are +100 AADT where distant
     from an AQMA and +25 AADT where within or close to an AQMA. As set out
     above, the appeal site and local road network are relatively distant from any
     AQMAs or identified areas of potential air quality concern.
135. At 50 HGV AADT, the 2-way on-road HGV movements associated with the
     proposed development would be well below the screening criteria of +100 HGV
     AADT. HGV movements would be further reduced during the periods of the
     development when only export or import occur. The Dust SoCG identified that the
     main parties agree that potential air quality impacts from traffic emissions are not
     likely to be significant.
136. Taking the above factors into account, I therefore consider that the contribution of
     the proposed quarry related HGV exhaust emissions to the local air quality would
     not be significant.
Noise
137. The planning application was accompanied by a Noise Assessment contained
     within Appendix 9 of the ES 34. Following a request by the Council, pursuant to
     Regulation 25 of the Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations, a further
     “Updated Noise Assessment” 35 was provided, dated 19 August 2024, which
     updated and superseded the Noise Assessment contained within Appendix 9 of
     the ES.
138. The minerals sections of the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) advise that noise
     limits should be established through a planning condition, at the noise-sensitive
     property that does not exceed the background noise level (LA90,1h) by more than
     10dB(A) during normal working hours (0700-1900). Where it will be difficult not to
     exceed the background level by more than 10dB(A) without imposing
     unreasonable burdens on the mineral operator, the limit set should be as near that
     level as practicable. In any event, the total noise from the operations should not
     exceed 55dB(A) LAeq, 1h (free field)36. The PPG recognises that temporary
     operations such as topsoil and overburden stripping, bund formation and the final
     restoration processes are often noisier than extraction operations, but these are of
     relatively short duration. Consequently, it advises that increased temporary
     daytime noise limits of up to 70dB(A) LAeq 1h (free field) for periods of up to 8
     weeks in a year at specified noise-sensitive properties should be considered to
     facilitate essential site preparation and restoration work and construction of baffle
     mounds 37.
139. The Updated Noise Assessment included measurements of existing ambient noise
     levels in the proximity of properties in the vicinity of the appeal site, a summary of
     background noise levels at those properties and an assessment of predicted worst
     case site noise levels as a consequence of short-term activities, such as soil

33
   CD12.12, Table 6.2
34
   CD1.21
35
   CD3.05
36
   Paragraph: 021 Reference ID: 27-021-20140306
37
   Paragraph: 022 Reference ID: 27-022-20140306


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          23
Appeal Decision 6002168


        stripping and bund construction and normal mineral extraction operations. The
        calculation of potential noise levels predicted at nearby noise sensitive properties
        was based on the methodology outlined within Annex F of BS 5228-
        1:2009+A1:2014 ‘Code of practice for noise and vibration control on construction
        and open sites. Part 1: Noise’. This guidance details methods to estimate noise
        from ‘open sites’ which can include quarries and waste disposal sites.
140. All noise level predictions were calculated with the combinations of plant working
     at the closest point to the assessment location. The Updated Noise Assessment
     therefore considers predictions are worst-case scenarios which may be of
     relatively short duration. However, they indicate the potential highest LAeq,1h
     noise level to which a particular property or group of properties may be exposed
     during the working of the site. This worst-case situation may occur intermittently
     over the lifetime of the site, but the longer-term noise levels perceived outside of
     the site boundary would normally be significantly less.
141. The Updated Noise Assessment identifies that potential noise levels from short-
     term activities are expected to remain within the temporary daytime limit of 70dB
     recommended within the PPG. With regard to normal operations, the assessment
     identified that potential noise levels from normal site operations could exceed the
     background level by more than 10dB at properties comprising Woodlands, Red
     Lea and Bourbles Farm. However, the proposed screening bunds reduce potential
     noise levels to within the 55dB limit at all assessment locations and near to the
     LA90 + 10 dB(A) criteria as practicable in accordance with the PPG.
142. It further identified that, in reality, site activities likely to generate noise levels that
     are in excess of 10 dB above the background noise levels will be infrequent and
     short lived. Furthermore, as extraction operations will occur on a campaign basis,
     meaning that there will be significant periods during the life of the scheme where
     only very minimal operations are occurring in the wider extraction areas, the
     longer-term noise levels are anticipated to be significantly lower.
143. With reference to the noise exposure hierarchy, potential impacts are considered
     to be at or below the ‘Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level’ (LOAEL) at the
     majority of noise-sensitive premises with the potential for effects marginally above
     the LOAEL but significantly below the ‘Significant Observed Adverse Effect Level’
     (SOAEL) at Woodlands, Red Lea and Bourbles Farm.
144. The Updated Noise Assessment also provided recommended noise limits for each
     noise sensitive property in the vicinity of the appeal site together with a number of
     noise control measures to be employed during operations at the site. It concluded
     that with the implementation of a range of best-practice control measures during
     the working of the quarry site, the overall noise impacts would unlikely be
     significant.
145. Prior to the opening of the Inquiry, the Appellant produced a “Technical Note”38
     regarding noise matters that considered the locations where the calculated site
     noise level would exceed a site noise limit based on the advice in the PPG i.e. not
     exceeding background noise levels plus 10 dB(A) up to a maximum of 55 dB
     LAeq, 1 hour. This identified that increasing some bund heights would result in the
     calculated site noise levels being no more than 10 dB(A) above the representative


38
     CD12.23


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      24
Appeal Decision 6002168


            background noise levels at all of the assessment locations. The following bund
            height increases were identified:
            •    Phase 1 – Woodlands – increase of 0.1 to a height of 10.1 metres AOD;
            •    Phase 1 – Red Lea - increase of even 0.2 metres to a height of 9.7 metres
                           AOD; and
            •    Phase 4 – Bourbles Farm – increase of 1.5 metres to a height of 11 metres
                           AOD.
146. The SoCG Noise identifies that the Council agrees that the adopted methodology
     for the assessment of noise impacts as set out in the Updated Noise Assessment
     is suitable. However, the Council does not agree with the Appellant findings
     regarding the predicted noise levels at some locations, principally among these
     being the “Woodlands” during normal operations and particularly during the short-
     term works.
147. The Appellant recognises that Phase 1 of the site is very close to Woodlands and
     Red Lea. However, this phase of the site contains the thickest mineral reserves
     up to 6 metres in depth and therefore the applicant wishes to maximise mineral
     recovery from this area. In my experience, soil screening bunds would normally
     be established on the site perimeter prior to any mineral working taking place to
     provide protection to nearby properties. However, adopting this practice within
     Phase 1 would sterilise the mineral below the bund footprint. Therefore, it is
     proposed to work the mineral in a 12m wide strip to the depth of the water table
     before backfilling the excavation to original ground levels.
148. In order to provide acoustic attenuation prior to the commencement of soil
     stripping operations in the vicinity of the above properties an acoustic fence,
     approximately 3.75m high, at a height of 10.1m AOD is proposed to be
     constructed along the site boundary in the vicinity of these properties. The
     evidence of the Appellant suggests that the prior construction of the fence would
     allow for the extraction of mineral to take place whist complying with the suggested
     site noise limits for routine operations of no more than 10 dB(A) above the
     background levels. The fencing would remain in place during bund construction
     operations.
149. The Council remained unconvinced that the proposed acoustic fence would
     achieve the required mitigation and that the 50 dB limit would be exceeded 39. This
     matter was the subject of considerable discussion in the Inquiry.
150. I recognise that the use of plant with low sound output levels, the reach of the
     excavator and the direction of mineral extraction can materially impact on the
     calculation of the anticipated noise levels in the vicinity of the Woodlands. I also
     recognise that the imposition of the suggested planning condition (proposed
     condition No.27) that stipulates noise levels at a number of properties in the
     vicinity of the site and the requirement for the submission of a Noise Management
     Plan (No. 28)40 would ensure the control of noise in the vicinity of noise sensitive
     properties.



39
     ID13
40
     ID47


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        25
Appeal Decision 6002168


151. I accept that the calculated noise levels are presented as a worst-case scenario
     and are unlikely to occur in practice. The predicted noise levels would all be within
     the guidelines set out in the PPG (Minerals) and would not exceed background
     noise levels by more than 10dB(A) during the site’s working hours. Furthermore,
     the site is being worked in phases and noise will drop away with distance from
     sensitive locations.
152. There is no doubt that Woodlands is a high sensitivity noise receptor. With the low
     background noise levels in the locality, I accept that the proposed development
     would be the principal noise source that is capable of affecting residential amenity.
     However, subject to the imposition of the suggested noise conditions, I am
     satisfied that the submitted evidence demonstrates that the site can be worked
     while keeping noise emissions to within environmentally acceptable limits as set
     out in the PPG (Minerals). Consequently, I do not consider that noise emitted from
     the site would give rise to a significant adverse effect. In my view, the evidence
     demonstrates that the proposed noise mitigation measures would enable a good
     standard of residential amenity to be achieved.
Conclusion on the effect of the proposed development on living conditions and Air
    Quality
153. Overall, I am satisfied that, subject to appropriate planning conditions setting out
     mitigation and compliance measures, the proposed development would not, by
     reason of noise, dust or poor air quality, have a significant adverse effect on the
     amenity of the area or the living conditions of those living nearby or using
     recreational features.
154. With regard to these impacts, the Council has identified conflict with Policy DM2 of
     the Local Plan Part 1 and Policy CDMP1 of the Wyre Local Plan. Taking into
     account the age of the policies contained within the Local Plan Part 1, I have
     considered the guidance provided in Policy M4(1)(b) and Policy P3 of the
     Framework.
155. Amongst other matters, Policy DM2 sets out that mineral developments will be
     supported where it can be demonstrated that the proposals will make a positive
     contribution to the residential amenity of those living nearby which will be achieved
     by the control of emissions from the proposal including dust and noise. In my
     view, Policy DM2 remains consistent with the overall objectives of Policy M4(1)(b)
     and Policy P3 of the Framework and therefore should be afforded full weight.
156. Taking into account my findings above, I find no conflict with the relevant
     provisions of Policy DM2 and no conflict with Policy CDMP1 of the Wyre Local
     Plan.
157. In coming to the above conclusion, I have also taken into account the Inspector’s
     Report for sand and gravel extraction at Ware Park, Wadesmill Road, Hertford
     (APP/M1900/W/17/3178839) 41. In particular, my attention was drawn to
     paragraphs 392 to 394 of the Report. In that case my colleague Inspector found
     that noise levels likely to be generated would be close to the acceptable limits set
     out in the Guidance. The Inspector was “not convinced, given the separation
     distances between the proposed excavation and nearby dwellings that there would
     be sufficient headroom here, between likely noise levels from the operation and

41
     CD8.02


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   26
Appeal Decision 6002168


      acceptable noise limits, to be confident that the proposed development would not,
      at times, result in an adverse noise impact that would harm the living conditions of
      nearby occupiers and the amenity of the area.”
158. It is rarely the case that appeal decisions on other sites will bring to light parallel
     situations and material considerations which are so similar as to provide
     justification for a decision one way or another. My conclusion in respect of the
     effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of nearby residents is
     based squarely on the evidence before me.
159. In the appeal case before me I have found that noise and dust effects would not
     exceed relevant guidance levels and therefore I have no substantive and
     compelling grounds to suggest that the living conditions of nearby residents would
     be harmed to an extent that would warrant the dismissal of this appeal on those
     grounds. For that reason, I do not consider that the appeal decision brought to my
     attention has a determinative influence on my consideration of the appeal case.
Other Matters
      Effect on the local economy
160. Interested parties and the Rule 6 Party consider that the presence of an open
     quarry in the area would have a potentially significantl impact on the viability of
     nearby local businesses. The perception of visual harm, traffic impact and dust
     associated with the proximity of the proposed development to existing local
     businesses, in particular those associated with leisure and equestrian activities, is
     considered to cause harm to their longer-term viability. In addition, it is considered
     that a quarry will inevitably make the area less attractive to visit and thereby have
     a detrimental effect on the tourist economy, particularly those using nearby
     camping and caravaning facilities.
161. There was no conclusive evidence provided in the Inquiry to make any reasonable
     judgement of the effect of the proposal on existing economic development in the
     local area. Whilst I accept that the proposed development would not provide many
     jobs, my attention was not drawn to any policy in the Development Plan that may
     set out a minimum level of jobs to be created in a development proposal.
162. I recognise the concerns that the proposal may be perceived as a detractor to
     some businesses. However, I am not convinced that these concerns would be
     likely to translate into material land use considerations if the appeal were to be
     allowed and the appeal scheme was regulated in accordance with the suggested
     planning conditions and an Environmental Permit issued by the Environment
     Agency in respect of the infilling operations.
163. It seems to me that the local concerns derive from a perception of harm. There is
     no evidence before me to conclusively demonstrate that quarrying activity has
     materially adversely affected economic development elsewhere in the country.
164. Although the proposal would generate a small degree of local employment, there
     is no evidence to suggest that this would be a significant benefit to the local
     economy due to the specialist nature of some of the quarrying plant. In my view
     such local benefits would be modest, but nonetheless beneficial. Given the nature
     and scale of the proposed operation, I consider that the likely effect on the
     economy would be a benefit of minor significance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    27
Appeal Decision 6002168


165. The perception of harm to the local economy can be a material planning
     consideration. However, I am satisfied that, in the absence of any substantive
     evidence to the contrary, there would be no material harm to economic
     development interests in the locality. In these circumstances, I consider that only
     limited weight is attributable to the perception of harm to the local economy. The
     scheme would not give rise to a significant conflict between land uses in the area.
         Effects of dust on human health
166. The effects of dust on health is not an issue for the Council but is a major concern
     for local residents and the Rule 6 Party and was reflected in many written and oral
     submissions.
167. A proportion of PM10 emitted from the proposed development could comprise
     respirable crystalline silica (RCS). Silica is a naturally occurring substance found
     in varying amounts in most rocks, sand and clay and the long-term inhalation of
     RCS may give rise to silicosis. There is understandably no evidence of what
     proportion of RCS may be emitted or how likely the extraction of the proposed
     minerals would generate RCS emissions as this cannot be determined with any
     degree of certainty. There is evidence that RCS risk is increased where minerals
     are crushed, whereas the appeal scheme would involve the processing of a damp
     raw material through a wet washing process to produce a finished material which
     is also inherently damp. This means that the potential for community exposure is
     low with minimal impact on air quality. However, RCS is a recognised hazard for
     personnel working at quarries.
168. The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) state that silicosis is a disease that has
     only been seen in workers from industries where there is a significant exposure to
     silica dust, such as in quarries and foundries, however, it should be noted that no
     cases of silicosis have been documented among members of the general public in
     Great Britain.
169. There is no UK established or recommended ambient air quality standard for RCS
     nor is there any recommended methodology for the assessment for potential RCS
     emissions to ambient air or potential off-site impacts. The AQA also considered
     the health effects of RCS and a Health Technical Note 42 was produced by the
     Appellant. The Technical Note identified that the change in air quality would be
     negligible and that the proposed development would remain well within air quality
     objectives protective of health. It further identified that the appeal proposal would
     not present any measurable risk to local community health.
170. In addition, in response to concerns raised by the Rule 6 Party the Appellant
     provided a Human Health Technical Note 43 which provided detailed responses to
     specific questions raised by the Rule 6 Party. Although the responses were
     discussed in the Inquiry, no contrary technical evidence was provided.
171. In my view the implementation of dust suppression measures in accordance with a
     Dust Management Plan would all serve to minimise the risk of any RCS emissions
     from the site. There is no compelling evidence that clearly demonstrates that the
     proposed development would pose a potential significant risk to the local
     population due to RCS.

42
     PoE Katrina Early Hawkins – Appendix KEH11
43
     ID36


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          28
Appeal Decision 6002168


172. I now turn to consider whether, in the absence of objective justification for the
     public health concerns raised with respect to air quality, land use consequences
     would flow from the perception of harm. It is clear from the submissions made that
     a significant number of existing residents in the area are concerned at the potential
     air quality impacts. Understandably, relatively few who cite this concern have
     engaged on an evidential basis. However, taking into account my findings above, I
     consider that only limited weight is attributable to the perception of harm to public
     health.
      Ecology and Effect on Protected Sites
173. As noted above, the appeal site is within 1.5km of Morecambe Bay and Duddon
     Estuaries SPA, Morecambe Bay SAC, Morecambe Bay Ramsar and Lune Estuary
     SSSI. It is also within 2.3km of Wyre Estuary SSSI. The Council’s reasons for the
     refusal of planning permission did not refer to any detrimental ecological impact
     nor any adverse impact on the above sites.
174. The ES accompanying the planning application included an ecological
     assessment. Prior to the determination of the planning application and to address
     the concerns of Natural England, a second season of overwintering bird surveys
     was undertaken during the 2023/24 period to better characterise the numbers of
     birds and species using the site and adjacent areas, zones of influence, the types
     of habitats found within the site and the appropriateness of mitigation measures.
     Further information was also provided to address impacts on other ecological
     interests raised by the Council's Ecologist.
175. Despite the submission of this information, at the time the planning application was
     determined Natural England advised that there was currently not enough
     information provided in the application to determine whether the likelihood of
     significant effects can be ruled out. In particular, Natural England advised that a
     Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) should be submitted to assess each
     potential impact pathway from the proposal for each nearby designated site
     supported by sufficient evidence to justify its conclusions.
176. In addition, the Council’s Ecologist also advised that the impacts on these
     protected sites cannot be concluded and recommended that a shadow Habitats
     Regulation Assessment (sHRA) is undertaken by the applicant. Without this
     assessment the Council’s Ecologist considered that was not possible to conclude
     that the impacts on the European Sites are acceptable and therefore there would
     be a conflict with Policy CDMP 4 of the Wyre Local Plan.
177. During the Inquiry, interested parties also raised concerns that the second season
     of overwintering bird surveys undertaken during the 2023/24 may have
     underscored the actual number of birds utilising the appeal site and its immediate
     surroundings. Consequently, it was contended that the survey cannot be relied
     upon.
178. For whatever reasons the above matters were not concluded prior to the
     determination of the planning application nor prior to the opening of the Inquiry.
     The Council’s Officer Report identified that the “…production of a shadow Habitats
     Risk Assessment is a major piece of work, the need for which has to be viewed in
     the context of the other issues that are raised by this application”. No conclusions
     were made in the Officer Report regarding this matter.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   29
Appeal Decision 6002168


179. Prior to the opening of Inquiry the Appellant produced a sHRA which was also
     forwarded to Natural England on 10 April 2026. This concluded that:
     • The development would not materially affect the population, distribution or
       viability of SPA qualifying species;
     • The application site does not constitute functionally critical land required to
       maintain SPA populations;
     • Any displacement of birds would be localised and accommodated within the
       wider landscape without ecological consequence at the SPA scale;
     • There would be no effect on the structure, function or supporting processes of
       the Morecambe Bay SAC;
     • The coherence of the ecological network supporting the European sites would
       be maintained.
     • There is no hydrological or water quality pathway by which the proposed
       development could affect the qualifying habitats of the site. Surface water is
       contained, attenuated, and controlled within the site, with discharge restricted to
       greenfield rates and subject to settlement and dilution processes.
180. The sHRA recommended that the requirements of Regulation 63 of the Habitats
     Regulations can be lawfully satisfied and that the proposed development may be
     consented without the need to proceed to further stages of the Habitats
     Regulations Assessment process (i.e. consideration of alternatives or Imperative
     Reasons of Overriding Public Interest).
181. Despite attempts by the Appellant to secure a response from Natural England on
     the findings of the sHRA during the course of the oral sessions of the Inquiry no
     such response was forthcoming. I also consulted Natural England following the
     closure of the oral aspects of the Inquiry. The response dated 23 June 2026,
     included a copy of the response which was sent to the Council dated 27 May 2025
     and the covering e-mail advised that the advice contained therein remains
     unchanged. I have no further information regarding the extent to which Natural
     England considered the content of the sHRA prior to making this response.
182. In my role as ‘competent authority’ I have taken into account the provisions of
     Regulation 63(1) of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017.
     This indicates the requirement for an Appropriate Assessment is only necessary
     where the competent authority is minded to give consent for the proposal. Given
     my conclusions on the main issue above relating to the highway safety
     considerations and the planning balance below, it is therefore not necessary for
     me to consider this matter in any further detail.
      Other matters
183. In addition to the impacts considered above, I have also taken into account other
     concerns raised by interested parties regarding, amongst other matters, including
     the potential effect of the proposed development on flood risk, the loss of
     recreational amenity for users of the nearby Public Rights of Way Network and a
     potential loss of outlook for the occupiers of some properties. Although the above
     matters have been carefully noted, they do not alter the main issues which have
     been identified as the basis for the determination of this appeal, particularly in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    30
Appeal Decision 6002168


      circumstances where the Council has not objected to the appeal scheme for these
      other reasons.
Unilateral Undertaking
184. The Appellants have provided a completed planning obligation in the form of a
     Unilateral Undertaking (UU) pursuant to section 106 of the Town and Country
     Planning Act 1990 which was signed on 12 May 2026. This includes a number of
     obligations relating to the submission of, and adherence to, a Traffic Management
     Scheme for approval by the Council to come into effect if the appeal is allowed and
     planning permission is granted.
185. I have taken into account the content and implications of the UU in my
     consideration of the highway implications of the proposed development above. I
     have also considered the obligations contained within the UU in light of the
     statutory tests contained in Regulation 122 of The Community Infrastructure Levy
     (CIL) Regulations 2010.
186. I am satisfied that the provisions set out in the UU are necessary to make the
     development acceptable in planning terms, are directly related to the development
     and fairly and reasonably related in scale to the development. The obligations
     meet the tests as set out within paragraph 58 of the Framework and CIL
     Regulation 122. I am also satisfied with the form, drafting and content of the UU.
187. As set out above in my consideration of the highway implications of the proposal, I
     therefore have attached weight to the provisions contained within the UU.
Planning Balance
188. Policy M3(1) of the Framework sets out that in assessing proposals for minerals
     development, substantial weight should be given to the benefits of mineral
     extraction and processing, including to the economy and that particular importance
     should be given to the maintenance of minimum reserves of aggregates. I have
     found that there is a proven and demonstrable need for the proposed development
     to contribute to the future supply of sand and gravel in this part of Lancashire. The
     proposal would make an important contribution to the landbank for sand and
     gravel in the County which faces a critical landbank and supply shortage. I have
     therefore attached significant weight to these benefits.
189. Subject to appropriate planning conditions, the proposed development would not,
     by reason of noise, dust or poor air quality, have a significant and demonstrable
     adverse effect on the amenity of the area or the living conditions and health of
     those living nearby.
190. However, I have found that the proposed development would present an
     unacceptable highway safety risk. As such it would be contrary to the provisions
     of Policy DM2 of the Local Plan Part 1 and Policy CDMP6 of the Wyre Local Plan.
     It would also be contrary to the provisions of National Decision-Making Policy
     TR6(4) of the Framework which clearly and unambiguously states that
     development proposals should be refused if they would have an unacceptable
     impact on highway safety.
191. Notwithstanding the weight that I have attached to the benefits of the proposed
     development, I consider that these would be significantly and demonstrably
     outweighed by the unacceptable highway safety risk that would be caused. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   31
Appeal Decision 6002168


      proposed development would be contrary to the provisions of the above
      Development Plan policies and Policy TR(6) of the Framework. Consequently, the
      evidence in this case leads me to the conclusion that the appeal should be
      dismissed.
Conclusion
192. For the above reasons, taking into account the Development Plan and the
     Framework as a whole, based on the evidence before me and all other matters
     raised, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



Stephen Normington
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   32
Appeal Decision 6002168


ANNEX A – APPEARANCES

FOR THE APPELLANT

John Barrett, Counsel

      He called
        Simon Rees BSc, MSc, C.Geol, FGS, MIQ    Director, Greenfield
                                                 Environmental Ltd
        Dr Robert Storey Beng, PhD, MIOA         Senior Consultant, WBM
                                                 Acoustic Consultants
        Katrina Early Hawkins BSc (Hons), MSc,   Chairman, Smith Grant LLP
        CENV, MIES, MIAQM, MISEP
        Jim Budd MSc, FCIHT                      Director, Singleton Clamp &
                                                 Partners
        Liam Toland BA (Hons), MSc, MRTPI        Director, Kedd Ltd


FOR LANCASHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
Constanze Bell, Counsel
      She called
        David Gray BSc (Hons), MIOA              Principal Acoustician,
                                                 AtkinsRéalis
        Matthew Edwards BSc (Hons), MSc          Associate in Air Quality and
        MIEnvSc, MIAQM, CSci                     Emissions Team, AtkinsRéalis
        Ryan Derbyshire BSc (Hons), MSc, MCIHT   Team Leader Highways
                                                 Development Control,
                                                 Lancashire County Council
        Richard Sharples BSc, MA, PGDip          Principal Planning Officer,
                                                 Lancashire County Council
INTERESTED PARTIES
Councillor Matthew Salter                        Lancashire County Council
Paul Ellis                                       Fylde Bird Club
Ashely Anderton                                  Chair Knott End and Preesall
                                                 Flood Action
Rob Billingham                                   Local resident
Carmel Harding                                   Lancaster Road Quarry
                                                 Boundary Residents Association
Paul O’Connor                                    Local resident


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   33
Appeal Decision 6002168


Peter Swarbrick                                    Chair Stalmine-with-Staynall
                                                   Residents Association
Ian Dale                                           Local resident
David Irvine                                       Chair Willowgrove Park
                                                   Residents Association
Councillor Collette Rushworth                      Wyre Borough Council
Victoria Dewhirst (read by Councillor Rushworth)   Local resident
Harry Hutcheon                                     Local resident
Pieter Burke                                       Local resident
Neil Cookson                                       Chair Pilling Parish Council
Carol Howden (read by Councillor Rimmer)           Local resident
Councillor Claire Rimmer                           Wyre Borough Council
Aaron Englander                                    Local resident
Mary Wood                                          Local resident
Bob Rushforth                                      Local resident
Mr Shields (read by Colin Murray)                  Local resident
Cat Smith MP                                       Member of Parliament for
                                                   Lancaster and Wyre
Marc Glass (read by Councillor Rushworth)          Local resident




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   34
Appeal Decision 6002168


ANNEX B
CORE DOCUMENTS


Core documents and associated Inquiry documents can be found on the Inquiry
Website which is accessible at:


https://www.lancashire.gov.uk/environment-and-planning/planning/bourbles-lane-
preesall/




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   35
Appeal Decision 6002168


ANNEX C
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED DURING THE INQUIRY (ID)


 Inquiry Document                               Description of Document
        (ID)
          ID1              Rule 6 Party Opening Statement

          ID2              Appellant Opening Statement

          ID3              Lancashire County Council Opening Statement

          ID4              Speaking Note of Paul Ellis

          ID5              Speaking Note of Rob Billingham

          ID6              Speaking Note of Paul O’Connor

          ID7              Speaking Note of Ian Dale

          ID8              Speaking Note of Councillor Matthew Salter

          ID9              Speaking Note and ownership evidence of Carmel Harding

         ID10              Revised Plans List submitted by the Appellant

         ID11              Electronic copy of revised plans

         ID12              Speaking Note of Peter Swarbrick

         ID13              Technical Noise Note submitted by Mr Gray

         ID14              Legal Opinion regarding location of Average Speed Cameras

         ID15              Technical Note relating to noise relating to Phase 1 Internal
                           works submitted by Dr Storey

         ID16              Speaking Note of David Irvine

         ID17              Revised List of Plans V1 15.04.26

         ID18              Revised Plan PA24-9 V3b – Conceptual Restoration

         ID19              Plan showing revised site visit walkover points V3 submitted by
                           Appellant

         ID20              Plan showing off-site site visit location points submitted by Rule 6
                           Party

         ID21              Speaking Note of Ashley Anderton



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        36
Appeal Decision 6002168



         ID22              Revised Agreed Description of Proposed Development

         ID23              Speaking Note of Councillor Collette Rushforth

         ID24              Speaking Note of Victoria Dewhirst

         ID25              Speaking Note of Mary Wood

         ID26              Speaking Note of Bob Rushforth

         ID27              Speaking Note of John Shields

         ID28              Speaking Note of Carol Howden

         ID29              Speaking Note of Councillor Claire Rimmer

         ID30              Speaking Note of Harry Hutcheon

         ID31              Speaking Note of Pieter Burks

         ID32              Speaking Note of Cat Smith MP

         ID33              Questions for written response from Br Buroni submitted by Rule
                           6 Party

         ID34              Technical Note TN01 submitted by Appellant to demonstrate site
                           access visibility splays

         ID35              Speaking Note of Marc Glass

         ID36              Health Technical Note provided by Dr Buroni in response to
                           questions raised by Rule 6 Party

         ID37              Email dated 21.4.26 from Xanthe Barker Wild

         ID38              Appeal Decision APP/R0660/W/24/3355974

         ID39              Objection to Revised Transport Statement dated December 2024
                           by Lancaster Road Quarry Boundary Residents Association

         ID40              Official Copy Title Plan and Register Entry LA754983

         ID41              Official Copy Title Plan and Register Entry LA905060

         ID42              Official Copy Title Plan and Register Entry LAN266168

         ID43              Official Copy Title Plan and Register Entry LA582412

         ID44              Closing Statement by Lancashire County Council

         ID45              Closing Statement by Rule 6 Party

         ID46              Closing Statement by Appellant

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       37
Appeal Decision 6002168


ANNEX D
LIST OF DOCUMENTS REQUESTED BY THE INSPECTOR AND SUBMITTED
AFTER THE CLOSE OF THE ORAL SESSIONS OF THE INQUIRY


 Inquiry Document                             Description of Document
        (ID)

         ID47              Revised Draft Planning Conditions

         ID48              Completed Unilateral Undertaking (dated 12 May 2026) which
                           provides for a Traffic Management Scheme




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      38
