Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by Samuel Watson BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002759
Land south of, Westwood Heath Road, Coventry CV4 8LG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ian Deverell against the decision of Warwick District Council.
•    The application Ref is W/25/0388.
•    The development is described as; outline planning permission (all matters reserved except for means
     of site access) for the erection of up to 140 homes, associated earthworks, infrastructure, public
     open space and landscape enhancements.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Outline planning
       permission (all matters reserved except for means of site access) for the erection
       of up to 140 homes, associated earthworks, infrastructure, public open space and
       landscape enhancements. at Land south of, Westwood Heath Road, Coventry
       CV4 8LG in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref W/25/0388, subject
       to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Ian Deverell against Warwick District
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The proposal before me has been made in outline with only the matter of access
       being considered at this stage. All other matters, namely appearance, landscaping,
       layout and scale, have been reserved for a subsequent application. I understand
       from the appellant’s case that the submitted drawings, in these respects, are for
       illustrative purposes only, I have considered them as such.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on an area of safeguarded land
Reasons
5.     The appeal site comprises a field off Westwood Heath Road on the edge of
       Coventry. The site is within a larger area of land designated as safeguarded land
       by Policy DS21 of the Local Plan (the LP). This land is not allocated but is instead
       effectively set aside to meet needs that may arise in the future. Until allocated for a
       specific use, the land is considered to be open countryside and is protected from
       development that may prejudice the future comprehensive development of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002759


       safeguarded land. The appeal site is also within the area covered by LP Policy
       DS20 where significant housing growth is broadly directed.
6.     As accepted by the parties, the Council has an undersupply of housing and cannot
       demonstrate a five-year housing land supply. The proposal would make a notable
       contribution to this in an area where housing is directed, and where land is
       safeguarded to meet such a need. Whilst the Council’s reason for refusal alleges
       that the proposal would prejudice the long-term planning of the area, the Officer’s
       report for committee found the development to be consistent with Policy DS21 with
       regard to safeguarded land. Consequently, I have no reason to believe, given the
       nature of the development and its scale, that it would prejudice the comprehensive
       development of the safeguarded land.
7.     In my consideration I have been mindful that the Council have not substantiated
       their reason for refusal, and that their appeal statement confirms this. Instead, the
       Council’s committee report sets out how the proposal would comply with LP
       policies DS20 and DS21.
8.     Given the above, I find that the proposal would not adversely affect the
       safeguarded land so as to prejudice the ability for it to be utilised, if required, to
       meet longer-term strategic development needs. The proposal therefore complies
       with LP Policies DS20 and DS21 as outlined above.
Other Matters
9.     It is likely that the proposal would, through the increase in residents, their needs
       and associated vehicular movements, put additional pressure on local services,
       facilities and infrastructure. I am mindful that there are concerns these are already
       under strain from existing developments and, for instance, it is submitted that local
       schools are at full capacity. However, a completed planning obligation has been
       provided that sets out support for a broad range of matters.
10. In this instance the planning obligation secures contributions towards air quality,
    sports provision, healthcare, travel, highways and transportation, education, and
    library services. It also secures the provision of public open spaces, sustainable
    urban drainage and, if found necessary, carbon offsetting. The available evidence
    indicates that these obligations accord with the development plan and are
    necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms; are directly
    related to the development; and are fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind
    to it. Accordingly, the obligations in the deed meet the tests set out in the National
    Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the Community Infrastructure
    Levy (CIL) Regulations 2010 (as amended). Collectively, they therefore constitute
    a reason for granting planning permission in accordance with Regulation 122 of
    the CIL Regulations.
11. Given the above, I am also satisfied that the proposal, subject to this legal
    agreement, would not put unacceptable pressure on local services, facilities and
    infrastructure. While no direct contribution has been allocated to Tile Hill train
    station, I have not been provided with any evidence demonstrating that it would be
    adversely affected by the proposal. As such, I do not find this to be unacceptable.
12. I note concerns as to road speeds and safety of the road network outside of the
    appeal site. However, I am content that the proposed access, the above


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6002759


       agreement and the conditions set out below are sufficient to protect highway
       safety.
13. Concerns have been raised as to the effect of the proposal on natural habitats.
    While the proposal would likely have some impact on the provision of habitats at
    the appeal site, I am content that any harm could be minimised and mitigated
    through appropriate details, such as landscaping, at the reserved matters stage.
14. The appeal site is a field in an edge of settlement location where it is bounded by a
    mixture of dense suburban development and open fields. Matters of appearance,
    landscaping, layout and scale are reserved for later consideration. However,
    notwithstanding these reserved matters, it is clear that developing this field would
    affect the character and appearance of the appeal site and its surroundings.
    Particularly by way of reducing the rural character and appearance provided by the
    site. Nevertheless, the appeal site is read in close relationship to the settlement
    and significant recent residential development. Therefore, this rural contribution is
    more limited, and its loss would have only a modest impact. I am mindful that this
    impact could be further reduced through the reserved matters stage given the
    areas set aside for open spaces.
15. Although the appellant may have carried out a limited level of consultation in
    relation to this scheme, and while this may have been unhelpful for interested
    parties, it does not comprise a reason for dismissing the appeal.
16. I understand that the appeal site is currently being considered for re-inclusion
    within the Green Belt as part of the creation of a new development plan. However,
    this is only at a very early stage and so this plan has not been determinative in my
    considerations. I note that the Council found similarly in this regard. I have
    therefore not considered the appeal site and proposal against any local or national
    Green Belt policies.
Conditions
17. I have had regard to the conditions suggested by the Council and the advice on
    planning conditions set out by the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance.
    In the interests of clarity and enforceability, I have made some changes to the
    wording.
18. For certainty, I have set out the reserved matters as well as the timescale for their
    submission and the commencement of works. A condition is also necessary, for
    certainty and enforceability, requiring that the development is carried out in
    accordance with the approved plans.
19. Conditions are required to ensure the site is appropriately connected to the
    surrounding road network and safeguarded land. Details are also required in order
    to ensure an appropriate balance of housing types and sizes.
20. In the interest of living conditions assessments are needed as to air quality and
    noise. Also, in the interest of living conditions, as well as character and
    appearance, finished floor and site levels are required to be submitted. In order to
    protect the living conditions of nearby residents, highway safety and the efficient
    floor of traffic on the surrounding road network, a construction management plan is
    required.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6002759


21. Conditions are necessary in the interests of reducing carbon use and climate
    change, as well as reducing water usage. Further conditions are required to
    ensure the protection of trees and hedges, as well as protected species.
22. Given the nature of the site, details and controls related to contamination are
    required to protect future occupiers. Similarly, in the interests of protecting future
    residents and minimising fire risk, details of fire hydrants are necessary. In order to
    minimise flood risk and surface water run-off, conditions for drainage details have
    been set out below.
23. A condition has also been imposed for in the event that the development is
    phased, in order to ensure proper integration.
24. A condition has been suggested that requires the proposal be carried out in
    accordance with the Transport and Roads for Developments: The Warwickshire
    Guide 2022 and Highways Authority standards. However, I find such a condition is
    unnecessary at this stage as it is a matter reserved for later consideration.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
25. When assessing this proposal against the Council’s reasons for refusal I have not
    found any harm or conflict with the citied policies. However, it is clear from the
    submissions before me that harm would occur as a result of a loss of best and
    most versatile agricultural land and to character and appearance. The proposal
    would therefore conflict with Policies BE1 and NE4 of the Warwick District Local
    Plan 2011-2029 and Policies BG7, BG8 and NE5 of the Burton Green
    Neighbourhood Plan. While these do not comprise reasons for refusal, they are
    matters raised within the Council’s committee report and by interested parties.
26. However, I am mindful the proposal would only result in a relatively limited area of
    agricultural land being lost. Moreover, the land is identified by LP Policy DS20 as
    being suitable for residential development, and is safeguarded by LP Policy DS21
    for future development. As a result, I find the harm stemming from the loss of best
    and most versatile agricultural land, and from character and appearance, to be
    only modest.
27. As noted above, there is no dispute that the Council is unable to demonstrate a
    five-year housing land supply. The Government’s objective is to significantly boost
    the supply of housing and the proposal would provide 140 new dwellings, including
    affordable housing, and contribute towards the Council’s under supply. It would
    also lead to a time limited economic benefit during the construction phase, as well
    as social and economic benefits resulting from future occupiers. Given the scale of
    the proposal these matters would attract substantial weight.
28. Taking everything into account, I consider that the adverse impacts of granting
    planning permission would not significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
    benefits. Consequently, the application of Framework Paragraph 11d indicates that
    permission should be granted, and in the circumstances of this appeal, the
    material considerations above justify making a decision other than in accordance
    with the development plan.
29. Therefore, for the reasons outlined above, the appeal is allowed.

Samuel Watson

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6002759


INSPECTOR


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


     1)       Details of the appearance, landscaping, layout, and scale, (hereinafter called
              "the reserved matters") shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority before any development takes place and the
              development shall be carried out as approved.
     2)       Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
              planning authority not later than three years from the date of this permission.
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than two years
              from the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing numbers 01711_01 (Site Location Plan) and 26476-01 Rev B
              (Proposed Site Access Visibility Splays and Connections). The development
              shall not be occupied until the access works, visibility splays and offsite
              highway works (including provision for pedestrians and cyclists) have been
              constructed in general accordance with the scheme as shown on approved
              drawing 26476-01 Rev B.
     5)       The reserved matters submission(s) shall be submitted in general
              accordance with the submitted Parameter Plan (drawing number 01711_03
              Rev B).
     6)       The reserved matters submission in respect of the layout of the site shall
              demonstrate how the development will enable suitable connections to the
              adjoining safeguarded land for vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists.
     7)       The reserved matters submission(s) in respect of the layout, scale and
              appearance of the site shall be accompanied by a detailed schedule of the
              proposed housing mix for both the open market and affordable dwellings
              along with details of the proposed distribution of the affordable units across
              the site.
     8)       The reserved matters submission(s) shall be accompanied by a Noise
              Assessment Report to demonstrate that the detailed design of the
              development would provide an acceptable noise environment and standard
              of living conditions for the occupiers of the development hereby permitted.
     9)       The reserved matters submission(s) shall be accompanied by an air quality
              mitigation strategy for the development. The strategy shall include a scheme
              of Type 1, 2 and 3 mitigation measures in accordance with Warwick District
              Council’s Air Quality Supplementary Planning Document (January 2019). The
              development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved mitigation
              measures.
     10)      The reserved matters submission(s) in respect of the layout and scale of the
              site shall include details of the finished floor levels of all buildings, together
              with details of existing and proposed site levels on the application site and
              the relationship with adjacent land and buildings. The development shall be
              carried out in accordance with the approved levels.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
Appeal Decision 6002759


     11)      The reserved matters, where they include details of appearance, layout and
              scale of any dwelling shall include an Energy Statement which meets the
              requirements of Net Zero Carbon Development Plan Document Policy NZC1.
              The development shall be carried out in accordance with the measures
              contained within the Energy Statement.
     12)      Prior to any occupation within any phase of housing approved through
              reserved matters under condition 1, a scheme shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority which sets out how it will
              be verified that the as-built dwellings comply with the standards set out in
              NZCDPD Policy NZC1. The submitted scheme shall provide for sampling of
              at least 20% of the dwellings in the scheme, include at least one example of
              each house type, provide indicative timings for when each dwelling would be
              completed for the purposes of testing. The development shall be carried out
              in accordance with the approved scheme.
     13)      The development hereby permitted shall not commence unless and until a
              Construction Management Plan (CMP) has been submitted to and approved
              in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The CMP shall provide for: an HGV
              routeing plan showing the route from the Strategic Road Network and Key
              Route Network; the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors; site
              working hours and delivery times; the loading and unloading of plant and
              materials; the storage of plant and materials used in constructing the
              development; the erection and maintenance of a security hoarding including
              decorative displays and facilities for public viewing where appropriate; wheel
              washing facilities and other measures to ensure that any vehicle, plant or
              equipment leaving the application site does not carry mud or deposit other
              materials onto the public highway; measures to control the emission of dust
              and dirt during construction, together with any details in relation to noise and
              vibration; and a scheme for recycling / disposing of waste resulting from
              demolition and construction works. The development hereby permitted shall
              only proceed in strict accordance with the approved CMP.
     14)      No development or other operations (including all preparatory works) shall
              commence unless and until a tree and hedgerow protection scheme has
              been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
              The scheme shall include details of measures for the protection of the
              existing trees and hedgerows on and adjoining the site during the course of
              the development. The development shall only be carried out in accordance
              with the approved scheme. Where the approved details require the
              installation of protective fencing or ground protection, these shall be put in
              place before any development takes place, and before any equipment,
              machinery or materials are brought on to the site; and shall be retained until
              these have been removed from the site, following the completion of the
              relevant part of the development. Nothing shall be stored or placed in any
              area fenced in accordance with this condition, and the ground levels within
              those areas shall not be altered unless already approved.
     15)      Prior to the commencement of development approved by this planning
              permission, the following components of a scheme to deal with the risks
              associated with contamination of the site shall each be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority:



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6002759


              i)      A site investigation has been designed for the site using the information
                      obtained from the approved desk-top / preliminary study and any
                      diagrammatical representations (conceptual model). The investigation
                      shall be comprehensive enough to enable:
                      •     A risk assessment to be undertaken relating to human health
                      •     A risk assessment to be undertaken relating to groundwater and
                            surface waters associated on and off site that may be affected
                      •     An appropriate gas risk assessment to be undertaken
                      •     Refinement of the conceptual model
                      •     The development of a method statement detailing the remediation
                            requirements
              ii)     The site investigation results and the detailed risk assessment (i) and,
                      based on these, an options appraisal and remediation strategy giving
                      full details of the remediation measures required and how they are to be
                      undertaken.
              iii)    A verification plan providing details of the data that will be collected in
                      order to demonstrate that the works set out in (ii) are complete and
                      identifying any requirements for longer-term monitoring of pollutant
                      linkages, maintenance and arrangements for contingency action.
              iv)     A verification report containing the data identified in (iii).
              Any changes to these components require the express consent of the Local
              Planning Authority.
              The scheme shall be implemented strictly as approved. If, during
              development, contamination not previously identified, is found to be present
              at the site then development on the site shall cease and the Local Planning
              Authority shall be notified in writing within 2 working days. No further
              development shall take place within the affected part of the site unless and
              until an addendum to the method statement has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. This addendum to the
              method statement shall detail how this unsuspected contamination shall be
              dealt with. The development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance
              with the approved addendum to the method statement.
     16)      No development shall take place until a detailed surface water drainage
              scheme for the site, based on sustainable drainage principles has been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
              scheme shall subsequently be implemented in accordance with the approved
              details before the development is completed. The scheme to be submitted
              shall:
              i)    Undertake infiltration testing in accordance with the BRE 365 guidance
                    to clarify whether or not an infiltration type drainage strategy is an
                    appropriate means of managing the surface water runoff from the site.
              ii) Where infiltration is demonstrated to not be feasible, limit the discharge
                    rate generated by all rainfall events up to and including the 1 in 100 year
                    (plus an allowance for climate change) critical rain storm to the QBar
                    Greenfield runoff rate of 6.0l/s for the site in line with the approved
                    surface water drainage strategy (ref: 28997_01_230_01, revision B,
                    dated 5/6/25).



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      7
Appeal Decision 6002759


              iii) Provide drawings / plans illustrating the proposed sustainable surface
                   water drainage scheme. The strategy agreed to date may be treated as
                   a minimum and further source control SuDS should be considered
                   during the detailed design stages as part of a ‘SuDS management train’
                   approach to provide additional benefits and resilience within the design.
                   a. Provide drawings/plans illustrating sufficient maintenance easements
                   have been provided around the perimeter of the attenuation basin and
                   the top of bank of the southern watercourse.
              iv) Provide detail drawings including cross sections, of proposed features
                   such as infiltration structures, attenuation features, and outfall
                   structures. These should be feature-specific demonstrating that such the
                   surface water drainage system(s) are designed in accordance with ‘The
                   SuDS Manual’, CIRIA Report C753.
              v) Provide detailed, network level calculations demonstrating the
                   performance of the proposed system. This should include:
                   •     Suitable representation of the proposed drainage scheme, details
                         of design criteria used (incl. consideration of a surcharged outfall),
                         and justification of such criteria where relevant.
                   •     Simulation of the network for a range of durations and return
                         periods including the 1 in 2 year, 1 in 30 year and 1 in 100 year
                         plus 40% climate change events
                   •     Results should demonstrate the performance of the drainage
                         scheme including attenuation storage, flows in line with agreed
                         discharge rates, potential flood volumes and network status.
                         Results should be provided as a summary for each return period.
                   •     Evidence should be supported by a suitably labelled
                         plan/schematic (including contributing areas) to allow suitable
                         cross checking of calculations and the proposals.
              vi) Provide plans such as external levels plans, supporting the exceedance
                   and overland flow routeing provided to date. Such overland flow routing
                   should:
                   •     Demonstrate how runoff will be directed through the development
                         without exposing properties to flood risk.
                   •     Consider property finished floor levels and thresholds in relation to
                         exceedance flows. The LLFA recommend FFLs are set to a
                         minimum of 150mm above surrounding ground levels.
              vii) Recognise that exceedance can occur during any storm event due to a
                   number of factors therefore exceedance management should not rely on
                   calculations demonstrating no flooding.
     17)      No occupation shall take place until a Verification Report for the installed
              surface water drainage system for the site based on the approved Flood Risk
              Assessment (28997-FLD-0101 Rev C) has been submitted to and approved
              in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The details shall include:
              i)    Demonstration that any departure from the agreed design is in keeping
                    with the approved principles.
              ii) Any As-Built Drawings and accompanying photos
              iii) Results of any performance testing undertaken as a part of the
                    application process (if required / necessary)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6002759


              iv)     Copies of any Statutory Approvals, such as Land Drainage Consent for
                      Discharges etc.
              v)      Confirmation that the system is free from defects, damage and foreign
                      objects
     18)      None of the dwellings hereby permitted shall be occupied until a detailed site
              specific maintenance plan for the approved surface water drainage system
              has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority. The maintenance plan shall:
              i)   Provide the name of the party responsible, including contact name,
                   address, email address and phone number.
              ii) Include plans showing the locations of features requiring maintenance
                   and how these should be accessed.
              iii) Provide details on how surface water each relevant feature shall be
                   maintained and managed for the life time of the development.
              iv) Be of a nature to allow an operator, who has no prior knowledge of the
                   scheme, to conduct the required routine maintenance
     19)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in full accordance
              with:
              i)    The mitigation measures for badger, nesting birds and reptiles
                    contained in section 5 of the Ecological Appraisal by EDP, report dated
                    March 2025 (reference number edp8770_r002a).
              ii) The mitigation measures for great crested newts contained in section 5
                    of the Ecological Addendum by EDP, report reference number
                    QA:OHw/PNe_FMi/GPa_130625.
     20)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied unless and until a
              scheme showing how a water efficiency standard of 110 litres per person per
              day based on an assumed occupancy rate of 2.4 people per household (or
              higher where appropriate) will be achieved has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. No dwelling / unit shall
              be first occupied until the works within the approved scheme have been
              completed for that particular dwelling / unit in strict accordance with the
              approved details and thereafter the works shall be retained at all times and
              shall be maintained strictly in accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
     21)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied unless and until a
              scheme for the provision of adequate water supplies and fire hydrants,
              necessary for firefighting purposes at the site, has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and the approved
              scheme has been implemented in full in strict accordance with the approved
              details.
     22)      Should the development hereby permitted come forward in phases, the first
              application for the approval of reserved matters shall be accompanied by a
              phasing plan for the whole site. The development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved phasing plan.
     23)      Existing trees and hedgerows to the boundaries of the site shall be retained
              in accordance with the approved Arboricultural Impact Assessment prepared
              by The Environmental Dimension Partnership Ltd (Report Reference
              edp8770_r003a).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
