Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 8 September 2026
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by R Sabu, BA(Hons), MA, BArch, PgDip, RIBA, ARB, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6002677
Land East of Halfpenny Lane, Wisbech, Cambridgeshire
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant hybrid planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Lee Russell of Seagate Homes against the decision of Fenland District
    Council.
•   The application Ref is F/YR23/0477/O.
•   The development proposed is Hybrid Application: Outline application with matters committed in
    respect of access to erect of up to 250 x dwellings, and full application to erect 102 x dwellings
    (15No. 1-bed, 41No. 2-bed, 35No. 3-bed and 11No. 4-bed) with associated parking, landscaping and
    public open space, and the formation of a bund and an attenuation basin, involving the demolition of
    existing building.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Hybrid Application:
   Outline application with matters committed in respect of access to erect of up to
   250 x dwellings, and full application to erect 102 x dwellings (15No. 1-bed, 41No. 2-
   bed, 35No. 3-bed and 11No. 4-bed) with associated parking, landscaping and
   public open space, and the formation of a bund and an attenuation basin, involving
   the demolition of existing building at Land East of Halfpenny Lane, Wisbech,
   Cambridgeshire in accordance with the terms of the application,
   Ref F/YR23/0477/O subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Application for costs
2. An application for an award of costs was made by Seagate Homes against Fenland
   District Council. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. A new version of the National Planning Practice Framework (Framework) was
   published in August 2026. I have consulted the main parties and taken any
   comments into account in reaching my decision.
4. The application is hybrid and comprises a full planning application and an outline
   application with all matters reserved for future consideration except for access. I
   have therefore considered the outline application on the basis of Highways Layout
   3509.SK210 P11 and Tracking Layouts, with all other drawings considered on an
   indicative but informative basis.
5. The Appellant submitted a planning obligation under section 106 of the Town and
   Country Planning Act 1990 (s106). This is in the form of a unilateral undertaking


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002677


     (UU). As it is signed and dated, I have had regard to it in my assessment of the
     appeal.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are:
       •     whether the proposal would accord with the Council’s development plan
             strategy for flood risk with regard to the proposed culverting of Halfpenny
             Lane Drain; and
       •     the effect of the proposed ground raising and ground reshaping works on the
             living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with regard to surface water run-
             off.
Reasons
Culverting of Halfpenny Lane Drain
7.     The site comprises predominantly flat agricultural land located on the southern
       edge of Wisbech. It is accessed via the northern part of Halfpenny Lane, an
       unclassified road within the site boundary that adjoins New Drove. A number of
       watercourses run through the site, including a watercourse which is located in a
       north-south direction alongside Halfpenny Lane, known as the Halfpenny Lane
       Drain (HLD).
8.     The site lies within the Hundred of Wisbech Internal Drainage Board’s (IDB)
       Internal Drainage District. The IDB is a Risk Management Authority further to the
       Flood and Water Management Act 2010 and are the relevant Drainage Body
       further to the Land Drainage Act 1991.The watercourse that runs alongside the
       access to the site is designated an Arterial Watercourse by the IDB and forms part
       of the wider drainage infrastructure serving the catchment. The maintenance of the
       watercourse is carried out by the IDB under permissive powers.
9.     The proposal for 352 dwellings includes the culverting of a substantial length of the
       HLD in order to facilitate construction of the primary access road.
10. During the course of the appeal the Appellant confirmed that they have acquired
    the freehold ownership of the area immediately to the east of the part of the
    watercourse proposed to be culverted. Halfpenny Lane and part of the western side
    of the watercourse is adopted highway and I note the evidence regarding the
    owners of the adjacent dwellings having riparian responsibilities for the western half
    of the watercourse. Although the IDB have permissive powers over the HLD under
    the Land Drainage Act 2010, the watercourse itself and the sub-soil of Halfpenny
    Lane appears to be unregistered with no known owner.
11. Policy LP14 of the Fenland Local Plan 2014 relates to flood risk and drainage
    among other things and requires that all proposals should have regard to the
    guidance and byelaws of the relevant Internal Drainage Board, including, where
    appropriate the Middle Level Strategic Study.
12. Policy DM7 of the Framework states that development proposals should be
    assessed on the basis of whether they would be an acceptable use of land. Matters
    which are controlled by separate regulatory regimes may, in the context of a
    particular development proposal, be a material consideration where they have land-


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6002677


     use implications. Decision-makers should assume, unless there is clear evidence to
     the contrary, that those separate regimes will operate effectively.
13. The IDB has indicated that Land Drainage Consent is unlikely to be granted and
    that the proposal would not accord with the Water Management Alliance Catchment
    Services Strategy (Strategy) which confirms how the IDB process applications for
    Land Drainage Consent and engage with local planning authorities, among other
    things. The Land Drainage Consent process is separate from the planning system.
    Notwithstanding the comments of the IDB, as an application for Land Drainage
    Consent has not been made or determined, there is no certainty that the proposed
    culvert would fail to accord with the Strategy. Accordingly, the proposal would not
    conflict with LP Policy LP14 in this respect.
14. The IDB also indicated that, even if consent is granted, it would not be willing to
    commute or adopt an obligation to maintain the culvert. The Appellant has
    proposed a number of options in this event. These include entering into an
    agreement with the Highway Authority under Section 278 of the Highways Act
    1990 with respect to the areas that are currently adopted highway. With regard to
    the areas of unregistered land, the process under section 228 of the Highways Act
    1990 may allow the Highway Authority to adopt this land and a maintenance
    approach to be agreed.
15. If neither the IDB nor the Highway Authority agree to maintain the proposed
    culvert, a private management company could undertake the management and
    maintenance of the culvert. A Management Fee Matrix provided by the Appellant
    outlines indicative costs and fees for the management and maintenance of
    common areas of the scheme including the culvert. While the details are indicative,
    the evidence does not demonstrate that the scale of the culvert and associated
    costs would make the proposal unacceptable in planning terms.
16. The Planning Practice Guidance states that, with respect to negatively worded
    conditions requiring works on land that is not controlled by the applicant, or that
    requires the consent or authorisation of another person or body, such conditions
    should not be used where there are no prospects at all of the action in question
    being performed within the time-limit imposed by the permission.
17. The relevant suggested conditions include a condition restricting the laying of
    services, creation of hard surfaces or erection of a building until a detailed design of
    the surface water drainage of the site, which include full details of maintenance and
    adoption of the surface water drainage system (including a management and
    maintenance plan), has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
    planning authority, and carried out in accordance with the approved details. The
    details to be submitted include any land drainage consent under the Land Drainage
    Act 1991. Given the options available for the maintenance and management of the
    culvert, there is at least some prospect of the action being performed.
18. During the hearing, the Water Management Alliance, acting on behalf of the IDB,
    raised concerns regarding the maintenance of the length of culvert proposed,
    including risk of blockages, and health and safety concerns. As discussed above,
    details of management and maintenance regimes could be secured as part of
    suitably worded conditions.
19. Framework Policy CC3 relates to adaptation to climate change and requires
    development to be located where the risk of flooding is minimised, or can be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6002677


     managed and the development made safe without increasing risk elsewhere, and
     incorporate sustainable drainage systems to manage surface water flow rates and
     reduce volumes of runoff in accordance with policy F8 among other things.
20. The FRA indicates that topographical surveys of the HLD were carried out and that
    manholes would be installed along the length of the culvert to allow access for
    maintenance. The proposed culvert would have a larger cross sectional area than
    the existing culvert from the northern side of Weasenham Road to the southern
    side of New Drove which lies upstream of the proposed culvert. This would provide
    a better flow of water at this point thus reducing the existing flood risk which is
    created by this culvert. Accordingly, the culverting of this section of open
    watercourse in order to provide site access would not increase the upstream flood
    risk.
21. Framework Policy F8 part 3 states that development proposals should not enclose
    existing watercourses where this is not already the case, unless there are
    compelling reasons to do so; and should where possible remove existing culverts
    and renaturalise existing river channels, unless to do so would increase flood risk,
    result in other environmental harm or cause harm to heritage assets.
22. The HLD arterial watercourse runs the length of Halfpenny Lane which passes
    through the western part of the site. Any access to the site via Halfpenny Lane
    would require culverting at least part of the watercourse. Given the existing
    dwellings to the north and east of the site, and the busy A47 to the south, a road via
    Halfpenny Lane appears to be the most appropriate way to access the site.
    Moreover, the site is allocated for residential development as part of Phase 2 of the
    South Wisbech Broad Location for Growth as defined in LP Policy LP8.
    Accordingly, there is development plan support for residential development at this
    site. These matters form compelling reasons for enclosing the Halfpenny Lane
    watercourse such that the scheme would not conflict with the Framework in this
    respect.
23. Consequently, the proposal would accord with the Council’s development plan
    strategy for flood risk with regard to the proposed culverting of Halfpenny Lane
    Drain. Therefore, it would not conflict with LP Policy LP14 or the Framework in this
    respect.
Living conditions
24. The site lies in Flood Zone 1; an area where flooding from rivers and the sea is very
    unlikely. However, I note local evidence regarding flooding at the site and
    surrounding area.
25. The Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Strategy (FRA) states that there is a
    small isolated area of surface water ponding adjacent to a watercourse shown to be
    at low risk from surface water flooding with a depth of <300mm. The FRA goes on
    to say that the gardens of plots 32 to 34 will be located within this area. Therefore,
    as a precautionary measure the finished floor levels of these plots will be raised to
    300mm above the adjacent ground level which in turn will provide mitigation against
    low risk surface water flooding. The other dwellings across the proposal would be
    raised 150mm above ground level.
26. The FRA outlines the drainage strategy and includes surface water runoff from
    paved surfaces including the adoptable estate roads, private and shared driveways

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6002677


     and roof areas entering a piped network for conveyance to an attenuation basin
     located within the public open space area. In addition, the attenuation basin would
     discharge to the adjacent watercourse. The flow rate would be controlled by a
     hydro brake limited to the greenfield run off rate.
27. I note the proximity of the site to neighbouring dwellings. However, given the
    modest increase in finished floor levels for a few dwellings and that the sustainable
    drainage system would limit flow rates to greenfield run off rate, the proposal would
    not increase flood risk elsewhere.
28. The Council’s concerns include that the drainage strategy was not informed by a
    topographical survey. While this may be the case, the site is relatively flat and lies
    in Flood Zone 1. Therefore, for the foregoing reasons, this matter does not alter my
    finding on this main issue.
29. Consequently, the proposed ground raising and ground reshaping works would not
    harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with regard to surface water
    run-off. Therefore, the proposal would not conflict with LP Policy LP14 which
    requires, among other things, that all development proposals should adopt a
    sequential approach to flood risk from all forms of flooding and demonstrate
    appropriate flood risk management and safety measures. The proposal would also
    not conflict with LP Policy LP2 seeks development that positively contribute to
    creating a healthy, safe and equitable living environment by promoting high levels
    of residential amenity among other things.
Other Matters
30. The Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (PEA) states that a range of protected
    species could potentially occupy the development site and thus be negatively
    impacted on by the development. Therefore, the PEA outlines a number of
    mitigation strategies for the whole site relating to both habitats and protected
    species. These include planting and the creation of attenuation basin, ditches and
    grassland and scrub creation to benefit reptiles, amphibians, birds and small
    mammals, as well as further surveys to be undertaken. Accordingly, while I note
    local concerns regarding wildlife and biodiversity, this matter has not altered my
    overall decision.
31. I note local concerns regarding highway safety and effect on the local road network,
    including the effect of a proposed incinerator near the site. Vehicular access to the
    proposed development would be via a priority junction from New Drove onto
    Halfpenny Lane. Upgrades are proposed to the junction to accommodate the
    development traffic, including widening Halfpenny Lane to 6.5m and realigning it to
    the east of the existing road. Upgrades are also proposed to the Weasenham Lane
    / New Drove junction to reduce traffic speeds within the area.
32. The scheme would also include other pedestrian and cycle connections to the
    surrounding area. The Transport Assessment factored in trips relating to the
    incinerator at Medworth and considered the proposed development to be
    acceptable in transport and highway terms. From the evidence I agree. Therefore,
    the proposal would not result in a severe adverse impact on the transport network
    (in terms of capacity and congestion, including cumulative impacts), or an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6002677


33. In terms of the character and appearance of the area and effects on the landscape,
    the proposal would alter the land from agricultural fields to residential development.
    However, given the existing dwellings to the north and east of the site, and
    proposed scale of the dwellings for the full application, the scheme would appear in
    keeping with the surrounding area. The site is not subject to any statutory or non-
    statutory landscape designations and does not contain any rare, valued landscape
    features. The topography of the land is relatively flat and as the site is contained by
    residential development, a busy road to the south and Halfpenny Lane, the scheme
    would be well contained. Accordingly, the proposal would not unacceptably alter
    the character and appearance or landscape of the area.
34. Although the proposal would be visible from neighbouring properties, given the
    proposed separation distances, the scheme would not unacceptably alter the
    outlook of the neighbouring occupiers.
35. Given the existing residential development in the area, the proposed residential
    dwellings would not result in undue effect on the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers with respect to noise.
Planning obligation
36. The UU secures provisions in relation to a number of aspects including: land,
    affordable housing, highway contribution, education and library contribution, NHS
    Estates contribution, NHS East of England Ambulance Service contribution and in
    relation to a toucan crossing.
37. The proposed provision of 49 affordable dwellings amounts to some 13% of the
    overall provision of housing. LP Policy LP5 seeks 25% of the dwellings as
    affordable houses on sites of 10 or more dwellings. However, the Policy continues
    to say that the Council, in undertaking negotiations, will take into account the
    financial viability of any individual scheme. The Viability Report sets out that due to
    significant additional costs of construction including from the proposed culverting of
    HLD, road access and junction enhancements, a policy compliant scheme would
    be unviable. Accordingly, this part of the UU would meet the relevant tests and the
    proposal would not conflict with LP Policy LP5.
38. The UU also includes financial contributions towards education facilities and/or
    library services, the provision of GP Services, and the provision of ambulance
    services which fall short of that requested. Consequently, the proposed financial
    contributions towards education and healthcare would result in an additional burden
    on existing infrastructure. This is a matter which weighs against the proposal and is
    discussed in the planning balance. However, given the findings of the Viability
    Report, I am satisfied that in each case the obligations meet the tests set out in
    Regulation 122 of the Community infrastructure Levy (2010). As a result, I have
    taken the UU into account.
Planning balance
39. LP Policy LP3 related to the spatial strategy and directs the majority of growth to in
    and around the four market towns, of which Wisbech is one. Given the location of
    the site, and that the site lies within a broad location for growth identified in LP
    Policy LP8, the proposal would not conflict with the aims of this policy.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6002677


40. As discussed above, I have found that the proposal would not conflict with
    LP Policy LP14 which relates to climate change and the risk of flooding.
    LP Policy LP16 seeks high quality environments that retains and incorporates
    natural features of the site such as drains and water bodies. The proposed
    culverting of the HLD is necessary to deliver the vehicular access to the site which
    is allocated for residential development in the LP, and other existing open
    watercourses in the site are largely being retained. Therefore, the proposal does
    not conflict with the aims of this policy.
41. Policy S4 of the National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) states that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in this Framework.
42. The policy goes on to list a number of circumstances in which the benefits of
    approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects.
    While the list is not exhaustive, none of the circumstances apply in this case.
43. As discussed earlier, the financial contributions toward infrastructure are less than
    that requested by the Council such that the scheme would result in an additional
    burden on existing infrastructure. Although there would be no associated
    development plan harm, given the quantum of contributions secured, I attached
    moderate weight to the harm.
44. The proposal would contribute 352 dwellings to the local housing supply. The
    Council are able to demonstrate a five year supply of housing. However, the
    Council’s Fenland Monitoring Report confirms a significant shortfall in affordable
    provision, with delivery averaging fewer than 80 affordable homes per year against
    a need exceeding 220 dwellings annually.
45. Accordingly, the scheme would contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the area of the local planning authority. Accordingly, I attach
    substantial weight to the benefit of providing affordable homes as directed by
    Framework Policy HO7.
46. Accordingly, the proposal would accord with the development plan and material
    considerations in this case to do not warrant a decision other than in accordance
    with the development plan.
Conditions
47. Suggested conditions are proposed for the full planning application and outline
    planning application. Conditions relating to time limits (1, 4 and 5) and specifying
    plans (2 and 6) are necessary in the interests of certainty. Conditions relating to the
    submission of reserved matters (3), Use Class C3 (33) and housing mix (34) are
    also necessary in the interests of certainty.
48. The condition relating to the highway layout and toucan crossing (7) is necessary in
    the interests of highway safety and certainty.
49. The conditions relating to surface water drainage (8), surface water run off (9),
    surface water drainage system (10) and foul water drainage (20 and 36) are
    necessary to mitigate against flood risk.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6002677


50. The condition relating to Construction Environmental Management Plan (12) is
    necessary to mitigate against the risk of noise, light and air pollution during the
    construction phase. Accordingly, as construction hours could be secured as part of
    this condition, the suggested condition regarding construction hours is not
    necessary.
51. The condition relating to a method statement for piling (13) is necessary in the
    interests of the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
52. The condition relating to Construction Ecological Management Plan (14) is
    necessary to protect biodiversity. In order to mitigate against light pollution, a
    condition relating to lighting design strategy (15) is necessary.
53. In the interests of sustainable travel, conditions relating to a Travel Plan (16), bus
    stop improvement works (17), travel accessibility plan (24) and cycle storage (25
    and 41) are necessary.
54. Conditions relating to future management of proposed streets (18) and parking and
    turning areas (19) are necessary for highway safety. The conditions relating to
    future management of streets is a pre-occupation condition rather than pre-
    commencement as it would not be affected by the construction stage. I have
    combined the suggested conditions relating to parking and turning areas and roads
    and footways, as they serve the same purpose and are necessary for both
    permissions.
55. Conditions relating to an Arboricultural Method Statement (21 and 37) and
    Ecological Design Strategy (22 and 38) are necessary to safeguard the character
    and appearance of the area.
56. Landscaping and ecological measures (23 and 39), external lighting (28 and 42),
    and hard and soft landscaping (29) conditions are necessary in the interests of
    biodiversity and character and appearance.
57. The conditions relating to external materials (26), refuse collection strategy (30)
    and boundary treatments (32) are necessary to safeguard the character and
    appearance of the area.
58. The condition relating to fire hydrants (27 and 40) is necessary for public safety.
    The conditions relating to contamination (11) and noise mitigation (31 and 43) are
    necessary in the interests of living conditions of future occupiers.
59. The condition relating to Locally Equipped Area for Play (35) is necessary to
    safeguard the living environment of future occupiers.
Conclusion
60. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.



R Sabu
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6002677


APPEARANCES
FOR THE APPELLANT:
Jamie Childs – Partner, Howes Percival
Lee Russell – Seagate Home Ltd
Andrew Hodgen – Senior Director, Pegasus Group
Jack Gandy - Principal Town Planner, Pegasus Group
Alan Faulkner – Partner, Maxey Grounds
Kay Elvy – Director, BHA Consulting


FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:
Alan Davies – Fenland District Council


INTERESTED PARTIES:
Cllr James H Edwards
Cllr Steve Tierney
Matthew Philpot - Chief Operating Officer & Deputy CEO, Water Management Alliance
(WMA)
Cathryn Brady - Head of Catchment Services, WMA
Mark Ogden - Sustainable Development Manager, WMA


DOCUMENTS
E-mail from Appellant dated 10 September 2026 attaching transfer plan, Mapsearch
extract and extent of highway search with associated comments
E-mail from Water Management Alliance dated 11 September 2026
E-mail from Water Management Alliance dated 15 September 2026
E-mail from appellant dated 17 September 2026 responding to WMA comments
attaching minutes of meeting of the Hundred of Wisbech Internal Drainage Board
E-mails from Appellant and Council with comments on approved documents and
suggested conditions dated 28 September 2026




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6002677


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
Time limit and approved plans relating to the full planning permission
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted in full shall be carried out in accordance
              with the following plans and drawings:
              •    Location Plan (HPW-SH-PD-LP-003, Revision B)
              •    Building Heights Plan (reference: HPW-SH-PD-BHP-005 Revision A)
              •    Site Sections (HPW-SH-PD-SS-008 Revision A)
              •    Site Highway Layout (reference: 3509.SK211, Revision P2)
              •    Landscape Masterplan (reference: LS01 Revision A)
              •    Landscape Plan - Phase 1 (reference: LS02)
              •    Pumping Station Details (reference: HPL-PS/PD/01 Revision A)
              •    Site Master Plan (reference: FSB-SH-PD-SMP-007)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S409 (reference: S409)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S409 V2 (reference: S409)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S301 V4 (reference: HT-S301-V4)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S303 V4 (reference: S303V4-01)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S305 V3 (reference: S305V3-01)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S306 V3 (reference: S306V3-01)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S308V3 (reference: S308V3-01)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S310 (reference: S310-01)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S213 V3 (Terrace) (ref: S213V3-01)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S213 V3 (ref: S213V3-01)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S312 V2 (ref: S312V2-01)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S318V2 & S319V2 (ref: S318V2 & S319V2-02)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S405 (ref: S405-01A)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S102 (ref: S102-01A)
              •    Plans and Elevations – HT S211 (ref: S211-01)
              •    Elevations – Terrace – HT S153 V2 (ref: S153 V2 – 02)
              •    Elevations – HT S153 V2 (4 Terrace) (reference: S153 V2-04)
              •    Elevations – HT S213 V3 (4 Terrace) (ref: S213V3-04-Elevations (terrace
                   version))
              •    Elevations – HT S430 V3 (ref: S430V3-02)
              •    Floor Plans - HT S213 V3 (4 Terrace) (ref: S213V3-04-Floor Plans
                   (terrace version))
              •    Floor Plans - HT S430 V3 (ref: S430V3-02)
              •    Preliminary Levels Strategy (reference: 3509.SK150, Revision P4)
              •    Existing Watercourse and Culverting Plan (reference: 3509.SK12,
                   Revision P2)
              •    Garages Drawings (reference: Garages-01 c- Plans and Elevations)
              •    Highways Post Adoption Layout (reference: 3509.SK221, Revision P4)
              •    Phase 1 Preliminary Levels Strategy (reference: 3509.SK150, Revision
                   P4)
              •    Tracking Layout 1 of 3 (reference: 3509.SK212, Revision P3)
              •    Tracking Layout 2 of 3 (reference: 3509.SK213, Revision P2)
              •    Tracking Layout 3 of 3 (reference: 3509.SK214, Revision P3)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6002677


              •    Boundary Enclosures Plan – Phase 1 (ref: HPW-SH-PD-BEP-006
                   Revision B)
              •    Building Heights Plan – Phase 1 (ref: HPW-SH-PD-BHP-005 Revision A)
              •    Ditch Section Layout (reference: 3509.SK07, Revision P3)
              •    Ditch Sections - Sheet 1 (reference: 3509.SK08, Revision P2)
              •    Ditch Sections – Sheet 2 (reference: 3509.SK09, Revision P2)
              •    Site Layout Detailed Phase 1 and Access from New Drove (reference:
                   HPW-SH-PD-SL-004, Revision G)
              •    Street Scene Elevations (reference: HPLW-SH-PD-SS-1003 Revision C)
              •    Pumping Station (reference: HPL-PS/PD/01, Revision A)
              •    Site Accessibility Plan (reference: HPW-SH-PD-SAP-1010, Revision C)
Time limit and approved plans relating to the outline planning permission

     3)       Details of the appearance, landscaping, layout, and scale, (hereinafter called
              the ‘reserved matters’ shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority before any development takes place and the
              development shall be carried out as approved.
     4)       Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
              planning authority not later than 3 years from the date of this permission.
              Application for approval of the last reserved matters shall be made before the
              expiration of five years from the date of permission.
     5)       The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than 2 years
              from the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.
     6)       The development hereby permitted to which the outline element of this
              permission relates shall be carried out in accordance with the following plans
              and drawings:
              •    Location Plan (HPW-SH-PD-LP-003, Revision B)
              •    Highways Layout (reference: 3509.SK210, Revision P11)
              •    Tracking Layout 1 of 3 (reference: 3509.SK212, Revision P3)
              •    Tracking Layout 2 of 3 (reference: 3509.SK213, Revision P2)
              •    Tracking Layout 3 of 3 (reference: 3509.SK214, Revision P3)
Conditions relating to both permissions
     7)       Prior to commencement of the development, the highway layout A or B set
              out below shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority:
              A. In the event a Toucan Crossing on Weasenham Lane Wisbech has
              commenced, the highway layout as shown on planning application drawing
              number Highways Layout with Toucan Crossing (reference: 210A, Revision
              P02).
              B. In the event a Toucan Crossing on Weasenham Lane Wisbech has not
              commenced, the highway layout as shown on planning application drawing
              number Highways Layout without Toucan Crossing (reference: 210, Revision
              P01).
              The development shall not be occupied until those works are complete.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6002677


     8)       No laying of services, creation of hard surfaces or erection of a building shall
              commence until a detailed design of the surface water drainage of the site
              has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              The scheme shall be based upon the principles within the agreed Phase 1
              Drainage Strategy and shall include:
              i. full calculations for existing surface water runoff rates for the QBAR, 3.3%
              AEP and 1% AEP storm events;
              ii. full results of proposed drainage system modelling for those storm events
              and the 1% AEP plus climate change event, including collection,
              conveyance, storage, flow control and disposal elements and allowance for
              urban creep;
              iii. full details of maintenance and adoption of the surface water drainage
              system (including a management and maintenance plan);
              iv. permissions to connect to a receiving watercourse or sewer;
              v. details of the delivery timescales (and any phasing arrangements) for the
              implementation of the surface water drainage design (including whether any
              works are required in the outline element of the development hereby
              permitted in connection with the delivery of the full element of the
              development); and
              vi. Any land drainage consent under the Land Drainage Act 1991 that is
              required in relation to any works to deliver the surface water drainage for the
              site and in order to discharge surface water to an existing watercourse has
              been secured and details of this provided with the detailed design.
               The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
               details and the timescales approved. Those elements of the surface water
               drainage system which are not to be adopted by a statutory undertaker shall
               thereafter be maintained and managed in accordance with the approved
               management and maintenance plan.
     9)       Prior to the commencement of development, including preparatory works,
              details of measures indicating how additional surface water run-off from the
              site will be avoided during construction works shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved measures
              and systems shall be brought into operation before any works to create
              buildings or hard surfaces commence.
     10)      Upon completion of the surface water drainage system, including any
              attenuation ponds and swales, and prior to adoption by a statutory
              undertaker or management company, a survey and report by an
              appropriately qualified independent Chartered Surveyor or Chartered
              Engineer shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The survey and report shall demonstrate that the system has been
              constructed in accordance with the approved details. Where necessary,
              details of corrective works and a timetable for completion shall be submitted
              and approved, and the corrective works shall be carried out and resurveyed.
     11)      Prior to the commencement of development, an investigative contaminated
              land assessment and associated remedial strategy shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. Any approved remediation
              shall be carried out in full and a validation report shall be submitted to and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6002677


              approved in writing by the local planning authority before first occupation of
              any dwelling hereby permitted. If contamination not previously identified is
              encountered during works, it shall be fully assessed and an appropriate
              remediation scheme agreed with the local planning authority.
     12)      Prior to the commencement of development, a Construction Environmental
              Management Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The CEMP shall include, but shall not be limited to,
              mitigation measures for noise, dust and lighting during construction and shall
              be adhered to at all times during the construction of the development.
     13)      In the event of piling, no development shall commence until a method
              statement detailing the type of piling, mitigation measures and monitoring to
              protect local residents from noise and/or vibration has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. Development shall be
              carried out in accordance with the approved statement.
     14)      Prior to the commencement of development, including demolition, ground
              works and vegetation clearance, a Construction Ecological Management
              Plan (CEcMP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The CEcMP shall identify construction risks to
              biodiversity, biodiversity protection zones, practical avoidance and reduction
              measures, timing of sensitive works, ecological supervision, responsible
              persons, communication lines and protective fencing or exclusion barriers.
              The approved CEcMP shall be implemented throughout construction.
     15)      Prior to first occupation, a lighting design strategy for biodiversity shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              strategy shall identify sensitive areas and features and demonstrate how
              lighting will avoid disturbance to bats and other nocturnal biodiversity. All
              external lighting shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
              approved strategy.
     16)      Prior to first occupation, a Travel Plan shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The Travel Plan shall include suitable
              measures and incentives, including bus vouchers and/or active travel
              vouchers, to promote sustainable travel and shall be implemented prior to
              first occupation.
     17)      Prior to first occupation, the developer shall deliver the bus stop improvement
              works shown in principle on drawing nos. 8/3088-CCL-XX-XX-DR-C-210A-
              P02 and 8/3088-CCL-XX-XX-DR-C-210-P01 at the two Boleness Road bus
              stops on Weasenham Lane.
     18)      Prior to first occupation of any dwelling, details of the proposed arrangements
              for future management and maintenance of proposed streets within the
              development shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The streets shall thereafter be maintained in accordance
              with the approved details until such time as an agreement under Section 38
              of the Highways Act 1980 has been entered into or a private management
              and maintenance company has been established.
     19)      Prior to first occupation of each dwelling, the on-site parking and turning area
              for that dwelling, and the roads, footways and cycleways required to access
              that dwelling, shall be laid out in accordance with the approved plans,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    13
Appeal Decision 6002677


              surfaced in a bound material from the dwelling to the adjoining adopted
              highway and drained within the site, and thereafter retained.
Conditions relating to the full planning permission
     20)      Prior to the commencement of development, a scheme and timetable for the
              provision and implementation of foul water drainage shall be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The works shall be
              constructed and completed in accordance with the approved scheme and
              thereafter retained in perpetuity.
     21)      Prior to the commencement of development, a detailed Arboricultural Method
              Statement shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The AMS shall include tree protection measures, any
              necessary tree surgery, phasing, protection methods, working methods and
              design solutions for works within root protection areas. All works shall be
              carried out in accordance with the approved AMS.
     22)      Prior to the commencement of development, an Ecological Design Strategy
              addressing mitigation, compensation and enhancements shall be submitted
              to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The EDS shall
              include conservation objectives, site constraints, detailed design and working
              methods, biodiversity net gain strategy, location and extent of works,
              materials, timetable, responsible persons, aftercare, maintenance, monitoring
              and remedial measures. The EDS shall be implemented in accordance with
              the approved details and retained in accordance with the details approved
              thereafter.
     23)      Prior to the commencement of development, a scheme for landscaping,
              biodiversity enhancements and habitat improvements shall be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The scheme shall
              include planting plans, biodiversity enhancements, hedgehog-permeable
              fencing, bird and bat boxes, mitigation measures, implementation timetable,
              management and maintenance. The approved scheme shall be implemented
              and maintained in accordance with the details approved thereafter.
              If development does not commence within 12 months of the date of
              permission prior to commencement of works, the approved ecological
              measures shall be reviewed and, where necessary, amended and updated
              following further ecological surveys. Any revised measures and timetable
              shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority
              and implemented as approved.
     24)      Prior to the commencement of development, a travel accessibility plan shall
              be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved plan.
     25)      Prior to the commencement of development above slab level, full details of
              cycle storage for each dwelling shall be submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. The approved details shall be implemented
              prior to first occupation of each dwelling.
     26)      Prior to the commencement of development above slab level, for any
              dwelling or garage, details of external wall and roof materials shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              Development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6002677


     27)      Prior to the commencement of development above slab level, details for the
              provision of fire hydrants shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. The approved scheme shall be implemented before
              occupation or in agreed phases.
     28)      Prior to the commencement of development above slab level, a scheme for
              external lighting, including management and maintenance details, shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              scheme shall include specifications, locations, heights and lighting levels and
              the approved scheme shall be implemented and retained as approved.
     29)      Prior to the commencement of development above slab level, a scheme for
              hard and soft landscaping in accordance with plan LS02 (Landscape Plan –
              Phase 1) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The scheme shall include finished levels, hard surfacing, retained
              features, planting plans and management and maintenance details.
              All hard and soft landscape works, including management and maintenance
              details, shall be carried out in accordance with the details and timescale
              approved. Any planting that dies, is removed or becomes seriously damaged
              or diseased within five years shall be replaced in the next planting season
              with planting of similar size and species unless otherwise agreed.
     30)      Prior to first occupation, a refuse collection strategy shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved strategy
              shall be implemented and retained thereafter.
     31)      Prior to first occupation, a detailed scheme of noise mitigation measures for
              each dwelling shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The measures shall include those specified within the
              Road Traffic Noise Assessment (ref: 20230124 7377 Wisbech ProPG
              prepared by Martec Environmental Consultants Ltd.) unless otherwise
              agreed and shall be implemented prior to first occupation of each respective
              dwelling.
     32)      Boundary treatments shall be erected in accordance with drawing no. HPW-
              SH-PD-BEP-006 Rev B prior to occupation of each dwelling to which such
              boundary features relate.
Conditions relating to the outline planning permission
     33)      The outline development shall not exceed 250 dwellings within Use Class
              C3.
     34)      As part of any reserved matters application, a housing mix scheme shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              reserved matters shall accord with the approved housing mix scheme. The
              scheme shall include a plan showing the location and distribution of market
              and affordable units, including tenure type; a schedule of dwelling sizes by
              number of bedrooms; and a statement demonstrating how the proposals
              contribute to current and future housing needs.
     35)      As part of any reserved matters application, a scheme detailing the provision
              of a Locally Equipped Area for Play comprising no fewer than eight pieces of
              play equipment, of which at least three shall be accessible play equipment, at
              least one seating area, a timescale for delivery, and a long term management
              and maintenance strategy, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
Appeal Decision 6002677


              the local planning authority. The LEAP shall be delivered and maintained in
              accordance with the approved scheme.
     36)      As part of any reserved matters application, a scheme and timetable for the
              provision and implementation of foul water drainage shall be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The works shall be
              constructed and completed in accordance with the approved scheme and
              thereafter retained in perpetuity.
     37)      As part of any reserved matters application, a detailed Arboricultural Method
              Statement for the part of the site to which such reserved matters application
              relates shall be submitted to the local planning authority. The AMS shall
              include tree protection measures, any necessary tree surgery, phasing,
              protection methods, working methods and design solutions for works within
              root protection areas. All works shall be carried out in accordance with the
              approved AMS.
     38)      As part of any reserved matters application, an Ecological Design Strategy
              addressing mitigation, compensation and enhancements has been submitted
              to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The EDS shall
              include conservation objectives, site constraints, detailed design and working
              methods, biodiversity net gain strategy, location and extent of works,
              materials, timetable, responsible persons, aftercare, maintenance, monitoring
              and remedial measures. The EDS shall be implemented in accordance with
              the approved details and retained in accordance with the details approved
              thereafter.
     39)      As part of any reserved matters application, a scheme for landscaping,
              biodiversity enhancements and habitat improvements shall be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The scheme shall
              include planting plans, biodiversity enhancements, hedgehog-permeable
              fencing, bird and bat boxes, mitigation measures, implementation timetable,
              management and maintenance. The approved scheme shall be implemented
              and maintained in accordance with the details approved thereafter.
              If development does not commence within 12 months of the date of
              permission prior to commencement of works, the approved ecological
              measures shall be reviewed and, where necessary, amended and updated
              following further ecological surveys. Any revised measures and timetable
              shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority
              and implemented as approved.
     40)      As part of any reserved matters application, details for the provision of fire
              hydrants shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The approved scheme shall be implemented before occupation or
              in agreed phases.
     41)      As part of any reserved matters application, full details of cycle storage for
              each dwelling shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The approved details shall be implemented prior to first
              occupation of each dwelling.
     42)      As part of any reserved matters application, a scheme for external lighting,
              including management and maintenance details, shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The scheme shall include


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
Appeal Decision 6002677


              specifications, locations, heights and lighting levels and the approved
              scheme shall be implemented and maintained thereafter.
     43)      As part of any reserved matters application, a detailed scheme of noise
              mitigation measures, informed by an assessment that is compliant to
              BS:4142 or another appropriate standard, for each dwelling shall be
              submitted to the local planning authority.
END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
