Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by E Pickernell BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6002960
Pavement o/s 5 The Triangle, Tilehurst, Reading RG30 4RN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications plc against the decision of Reading
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/1394.
•    The development proposed is proposed installation of 1no. new BT Street Hub, incorporating 2no.
     digital 75" LCD advert screens, and associated BT Phone Kiosk removal.


Appeal B Ref: 6002961
Pavement o/s 5 The Triangle, Tilehurst, Reading RG30 4RN
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications plc against the decision of Reading
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/1403.
•    The advertisement proposed is 2no. digital 75" LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street
     Hub unit.


Decisions
1.    Appeal A is dismissed.
2.    Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.    There are two appeals relating to the site, one against the refusal of planning
      permission and the other against the refusal of advertisement consent. To avoid
      duplication, while considering each on its own merits, I have dealt with both in a
      single decision letter.
4.    With regards to Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) (the Regulations), the
      National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and Planning Practice
      Guidance (PPG) all make it clear that advertisements should be subject to control
      only in the interests of amenity and public safety. Therefore, I have had regard to
      the policies of the development plan only in so far as they are a material factor
      relevant to the consideration of these matters. Some of the reasons refer to
      policies which are not relevant to the main issue or the nature of the proposal. In


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6002960 & 6002961


      my reasoning below, I have concluded only against the policies which have been
      determinative in my consideration of the main issues.
5.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
      August 2026. This has introduced changes to its structure and presentation,
      including the incorporation of development management policies. However, having
      carefully considered the new Framework, I am satisfied that insofar as the issues
      determinative to these appeals are concerned, the relevant policy approach has
      not fundamentally changed. In these circumstances I have not considered it
      necessary to invite further representations from the parties and I am satisfied that
      no party has been prejudiced by this course of action.
Main Issues
6.    The main issues in respect of Appeal A are the effect of the proposal on:
           •    the character and appearance of the area, including its effect on the Grade
                II listed building (LB), Tilehurst War Memorial;
           •    the living conditions of the occupiers of nearby dwellings in respect of noise;
                and
           •    public safety.
7.    The main issues in respect of Appeal B are the effect of the proposed
      advertisements on:
            •    the visual amenity of the area; and
            •    public safety.
Reasons
Character and appearance (Appeal A)
8.    The appeal site comprises part of an area of hardstanding adjacent to School
      Road. This is part of a public space comprising grassed areas, trees, and paved
      areas located adjacent to a parade of small units providing a variety of commercial
      uses. Further commercial uses are present on the north side of School Road. To
      the southwest of the appeal site is located a war memorial which is a Grade II
      listed building.
9.    The greenspace and vegetation provides a central focus of the local centre and
      the area therefore retains a spacious, verdant character despite the presence of
      commercial activity.
10. The location of the proposed street hub is near to an existing telephone booth
    which would be removed as part of the proposals and several items of street
    furniture including a bus stop, bench and bike stands. The footprint of the street
    hub would be smaller than that of the existing telephone box and as such the
    proposal would not add to clutter in the area.
11. Although there is commercial activity nearby including signage and lighting, this is
    modest in scale. In comparison the street hub, due to its solidity, height and
    position in relation to the road, would appear monolithic within the street scape.
    This would contrast unacceptably with the relatively small scale of the buildings in


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6002960 & 6002961


      the area and would result in a structure which would appear overly prominent and
      incongruous in the context of the adjacent public open space.
12. From some vantage points to the north, the structure would be in the foreground of
    views towards the LB, Tilehurst War Memorial. Under Section 66(1) of the Act, I
    have a duty to have special regard to the desirability of preserving the LB or its
    setting.
13. The memorial was erected in the aftermath of the First World War, in the 1920’s as
    part of a country-wide public commemoration. It derives its significance from its
    historic interest in this regard and also from its architectural interest being
    constructed of limestone with a wheel-head cross.
14. The LB is located prominently within the public open space, adjacent to the
    grassed areas. The manner in which the LB interacts with the surrounding public
    space point to its importance as a public memorial and thus is an aspect of its
    setting which contributes to its significance. However, given the distance between
    the proposed hub and the war memorial and the presence of intervening
    vegetation I consider that the proposal would have no effect on the significance of
    the heritage asset. This is a neutral factor in the appeal.
15. Overall, I conclude that the proposal would result in harm to the character and
    appearance of the area. It would therefore conflict with Policies OU3 and CC7 of
    the Reading Borough Local Plan (Adopted November 2019) (LP) which together
    seek to ensure that telecommunications development does not have an adverse
    impact on visual amenity and that developments maintain and enhance the
    character and appearance of the area.
Visual amenity (Appeal B)
16. Appeal B relates to the proposed illuminated advertisement panels which would be
    part of the street hub considered under Appeal A. The advertisement panels would
    take up the majority of the front and rear facing sides of the hub.
17. Although there are elements of illumination and advertisements near to the site,
    they are more modest in size and scale than those included in the appeal scheme.
    Advertisements in the area generally comprise fascia and small projecting signs to
    premises. Exceptions to this include the advertisements incorporated into the
    structure of the existing phone box and bus shelter.
18. However, in this instance the advertisements would be of a digital format and
    would occupy the majority of the structure and therefore would be significantly
    more eye-catching and jarring in the street scene that other existing adverts
    nearby.
19. Although I find that the proposed advertisements would have an unacceptable
    impact on the visual amenity of the area, given the distance from the Grade II
    listed war memorial and the intervening vegetation, I do not consider that the
    advertisements would harm the significance of the LB.
20. Overall, I conclude that the proposed advertisements would result in harm to the
    visual amenity of the area. I have taken account of Policies OU4 and CC7 of the
    LP which seek to ensure that developments, including advertisements do not
    result in harm to visual amenity.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6002960 & 6002961


Living conditions (Appeal A)
21. The Street hub would include call-making facilities. There is the option to use
    headphones, otherwise both sides of the conversation would be audible in the
    vicinity of the hub.
22. There area is characterised by a mix of uses and there are residential properties
    nearby, including above the commercial units to the south. During daytime hours
    the use of the hub for making calls would be unlikely to result in any undue
    disturbance against general background noise in the area. However, at night such
    activity would have the potential to result in disturbance to occupiers of nearby
    properties as a result of conversations in the street which might not otherwise
    occur.
23. The appellant contends that voice calls would not be the primary use of the hub
    and would be used infrequently, however I have not been provided with any
    evidence that supports this assertion. The appellant has suggested that a
    condition controlling the operation of the voice call service could be imposed. I
    consider that such a condition could adequately mitigate the concerns in respect of
    amenity, if I were allowing the appeal. As I am dismissing the appeal for other
    reasons I have not sought further comments on the wording of such a condition.
24. Subject to a suitably worded condition, I conclude that the proposed street hub
    would not result in harm to the living conditions of the occupiers of nearby
    dwellings in respect of noise. It would therefore comply with Policy CC8 of the LP
    which seeks to ensure that development does not cause a detrimental impact on
    the living conditions of existing properties in terms of, amongst other things, noise
    and disturbance.
Public safety (Appeals A & B)
Appeal A
25. The proposed street hub would be located a generous distance from the edge of
    the highway to the north and hard surfacing continues to the south. Consequently,
    the proposal would not create a pinchpoint or result in pedestrians having to step
    into the highway. I note that the highway authority has no concerns in this regard.
26. The Council is concerned that the hub would become a place to loiter, could
    provide a hiding spot for, and attract criminals and would result in anti-social
    behaviour through the mis-use of the hub.
27. I have not been provided with any evidence which indicates that a street hub in
    this location would provide opportunities for crime or anti-social behaviour over
    and above existing street furniture and facilities including the bus shelter, phone
    kiosk and benches. The area benefits from high levels of surveillance from nearby
    buildings and the appeal site is within a relatively open area.
28. Furthermore, the submitted Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan
    (Version 3) sets out a system of anti-social call restriction and a methodology for
    dealing with anti-social behaviour should it occur. This could include turning the
    free wi-fi off during the hours of darkness. With such safeguards in place, I am not
    persuaded that the street hub would result in harm to public safety.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6002960 & 6002961


29. I therefore conclude that Appeal A would not result in harm to public safety and
    would therefore accord with Policy CC7 and CC8 of the LP which seek to ensure
    that proposals create safe environments and living conditions where crime and
    disorder do not undermine quality of life.
Appeal B
30. In respect of the proposed advertisements, the Council is concerned that the
    digital display would interfere with CCTV in the area by creating a glare. I have
    been provided with limited details in respect of the position of the CCTV cameras
    in the area and the anticipated impact, in this specific location.
31. Nevertheless, were I to allow the appeal it would be possible to control the
    brightness of the advertisements or to turn off the illumination during the hours of
    darkness. As I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, I have not sought
    further comments on such conditions, however I am satisfied that in this instance
    the concerns are capable of being addressed through appropriately worded
    conditions.
32. I therefore conclude that Appeal B would not result in harm to public safety. I have
    taken account of Policies OU4, CC7 and CC8 all of which seek to ensure that
    developments do not undermine public safety.
Other Matters
33. I recognise that the proposals would bring about certain benefits and is part of a
    wider strategy for BT to upgrade and replace dated infrastructure in order to
    deliver on their obligation to maintain public access. The hub would replace two
    existing kiosks. It would provide free wi-fi, capacity for 5G services, phone calls,
    device charging, access to emergency services and would be capable of assisting
    in public functions such as messages and hosting technology such as air quality
    monitoring. The technology would be accessible and powered by carbon free
    energy.
34.    Policy CO1 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the
      benefits of maintaining or improving network coverage, capacity, reliability and
      resilience. However, the Policy states that proposals for such development should
      be sited and designed to minimise the visual impact of the proposals, especially in
      situations where a new site or structure is proposed. In this instance the proposal
      would be very prominently located and would result in a significant negative visual
      impact.
35. Consequently, whilst I acknowledge the benefits of the schemes, because of the
    very significant and long-lasting harm which would occur to the character and
    appearance of the area, these benefits do not outweigh the harm.
36. The appellant has made reference to and provided copies of several decisions for
    similar proposals, none of which are in the same local authority area. These
    highlight the importance of a consideration of the context in which the proposed
    development would be situated. Given that this will differ significantly from place to
    place it is not possible to inter that there are parallels with these appeal schemes
    that indicate that I should allow the appeals before me.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6002960 & 6002961


Conclusion
37. With regard to Appeal A, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan when read as a whole and the material considerations, including
    the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it.
38. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude that the proposal would result in unacceptable
    harm to the amenity of the area.
39. Accordingly, both Appeal A and Appeal B are dismissed.




E Pickernell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
