Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by B Astley-Serougi BA(Hons) LLM MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003535
59 Betterton Road, Rainham, Havering RM13 8NB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Dinakaran Ramanathan against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Havering.
•    The application Ref is Y0263.25.
•    The development proposed is single storey rear extension with an overall depth of 7.50m, a
     maximum height of 2.95m, and an eaves height of 2.75m

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and prior approval is not required under the provisions of
       Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph A.4 of the Town and
       Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
       amended) for single storey rear extension with an overall depth of 7.50m, a
       maximum height of 2.95m, and an eaves height of 2.75m at 59 Betterton Road,
       Rainham, Havering RM13 8NB in accordance with the application Y0263.25 made
       on 19 October 2025, and the details submitted with it including plan no
       ARC/25/BET59/PA02 (Single Storey Rear Extension and Location Plan) pursuant
       to Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph A.4(2).
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Council refused the application prior to conducting any consultation.
       Accordingly, I requested that the Council carry out the necessary consultation.
3.     I have used the description of development contained within the Council’s decision
       notice as I consider it describes the development more accurately, but in doing this
       I have nonetheless had full regard in my reasoning to the description on the
       application form.
4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued
       on 17 August 2026. It has introduced policy lettering and numbers and separated
       plan-making policies from decision-making policies. Having considered the
       revisions and in light of the principles of natural justice, in this instance I do not
       consider it necessary to invite any submissions from the parties on the revised
       Framework.
Background and Main Issue
5.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003535


       (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a
       dwellinghouse subject to limitations and conditions.
6.     Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior approval is
       required for development which exceeds the limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is
       allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph A.4(3) provides that the local
       planning authority may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
       development does not comply – or that the developer has provided insufficient
       information to enable the authority to establish whether the proposed development
       complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such
       permitted development.
7.     There is nothing to suggest that the proposed development would not meet the
       criterion at GPDO paragraphs A1. (a), (b), (c), (e), (h), (i) and (k). Given that the
       development would measure 7.5 metres in depth, the proposal would exceed the
       limits in GPDO paragraph A.1. (f), but not those outlined in paragraph A.1 (g).
       Nevertheless, there is doubt on behalf of the Council as to whether the appeal
       scheme would comply with A.1. (d) regarding whether the height of the eaves of
       the part of the dwellinghouse enlarged, improved or altered would exceed the
       height of the eaves of the existing dwellinghouse.
8.     Accordingly, the main issue is therefore whether the proposed development
       complies with the provisions of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO and
       would therefore constitute permitted development.
Reasons
9.     59 Betterton Road (No 59) is a two-storey detached dwellinghouse in a
       predominantly residential area. Based on the plans before me, the proposed
       development would have a maximum height of 2.95 metres. The plans illustrate
       that the existing eaves height of No 59 is 2.8 metres. I note that the proposed
       development also highlights a proposed eaves height of 2.75 metres
10. The Permitted Development Rights for Householders: Technical Guidance
    (September 2019) outlines two definitions for eaves. In relation to Class A, the
    Guidance explains that for the purpose of measuring ‘height’ from ‘ground level’,
    the eaves of a house are the point where the lowest point of a roof slope, or a flat
    roof, meets the outside wall. Additionally, that the height of the eaves will be
    measured from the ground level at the base of the external wall of the extension to
    the point where the external wall would meet (if projected upwards) the upper
    surface of the roof slope. Parapet walls and overhanging parts of eaves should not
    be included in any calculation of eaves height.
11. Accordingly, based on the plans before me, the proposed eaves height is 2.75
    metres and thus would not exceed the height of the eaves of the existing
    dwellinghouse which are 2.8 metres. The appeal scheme therefore complies with
    Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A.1(d) of the GPDO.
12. For these reasons, I conclude the proposed development complies with the
    provisions of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO and would therefore
    constitute permitted development. No objections were received from neighbouring
    occupiers therefore prior approval is not required.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003535


Conditions
13. Planning permission granted for development under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2,
    Part 1, Class A of the GPDO is subject to the conditions set out in paragraphs A.3
    and A.4 of that Class. In summary, these require external materials be of a similar
    appearance to those used in construction of the exterior of the existing dwelling
    and provide details of written information required to be submitted before
    beginning the development.
14. The Council has suggested a number of conditions relating to amenity, however
    given that there were no objections to the appeal scheme prior approval is not
    required, and thus it is not possible to impose conditions in this instance.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above, I conclude the appeal should be allowed and prior
    approval is not required.

B Astley-Serougi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
