Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 September 2026
by E Catcheside BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003226
Flat 4, 99 Kennington Park Road, Southwark, London SE11 4JJ
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Serena Wong against the decision of the London Borough of Southwark
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/AP/1749.
•    The works proposed are retention of internal alterations, including the creation of a sliding door
     opening between the living room and kitchen/dining room; the blocking up of a former doorway
     between the hall and kitchen/dining room; the removal of two chimney breasts, and, the creation of a
     larger door opening (which is a sliding door) to the living room from the hall.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     In the interests of providing clarity over the works for which consent is sought, the
       description is taken from the decision notice and the appeal form.
3.     It is common ground that the works that are subject to this appeal have been
       completed. I have therefore considered the appeal on the basis that permission is
       sought to regularise works that have already been carried out. Because the works
       have already been undertaken, I am reliant on the evidence to describe the
       condition of the property prior to the works and to explain the changes that have
       occurred. My assessment is made on this basis.
4.     An external door and a Juliette balcony are shown on the plans. However, these
       are not elements that are included within the description of the works for this
       appeal; and they are the subject of separate appeals. For the avoidance of doubt, I
       shall only consider the works insofar as they are described in the banner heading
       and I shall form no conclusions in respect of any other works that may have been
       carried out at the site.
5.     As the site lies in a conservation area and relates to a listed building, I have had
       regard to sections 16(2) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
6.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The parties were invited to comment on the revised
       Framework, and I have taken account of the comments received.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003226


Main Issue
7.       The main issue is whether the works have preserved the Grade II listed building
         known as ‘Numbers 87-121 and Attached Railings’1, or any features of special
         architectural or historic interest that it possesses.
Reasons
Special interest and significance
8.       99 Kennington Road is one of several houses that form part of a Grade II listed
         terrace. No 99 has been converted into flats, and this appeal relates to Flat 4
         which comprises the uppermost two floors of the building, including the mansard
         space.
9.       According to the evidence, the listed terrace dates from the late 18th Century.
         There are some variations in the architectural detailing and appearance of the
         individual house frontages, including some render on the appeal property.
         However, insofar as it is relevant to this appeal, the exterior of the terrace provides
         a well-preserved example of the cohesive character and style that was typical
         during the period in which the listed building originated.
10. The interior of the terrace was not inspected as part of the listing process and, in
    any event, the list description is not definitive as to the interest features that are
    present on this terrace. Indeed, both parties refer to guidance set out in ‘London
    terrace homes 1660-1860: A guide to alterations and extensions’ (English
    Heritage, February 1996), which states that the domestic plan form and interior of
    London terrace houses is an important part of their character and special interest.
    Whilst the guidance was published some time ago, the importance of the
    standardised plan form is echoed in more recent national guidance2 and so it is a
    factor that remains pertinent to my decision.
11. The interior of No 99 has undergone significant alterations, including through its
    conversion to flats; and there is reference in the evidence to other internal changes
    within the wider terrace. I have very limited information before me to be certain as
    to the nature and scale of the alterations that have occurred other than to Flat 4.
    However, in respect of Flat 4, the evidence refers to past changes including the
    installation of a kitchen and bathroom, the blocking up and removal of fireplaces,
    and the loss of chimney breasts on the top floor. The evidence also indicates that
    many of the traditional decorative features, such as cornicing, were not present
    prior to the appeal works.
12. However, notwithstanding the changes that had occurred prior to the appeal works
    being undertaken, the plans show that Flat 4 retained several key components of
    the traditional plan form of this Georgian terrace, including the side hall and
    staircase, the front and rear rooms separated by a spine wall, and the two chimney
    breasts in the living room and kitchen. Together, these features would have helped
    to define the historic cellular plan form of the property, and they would have
    pointed to the past use and function of the building including its method of heating.
13. Whilst the flat is only one component of the wider terrace, the interior layout and
    materials are a key aspect of the standard vocabulary and disposition that is

1
    List entry number 1385633
2
    Conserving Georgian and Victorian terraced housing: A guide to managing change (Historic England, July 2020)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6003226


       traditional to the character of this Georgian terrace, and so these factors add to the
       value and interest of the listed building.
14. Insofar as it is relevant to this appeal, the significance of the listed building is
    derived from the historic and architectural interest associated with the age of the
    terrace, the surviving historic fabric, and the retained elements of the plan form
    and internal features. Together, these features reveal information about the
    uniformity in design that was characteristic of the built form in this area in the late
    18th Century; and they provide evidence of past domestic life. For this reason,
    these are factors that contribute to the special interest of the listed building.

Effects of the works
15. Although small nibs were retained either side of the opening between the
    kitchen/dining and the living room, the new opening extends across almost the
    entirety of the historic divide. This has caused the front and rear spaces, which
    were once cellular in form, to leak into one another with very little distinction
    between them. Similarly, whilst a larger proportion of wall has been retained
    between the living room and the hall, the large width of the extended opening has
    blurred the sense of these two spaces as physically and functionally discrete.
16. The sliding doors, whilst broadly aligned with the former walls, do little to define the
    historic spaces due to the large width of the openings and the transparency of the
    glass, which allows for visual connectivity across most of the living space on this
    floor. Furthermore, there is no visual trace of the siting, form and scale of the old
    doorways between the hall and the old front and rear rooms because the
    mouldings have been removed.
17. Together, the new and extended openings, and the loss of the historic internal
    doorways, have significantly eroded the traditional cellular plan form of the
    building. Thus, the historic scale and proportions of the front and rear rooms, and
    their past spatial relationship with the side hall and stairway are now barely legible.
    In addition, and in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the removal of the wall
    sections and the old doorways has led to a permanent loss of historic fabric which
    could not authentically be reversed.
18. Given that the fireplaces and the bedroom chimney breasts were removed a long
    time ago, the chimney breasts in the kitchen area and the living room served as
    some of the last evidence of the chimneys in this part of the listed building. Their
    removal has not only led to the loss of historic materials, but it has also eroded our
    ability to appreciate and understand the past function of these internal spaces,
    including how they were once heated and used. Alongside other aspects of the
    traditional internal layout, the chimney breasts contributed to the standard
    vocabulary of the terrace as a whole; and their loss has therefore eroded the
    consistency of the design that is integral to the historic character of the listed
    building.
19. The works were undertaken under the guidance of structural engineers, and there
    is no substantive evidence to suggest that the building is not structurally sound in
    its current condition. That said, the loss of the spine wall and the chimney breasts
    has fundamentally altered the structural authenticity of the building by removing
    historic load bearing elements and replacing them with visually prominent beams.
    There is no evidence to suggest that the building was structurally unsound prior to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003226


       the works; nor is it clear why structural interventions of this scale were necessary
       to provide improved visual and spatial connectivity around the flat. Therefore, the
       works have not been carried out in a way that has sought to avoid or minimise
       harm.
20. In the absence of photographs, method statements, or other clear records, there is
    little certainty that the works were undertaken in a sensitive way; and, therefore, I
    cannot be satisfied that historic materials and structures were retained wherever
    possible, and that the new materials were selected and installed in a manner
    appropriate to the integrity of the terrace. For the same reason, I am not
    persuaded that the historic elements that have been removed could be reinstated
    and the harm reversed.
21. Overall, whilst other parts of the terrace and indeed Flat 4 have previously been
    altered, the appeal works have harmfully eroded the historic and architectural
    integrity of the listed building. With regard to my duty under Section 16(2) of the
    Act, I find that the scheme has failed to preserve the listed building and the
    features of special architectural and historic interest which it possesses. The works
    also conflict with Policy HC1 of The London Plan (March 2021) and Policy P19 of
    The Southwark Plan 2019-2036 (Adopted 23 February 2022) (SP), which seek to
    conserve the significance of listed buildings; and they have failed to accord with
    the provisions of Southwark’s Historic Environment Heritage Supplementary
    Planning Document (September 2021).
22. The Framework is clear that in assessing effects on heritage assets, it is the effect
    on significance rather than the scale of the works that should be considered. The
    appellant identifies that any harm caused would be less-than-substantial and to a
    localised, minor extent. In my judgement and utilising the terminology of the 2026
    version of the Framework, the works have resulted in harm to the significance of
    this designated heritage asset. Given the cumulative effect of the appeal scheme
    works, the degree of that harm would be high.
Other Matter
23. The site lies within the Kennington Park Road Conservation Area (CA). From the
    information that is before me, the significance of the CA is derived in part from its
    high concentration of historic buildings which reveal information about the
    development of the area over time. Because no external alterations have occurred
    as part of the appeal works, the character and appearance of the CA is preserved.
Heritage Balance
24. The Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the conservation
    of designated heritage assets. It also states that any harm to the significance of a
    designated heritage asset should have a clear and convincing justification.
    Although no harm has arisen in respect of the character or appearance of the CA,
    and the external appearance of the building has not been altered through the
    appeal scheme, the works have caused harm to the significance of the listed
    building. This is a matter of considerable importance and weight in my decision.
25. Where there is harm to a designated heritage asset, the Framework requires that
    the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
    benefits arising from the proposal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6003226


26. It is stated that the works were an investment in the listed building, to secure its
    stability, use, and upkeep and to prevent it falling into decay. Any works that were
    necessary to preserve the building would amount to heritage and public benefits.
    However, there are no photographs or other records to demonstrate the condition
    of the building prior to the works; and there is an absence of evidence to indicate it
    was structurally unsound or in a state of disrepair. Therefore, I am not persuaded
    that interventions on this scale were necessary to conserve the building and to
    secure its ongoing use. This limits the weight afforded to these stated benefits.
27. It is feasible that the works could have improved the energy efficiency of the
    building, which would amount to an important public benefit. However, there is no
    evidence before me to demonstrate the energy efficiency gains that have
    occurred; and how they have been achieved. Moreover, there could have been
    other, potentially less harmful ways, in which the gains could have been realised.
    Consequently, any energy efficiency improvements that have occurred do not
    provide clear and convincing justification for the harm that has been caused.
28. The works have created an internal layout that is conducive to the lifestyle and
    preferences of the appellant in terms of its functionality, circulation, daylighting,
    and outlook. However, there is no evidence to suggest that the property was
    inadequate or unsafe for domestic use prior to the works; and, therefore, the works
    were not necessary to secure its residential function. Consequently, these
    improvements amount to private rather than public benefits. Whilst the appellant’s
    wishes to alter the living space are understandable, the works have not conserved
    the heritage asset in a manner appropriate to its significance, contrary to the
    historic environment provisions of the Framework.
29. Taking all of the above into account, the public benefits in this case are not
    sufficient to outweigh the considerable importance and weight that I ascribe to the
    heritage harm I have identified. It follows that the scheme fails to satisfy the
    requirements of the Framework.
Conclusion
30. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.


E Catcheside
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
