Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by P Brennan BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003286
Land North of Lubstree Barns, Humber Lane, Donnington, Telford TF2 8FB.
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mark Davies of Lubstree Barns Ltd against the decision of Telford and
     Wrekin Council.
•    The application Ref is TWC/2025/0346.
•    The development proposed is the conversion of agricultural barns labelled 'North Barn' and 'Middle'
     Barn, with associated curtilage and parking.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 21 May 2024, Statutory Instrument 2024 No 579 (the SI) came into force
       amending Article 3(1), Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (the Order) (as
       amended). Article 10 sub paragraph 1 of the SI allowed a transitional period until
       the 21 May 2025 whereby an application could be determined either under the
       original or amended Class Q of the Order. The appellant has indicated that they
       sought consent under the Order as it stood prior to 21 May 2024. The Council
       considered the application on that basis and so shall I.
3.     A Flood Risk Assessment and a further email from the Structural Engineers have
       been submitted as part of the appeal. The Council have provided comments within
       its evidence. I am satisfied that accepting the information would not cause
       procedural unfairness to interested parties and as such, I have taken it into
       consideration.
Background and Main Issue
4.     The application was made under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q, of
       the Order (as amended) (as of August 2020). This permits development consisting
       of: (a) a change of use of a building and any land within its curtilage from a use as
       an agricultural building to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of the
       Schedule to the Use Classes Order; and (b) building operations reasonably
       necessary to convert the building subject to certain limitations and conditions.
       Consent is sought pursuant to Class Q(a) and Class Q(b).
5.     In this regard, the Council’s case is that the proposal fails to comply with the
       requirements of Class Q(a) as insufficient evidence has been presented to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003286


       demonstrate that the site forms part of an established agricultural unit and
       Class Q(b) regarding building operations reasonably necessary for conversion.
6.     Paragraph Q1 of the Order provides a list of exclusions as to when development
       would not be permitted by Class Q. The Council considers that the proposal fails to
       comply with Paragraph Q1(i) as the proposal would consist of building operations
       other than - (i) the installation or replacement of (aa) windows, doors, roofs or
       exterior walls, or (bb) water, drainage, electricity, gas or other services, to the
       extent reasonably necessary for the building to function as a dwellinghouse, and
       (ii) partial demolition to the extent reasonably necessary to carry out building
       operations allowed by paragraph Q.1(i).
7.     The proposed development would meet the requirements of all the other matters
       identified under paragraph Q1 (b) to (h) and (j) to (m).
8.     For the matters under paragraph Q2 of Class Q, it was concluded that the prior
       approval of the Council would be required in respect of the transport and highways
       impacts of the development in relation to the site access; noise impacts of the
       development; contamination risks on the site; flooding risks on the site; and the
       provision of adequate natural light in all habitable rooms of the dwellinghouses.
9.     Consequently, the main issues are whether the proposal would constitute
       permitted development under Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO
       in respect to Class Q(a) and (b) and paragraph Q1(i) and if the proposal is found to
       constitute permitted development, whether prior approval would be required and
       should be granted.
Reasons
Class Q(b) and Q1(i)
10. The appeal relates to two steel framed barns with corrugated roofs referred to as
    ‘North Barn’ and ‘Middle Barn.’ North Barn is a ‘Dutch’ barn with a barrel roofed
    section and a single storey lean-to element. One side of the barn is open with the
    other three sides clad in corrugated steel sheeting. The sheeting appears to be in
    a poor state of repair with holes in the roof and areas missing on the sides of the
    barn. The roof is supported on a mix of steel and timber purlins on the truss
    members. Middle Barn is a portal framed barn with pitched roof and a small single
    storey lean-to extension at the rear. It is enclosed on three sides with metal
    sheeting and appears to be in a good state of repair. As observed on my visit, both
    barns had a concrete base.
11. The appellant’s structural report for North Barn was undertaken in April 2023
    where it was estimated that the barn is at least 50 years old and identifies that at
    that time the barn had no floor slab. The report identifies that the steel frame is in a
    reasonable condition but has been subject to distortion and impact damage. The
    report concludes that the barn would require repairs to any members subject to
    damage; additional bracing and stiffening to the existing framing for the building
    and from any new mezzanine or internal structure to be installed; new roof and
    wall cladding; additional/replacement purlins to the roof; side rails repair and would
    be unlikely to be suitable for loadbearing for anything other than the roof and
    would benefit from further bracing and restraint both in the longitudinal and the
    transverse directions.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003286


12. Once the repairs have been made, the report identifies that a lightweight timber or
    Steel Frame System structure could be constructed within the current framework
    of the building with an internal flat deck at roof level to provide the insulation line
    without applying any additional loading to the existing structure allowing the roof to
    be re-sheeted and remain as original. No assessment of the foundations was
    undertaken.
13. The structural report for Middle Barn was undertaken in April 2025 where it was
    estimated that the barn is at least 40 years old. The report identifies that the
    existing structural steel frame is in a reasonable condition and capable of re-use,
    subject to a calculation check. However, subject to minor works to maintain the
    stability of the building in a longitudinal direction, the upper-level wall cladding and
    roofing would require replacement with a suitable steel profiled insulated system.
    The timber purlins appear to be in reasonable condition and subject to a timber
    and damp survey, and design checks could be retained for reuse. The low-level
    cladding to the rear and to the sides is considered to be grain walling that provides
    some stiffness to the building and should be retained in any conversion project,
    even if the cladding itself is concealed in the overall building envelope. No
    assessment of the foundations was undertaken.
14. Advice on the interpretation of Class Q is contained within paragraph 105 of the
    Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). It advises that it is only where the existing
    building is already suitable for conversion to residential use that the building would
    be considered to have the permitted development right. It also states that “it is not
    the intention of the permitted development right to allow rebuilding work which
    would go beyond what is reasonably necessary for the conversion of the building
    to residential use.” The guidance also draws attention to relevant caselaw in
    Hibbitt and Another v SSCLG (1) and Rushcliffe Borough Council (2) [2016]
    EWHC 2853 (Admin) (Hibbitt) on the difference between conversion and a rebuild.
    The latter would not be permissible under Class Q, but the judgment in each case
    is one of fact and degree.
15. Paragraph Q1(i) development is not permitted if it would consist of “building
    operations other than (i) the installation or replacement of (aa) windows, doors,
    roofs, or exterior walls, or (bb) water, drainage, electricity, gas, or other services to
    the extent reasonably necessary for the building to function as a dwellinghouse”.
    On the matter of building operations, the PPG states that such works may include
    the installation or replacement of doors, roofs, and exterior walls.
16. The North Barn structure would be stripped back to its skeletal form, new cladding
    would be provided to its walls and roof, and a new self-supporting timber frame
    structure would be built within to form two dwellings with an outside area provided
    at first floor within the roof structure of the lean-to. At the front of the barn, the front
    wall of the dwellings would be set within the barn leaving an area of the barn
    structure and roof providing additional covered area.
17. The Middle Barn structure would also be stripped back to its skeletal form and
    reclad and reroofed. Three dwellings would be constructed within the steel
    structure within a self-supporting timber frame appearing to be independent from
    the main barn structure, other than where the dwellings would be sited under the
    main pitch of the roof.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003286


18. New doors, windows, roofs, and exterior walls would be provided throughout both
    barns alongside servicing works. It is unknown whether new foundation works
    would be required.
19. The PPG indicates that internal works are generally not development and that, for
    a building to function as a dwelling it may be appropriate to undertake internal
    structural works, including to allow for a floor, the insertion of a mezzanine or
    upper floors within the overall residential floor space permitted, or internal walls,
    which are not prohibited by Class Q. There is no restriction on whether the internal
    works are structural or not, and the operations do not need to be demonstrably
    essential in order to be found 'reasonably necessary'.
20. Nonetheless, based on the extensive level of work required to the existing
    structures and the proposed self-supporting timber structures to deliver the
    dwellings within and around but not attached to or requiring the existing structure, I
    consider that the proposal has sufficient similarities with the Hibbitt case and the
    proposal would amount to a rebuild thus taking the proposal outside the scope of
    Class Q.
21. I am cognisant of the fact that where one becomes the other is a matter of
    judgement based on the specifics of the case. In this regard, whilst sufficient
    structure could be retained within the two barns, the level of work to the structures
    identified as being required (alongside the unknowns due to a lack of calculations
    and foundation assessment and the use of independent self-supporting timber
    frames that do not require the use of the barn structures) fail to convince me that
    the proposal would qualify as a conversion rather than a rebuild.
22. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would not fall within the scope of
    that permissible under Class Q(b) and Q1(i) of the GPDO. Accordingly, the
    proposal would not be permitted development.
Class Q(a)
23. Paragraph Q(a) identifies that development consisting of a change of use of a
    building and any land within its curtilage from a use as an agricultural building to a
    use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) is permitted development. The
    Council contends that insufficient information has been provided to demonstrate
    that the barns are in use as agricultural buildings.
24. The Council provides no further reference to the limitations identified within
    paragraph Q1(a) which requires the site to have been in use solely for agriculture
    as part of an established agricultural unit on 20 March 2013, or in the case of a
    building which was in use before that date but was not in use on that date, when it
    was last in use, or in the case of a site which was brought into use after 20th
    March 2013, for a period of at least 10 years before the date development under
    Class Q begins.
25. The two buildings are clearly agricultural barns. The appeal site is surrounded by
    agricultural land to its north, east and west. To the site’s south are Lubstree Barns,
    which are a series of agricultural buildings converted into eight dwellings following
    the grant of planning permission in 2014. At the time of my visit, the barns subject
    of this appeal, were empty. The application was accompanied by photographs
    taken at various points in time showing the barns being used to store machinery
    and crop seeds, alongside a detailed history of Lubstree Park Farm, including land

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6003286


       ownership. These include imagery from 2012 that show the barns in situ as part of
       the wider farm holding.
26. The Council has not identified why this information was considered insufficient.
    Nor has it provided information as to what was required to be submitted to prove
    that they are agricultural buildings. No further comment has been provided by the
    Council in its evidence, and it has not directly contradicted the appellant’s
    evidence. Consequently, based on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the
    barns were in use solely for agriculture as part of an established agricultural unit
    on 20 March 2013. Accordingly, the proposal would comply with the requirements
    of Class Q(a) and Paragraph Q1(a).
Other Matters
27. Considerations in relation to prior approval, including transport and highways
    impacts of the development; noise impacts of the development; contamination
    risks on the site; flooding risks on the site and the provision of adequate natural
    light in all habitable rooms of the dwellinghouses are a follow-on condition stage
    under Paragraph Q2. I note that the appellant would accept conditions to address
    the Council’s concerns regarding the prior approval matters noted above and that
    these would remove the Council’s objections in this regard. However, as the
    proposal would fail to constitute permitted development, there is no need to
    consider whether prior approval is required.
28. The appellant has drawn my attention to various appeal decisions in support of
    their case. However, whilst the decision letters are before me, the full details of the
    evidence presented to the Inspector has not been provided and the judgement
    between conversion and rebuild is a planning judgement based on fact and
    degree. Consequently, I am unable to establish whether there are any direct
    parallels between the cases referenced and the scheme before me, that would
    lead me to alter my conclusion on the main issue. I have considered this appeal
    proposal on its own merits and concluded that it would be unacceptable for the
    reasons set out above.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given above, I conclude the appeal should be dismissed.



P Brennan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
