Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026 by T Mansfield BA (Hons)
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003697
104 Trinity Road, Wandsworth, London, SW17 7RL
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Henry Agyekum (Trinity Dental Practice) against the decision of the
    Council of the London Borough of Wandsworth.
•   The application Ref is 2025/3381.
•   The advertisement is the installation of one internally illuminated sign to the front of the property.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The advertisement that has been installed at the appeal site appears to be in
   accordance with the plans before me. However, the appellant has confirmed that
   the advertisement is no longer proposed to be illuminated and I have therefore
   considered the appeal on this basis.
4. The control of advertisements is exercisable only in the interests of amenity and
   public safety. Regulation 3 states that powers in this regard shall be exercised
   taking into account the provisions of the development plan, so far as they are
   material, and any other relevant factors.
5. The Council has concluded that the advertisement would be acceptable in terms of
   public safety and, from the evidence before me, I have no reason to disagree.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is therefore the effect of the advertisement on amenity.
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal site is situated in the Wandsworth Common Conservation Area which,
   as the Wandsworth Common Conservation Area Appraisal (no date) sets out,
   derives considerable significance from the relationship between the fine-grained
   pattern of development surrounding the common and the open space of the
   common.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003697


8. Located to the south of Wandsworth Common, the appeal site belongs to a
   terraced row of substantial, brick-built Victorian buildings. These buildings are
   almost entirely consistent in their appearance through repeated features including
   arched porches, white stone dressing and gable ends. This uniformity, which can
   be appreciated behind the low walls and intermittent hedging at front boundaries, is
   integral to establishing a clear pattern of development in this primarily residential
   portion of Trinity Road. For these reasons, the appeal site makes a positive
   contribution to the significance of the conservation area.
9. It is not uncommon, in principle, for a business to have signage advertising their
   premises. The dark colour and design of the sign that has been installed at the front
   of the appeal site are respectful of the wider residential context, in which
   advertisements are otherwise rare. However, the sign is of an excessive scale,
   giving it an overly prominent appearance in views of the terraced row. This size and
   its positioning make it an unduly dominant feature in the streetscene and detracts
   from the contribution that the consistency of these buildings and their frontages
   make to the conservation area.
10. The appellant has indicated that the scale of the advertisement is necessary to
    provide functional wayfinding for patients, particularly those who are elderly or have
    visual impairments. However, the appellant has not sufficiently demonstrated that a
    smaller sign could not achieve the same purpose. Furthermore, I observed during
    my site visit that a significant portion of the small writing that covers much of the
    sign has begun to wear away, making it challenging to read in its current condition.
    For these reasons, I am not satisfied that this size and design of sign is necessary
    in the provision of functional wayfinding.
11. Therefore, the advertisement harms the character and appearance of the area,
    including the Wandsworth Common Conservation Area, and thereby harms
    amenity. Although it could be removed, so is reversible, this harm will endure while
    the advertisement is in place. Whilst there is no provision in the determination of
    advertisement consent appeals within a conservation area for harm to be balanced
    against the public benefits of the scheme, I will consider whether there are any
    other relevant factors that justify the identified harm.
12. Whilst the appellant has stated that the practice has experienced a notable
    increase in NHS patient enquiries since the installation of the signage, I have not
    been provided evidence to confirm that there is a direct correlation between these,
    and that no other factors were involved. Furthermore, although the appellant has
    associated the signage with the continued viable use of a non-listed building for
    essential healthcare provision, there is no indication that this is dependent on the
    presence of the advertisement as installed. Equally, it has not been demonstrated
    that a well-maintained and active frontage cannot be achieved at the appeal site
    without the installed advertisement.
13. On balance, therefore, these factors put forward by the appellant are not sufficient
    to mitigate the harm that the proposed advertisement has caused to the character
    and appearance of the Wandsworth Common Conservation Area, and thereby to
    amenity.
14. I have taken into account Policy LP9 of the Wandsworth Local Plan 2023-2038
    (adopted 2023) which seeks to protect amenity and so is material in this case.
    Given I have concluded that the advertisement has resulted in harm to amenity, the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003697


     scheme conflicts with this policy. The Council has also cited Local Plan Policies
     LP1 and LP3 which relate to a design-led approach and the historic environment.
     These policies refer only to development proposals, which does not include
     advertisements, and they are not therefore directly relevant to this proposal.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

T Mansfield
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
