Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by Chris Mayes CMLI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003507
Land opposite 17 Harper Royd Lane, Sowerby Bridge, Calderdale HX6 3QQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by D Barclay against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application reference is 25/01008/FUL.
•   The development proposed is described as ‘stable block’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. Since the appeal was lodged, the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) has been updated. I have determined the appeal on the basis of the
   current Framework. The parties, through the evidence submitted with the appeal,
   have had the opportunity to address the planning merits of the proposal, including
   matters relating to development in the Green Belt. I am satisfied that the changes
   to the Framework do not alter the substance of the main issues in this appeal or
   prejudice either party.
3. An additional cross-section plan was submitted with the appeal. This provides
   further information about the relationship between the proposed stable, the
   adjoining road and the surrounding land levels. It does not materially alter the
   development that was before the Council when it made its decision. I am satisfied
   that taking it into account would not disadvantage any party and I have determined
   the appeal on that basis.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
                having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies,
                including any relevant effects on the openness of and purposes of including
                land within the Green Belt;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area; and,
           •    whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm,
                would be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the
                very special circumstances required to justify the proposal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003507


Reasons
Whether Inappropriate Development, Openness, and Purposes
5. The appeal site lies within the Green Belt, where the essential characteristics are
   openness and permanence. Policy GB1 of the Calderdale Local Plan 2018/19-
   2032/33 (March 2023) (the LP) seeks to control development in the Green Belt and
   identifies forms of development that are not inappropriate. Although Policy GB1
   reflects earlier national policy wording, it continues to seek to protect the openness
   of the Green Belt and prevent inappropriate development. I have therefore
   considered the proposal against Policy GB1 of the LP and the current Framework,
   including Policy GB7.
6. The proposed stable would be associated with the existing equestrian use of the
   wider landholding. The keeping and riding of horses for private recreational
   purposes can be treated as outdoor recreation, and the proposed stable, including
   the fodder store and tack room, would serve that use. I am therefore satisfied that
   the building would be a facility for outdoor recreation for the purposes of Policy
   GB7(1)(f)(iv) of the Framework.
7. However, Policy GB7(1)(f) is not satisfied merely because a building is connected
   with outdoor recreation. The relevant exception applies only where the
   development minimises its impact on the openness of the Green Belt and does not
   conflict with the purposes of including land within it. The associated engineering
   operations required as part of the scheme are also required to satisfy the relevant
   requirements of Policy GB7.
8. The proposed stable would be located on a presently undeveloped part of the site,
   close to Harper Royd Lane and separated from the existing stable building and
   manège. Although the building would be single storey and of a form commonly
   associated with equestrian use, it would nevertheless introduce a new structure,
   associated hardstanding and engineering works onto open land. In spatial terms,
   the development would increase the amount of built form on the site and would
   therefore reduce the openness of this part of the Green Belt.
9. The stable would be set below the level of Harper Royd Lane and would use dark-
   stained timber and a low roof profile. These factors would reduce its visibility within
   the wider landscape. Nevertheless, the development would still be seen from
   Harper Royd Lane and from wider public vantage points across the valley, where it
   would be experienced as a new building extending built form onto the valley side.
   Consequently, the proposal would also have a harmful effect on openness in visual
   terms.
10. I recognise that the scale of the building would be modest and that the degree of
    activity associated with the private stabling of horses would be limited.
    Furthermore, its low-profile design, materials and siting would reduce its visual and
    spatial effects. Taking these matters together, I am satisfied that the proposal
    would seek to minimise its impact on the openness of the Green Belt.
11. Nevertheless, the appeal site forms part of open countryside on the valley side, and
    the proposal would introduce a new isolated building into that setting. As such, it
    would conflict with the purpose of safeguarding the countryside from
    encroachment. The presence of other stables and ancillary buildings in the wider


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003507


     area does not alter that finding, as the appeal proposal must be assessed on its
     own site-specific effects.
12. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would not satisfy the requirements
    of Policy GB7(1)(f) of the Framework. Although the proposal would seek to
    minimise its impact on the openness of the Green Belt through its scale, siting and
    design, it would conflict with the purpose of safeguarding the countryside from
    encroachment. Consequently, the proposal would constitute inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt in conflict with policy. It would also conflict with
    Policy GB1 of the LP which, read in light of the current Framework, seeks to
    prevent inappropriate development in the Green Belt and protect its openness.
Character and Appearance
13. The appeal site forms part of an open pastoral hillside characterised by small field
    parcels enclosed by fencing and occasional stone walls, scattered trees and areas
    of woodland. These features contribute to the rural character of the valley side and
    the wider landscape setting of Sowerby Bridge.
14. The site lies within the Ringstone Edge and Norland Moor Fringes Special
    Landscape Area and the Blackwood Common Landscape Character Area. Despite
    some sporadic development in the wider area, the appeal site itself remains
    undeveloped and contributes to the open character of the hillside.
15. The proposed stable would introduce a new building, associated hardstanding and
    engineering works into this undeveloped landscape. Although the scale, design and
    materials would be typical of equestrian development, that does not overcome the
    implications of its siting. The proposal would extend built development further down
    the valley side and reduce the open, undeveloped character that presently
    contributes to local distinctiveness and sense of place.
16. I have taken into account the existence of other stables and ancillary structures in
    the wider area. However, their presence does not, in itself, provide justification for
    additional development in this part of the landscape. The issue is not solely
    whether the building would appear incongruous, but whether its introduction would
    conserve or enhance the landscape character of the area. In this regard, it would
    not.
17. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area. It would therefore conflict with Policy GN4 of the LP which
    seeks, among other things, to protect important and distinctive views, avoid
    adverse effects on the scenic quality of the Special Landscape Area, and protect
    and enhance landscape quality, sense of place and local distinctiveness.
Other Considerations and Green Belt Balance
18. The proposal would provide accommodation for the appellant's horses and support
    the continued recreational use of the land for equestrian purposes. I accept that this
    represents a benefit of the scheme. However, that benefit would be mainly private
    in nature and does not attract more than limited weight in favour of the proposal.
19. Planning permission exists for the demolition of the existing stable within the wider
    landholding and its replacement with a dwelling. If implemented, that permission
    would remove the existing stabling facilities currently available on the site. I
    therefore recognise that the appeal proposal would provide replacement

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003507


     accommodation for the appellant's horses. However, the existence of the extant
     planning permission does not, on its own, justify the proposed development. I
     therefore attach limited weight to this matter.
20. The proposal includes biodiversity enhancements, including tree planting and bird
    and bat boxes. However, the scale of the proposed enhancement would be
    modest. As such, these measures would attract limited weight in favour of the
    proposal.
21. I have also taken into account the support expressed by some nearby residents,
    who consider that the proposal would have limited effects on the Green Belt and
    support the grant of planning permission. Local opinion is a material consideration,
    but planning appeals are determined on their planning merits. In this case, I attach
    limited weight to those expressions of support.
22. There is no substantive evidence before me that the proposal would cause
    unacceptable harm in relation to highway safety, drainage, mineral safeguarding or
    neighbouring living conditions. However, the absence of harm in these respects is
    neutral and does not weigh either for or against the proposal.
23. The proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt
    because, although it would seek to minimise its impact on openness, it would
    conflict with the purpose of safeguarding the countryside from encroachment. In
    accordance with the Framework, I give substantial weight to the resulting Green
    Belt harm. In addition, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of
    the area, including the landscape character of the Special Landscape Area and
    Landscape Character Area.
24. Set against that harm, I attach limited weight to the provision of stabling for the
    appellant's horses, the replacement of stabling facilities that could otherwise be lost
    through implementation of the extant planning permission, and the proposed
    biodiversity enhancements. I have also had regard to the support expressed by
    nearby residents. However, these considerations, whether taken individually or
    cumulatively, do not clearly outweigh the substantial weight that I give to the Green
    Belt harm, together with the harm to the character and appearance of the area.
    Consequently, the very special circumstances necessary to justify the development
    do not exist.
Conclusion
25. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt because it
    would conflict with the purpose of safeguarding the countryside from
    encroachment. It would also harm the character and appearance of the area.
26. For the reasons given above, the other considerations in this case do not clearly
    outweigh the harm that I have identified. Consequently, the very special
    circumstances necessary to justify the development do not exist.
27. The proposal conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole, and material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be determined other than in
    accordance with it. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Chris Mayes
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
