Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 27 May 2026
by J Moore BA (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 Augst 2026

Appeal A Ref: 6003318
Robinia, 18 Blyth Hall, Blyth, Worksop, Nottinghamshire S81 8HL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Anthony Hallam against the decision of Bassetlaw District Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/00800/HSE.
•   The development was originally described as proposed extensions and alterations to an existing
    dwelling.

Appeal B Ref: 6003486
Robinia, 18 Blyth Hall, Blyth, Worksop S81 8HL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•   The appeal is made by Anthony Hallam against the decision of Bassetlaw District Council.
•   The application Ref 25/00871/HSE was approved on 24 October 2025 and planning permission was
    granted subject to conditions.
•   The development permitted is erect detached building for store/garaging & golf simulation room.
•   The conditions in dispute are:
    • No 3 which states that: Before the windows and doors hereby approved are installed, details of their
      material, design, specification, method of opening, method of fixing and finish, in the form of drawings
      and sections of no less than 1:20 scale, shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by the Local
      Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out only in accordance with the agreed details.
    • The reason given for condition 3 is: To ensure the development preserves the character and
      appearance of the Conservation Area in accordance with policy ST33 and Chapter 12 and 16 of the
      NPPF.
    • No 4 which states that: Before any construction occurs above damp proof course (DPC) level,
      samples or detailed specifications of all external materials to be used on the development hereby
      permitted shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
      development shall be carried out only in accordance with the agreed materials.
    • The reason given for condition 4 is: To ensure the development preserves the character and
      appearance of the Conservation Area in accordance with policy ST33 and Chapter 12 and 16 of the
      NPPF.
    • No 5 which states that: No dentil fillers shall be used on any pantile roof at the ridge, and roof
      ventilation shall not be provided through tile vents.
    • The reason given for condition 5 is: To ensure that the design and detailing of the roof preserve the
      character and appearance of the Conservation Area, in accordance with Policy ST40 of the
      Bassetlaw Local Plan and Chapter 12 of the NPPF.
    • No 6 which states that: Before any construction occurs above damp proof course (DPC) level, details
      of the treatment of verges and eaves hereby permitted shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by
      the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out only in accordance with the
      agreed verges and eaves details.
    • The reason given for condition 6 is: To ensure the development preserves the character and
      appearance of the Conservation Area in accordance with policy ST33 and Chapter 12 and 16 of the
      NPPF.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003318


Decisions
1.       Both Appeal A and Appeal B are dismissed.
Preliminary and Procedural Matters
2.       The planning applications were made in the name of Mr and Mrs Hallam. However,
         the appeals are made in the name of Anthony Hallam only. I have therefore used the
         latter in my banner heading above.
3.       The appeal site is the same for each appeal. Appeal A is made against the refusal of
         planning permission for extensions and alterations to the host property. Appeal B is
         made against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions for a detached
         outbuilding. Although the appeals are different in nature, the main issues and my
         reasoning overlap to some degree, and I have therefore considered both appeals
         within one decision to avoid duplication.
4.       By way of background, there appears to have been some confusion during the
         determination phase as to whether the appeal site and/or each proposal is in the
         Blyth Conservation Area (CA), which is a designated heritage asset. Moreover, both
         appeals were made partly on the grounds that the appeal site is not within the CA.
         However, Appeal A was made under the Householder Appeal Service, which does
         not permit the Council or any interested party to respond to the grounds of appeal. In
         the interests of natural justice and fairness, the appeal procedure for Appeal A was
         therefore elevated to one of written representations.
5.       The map of the CA and the Blyth Conservation Area Appraisal and Management
         Plan 2012 (CAAMP) indicate that only part of the appeal site is within the CA. This is
         a small section of land to include the boundary wall of the appeal site along Bawtry
         Road and around the entrance way to the street of Blyth Hall (the street).
         Furthermore, the development proposed under Appeal A and the approved
         development under Appeal B are outside the CA.
6.       Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
         (the Act) requires that special attention is paid to the desirability of preserving or
         enhancing the character or appearance of a CA. This duty is exercised in relation to
         any building or other land in a CA, and not in relation to its setting. However,
         paragraph 213 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) states
         that any harm to, or loss of, the significance of a designated heritage asset (from its
         alteration or destruction, or from development within its setting), should require clear
         and convincing justification. The Framework therefore establishes the need to
         consider any negative impact of development within the setting of a CA, and the
         effect upon its significance.
7.       Both appeals were made partly on the grounds that each proposal would not harm
         the setting of the Grade I listed building Blyth Priory Church of Saint Mary and Saint
         Martin1 (the listed Church). I have therefore had regard to the duty under section
         66(1) of the Act, which requires a decision maker to have special regard to the
         desirability of preserving a listed building or its setting or any features of special
         architectural or historic interest it possesses.



1
    List Entry Ref 1239182


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6003318


Main Issues
8.     The proposed development under Appeal A includes several elements; a two-storey
       front porch extension, a first-floor side extension; alterations to the existing
       fenestration; and alterations to an existing rear conservatory to form a sunroom. The
       Council has no concerns about the proposed sunroom, and I find no reason to
       consider otherwise. Consequently, my reasoning for Appeal A focusses on the
       remaining elements of the scheme. Therefore, and having regard to all the evidence
       before me, the main issues are:
       •    Appeal A: the effect of the proposed development upon the settings of the listed
            Church and the CA (the designated heritage assets); and the character and
            appearance of the area outside of the CA, including the host property.
       •    Appeal B: whether the disputed conditions are reasonable and necessary, with
            particular regard to the effect of the approved development upon the settings of
            the designated heritage assets; and the character and appearance of the area
            outside the CA, including the host property.
Reasons
The appeal property and the proposals
9.     Robinia is the first property on the left-hand side of the street when entering from
       Bawtry Road. It is a two-storey dwelling within a large triangular plot. The main
       elevation includes a central, flat-topped projecting pediment supported by columns
       (an open porch) which is flanked by rounded bay windows which project well forward
       of the main elevation. A single-storey garage wing extends towards Bawtry Road
       and angles to a position forward of the main elevation and the open porch.
10. The dwelling is of pale red/brown brick with a hipped concrete pantile roof in a pale
    red colour, and a pair of chimney stacks. Roof eaves and verges are white, and
    although I cannot be certain whether they are of timber or another material, they are
    of a simple design and undecorated. Windows and doors are given to be of white
    UVPc and include those with small panes and glazing bars. Garage doors are of a
    roller shutter style in a muted pale green colour.
11. Boundaries to the rear garden are tall and of brick; the section along Bawtry Road is
    within the CA and wraps around the entrance to the street, screening much of the
    garage wing. Boundary walling along the frontage is low, to include pillars and
    coping, given to be of stone and reconstituted stone.
12. Appeal A: The first-floor side extension would be stepped back from the existing
    main elevation with an extended hipped roof form below the ridge height of the main
    roof. The front porch extension would be a two-storey gable at the centre, and single
    storey at each side to the ground floor with a pitched roof above, following the outer
    edges of the existing bays, with extensive glazing treatments. The overall effect
    would be to increase the volume and mass at the front of the dwelling and above
    part of the garage wing. The extensions would largely be in matching materials to
    those of the existing dwelling, save for the facing brickwork for the front extension
    which would be in a contrasting blend. The windows would be in UVPc or aluminium
    to match proposed replacement windows.
13. Appeal B: The approved single storey outbuilding would be sited to the right of the
    existing dwelling when viewed within the street, set at an angle against the side

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003318


       boundary of the triangular plot. Its outer right corner would project forward of the
       main elevation of the dwelling and its open porch. This arrangement would reflect
       the angle of the existing wing on the opposite flank. The materials detailed on the
       application form include facing bricks, roof tile and standard doors to match the
       existing dwelling. However, the proposed plans state that brickwork would match the
       proposed entrance extension (part of the Appeal A scheme) with facing brick in
       contrasting blend to the original house, without any detail as to colour or tone. The
       proposed plans include solar tiles to be in laid and flush to the front and rear roof
       planes.
Designated heritage assets: significance, special interest & settings (Both Appeals)
14. The significance of the CA stems in part from its location at the convergence of
    important routes between Sheffield and Nottingham at a promontory of higher
    ground. Further significance arises from its status as an historic market town, with
    market rights granted to a former priory. Although most of the priory was lost at
    dissolution, part of its cloisters became a hall, which was later rebuilt and modified in
    the C17 and C18 with extensive landscaped grounds. The hall fell into disrepair
    before being demolished in 1972, when it was known as Blyth Hall. The outer
    boundary of the CA is drawn to include the town’s historic core; the listed Church;
    and parts of the former grounds of Blyth Hall, including its surviving boundary walling
    along Bawtry Road. This historic, tall boundary walling is a key feature of the CA,
    and forms part of the boundary of the appeal site, wrapping around the entrance to
    the street.
15. The appeal property is part of an area of modern housing development which
    occupies other parts of the former grounds of Blyth Hall. This residential area is
    characterised as a group of generously sized, architecturally varied detached
    dwellings in large plots. This development pattern is in sharp contrast to the
    established development pattern within the CA, which is characterised as narrow
    plots (long or short) with buildings sited close to the highway. Although this
    residential area is excluded from the CA, the CA wraps around it, such that Bawtry
    Road forms a relatively narrow corridor to the external boundary of the CA. The built
    form of the main dwelling, the proposed extensions and the approved outbuilding
    are within this residential area, outside of the CA.
16. The listed Church occupies an elevated position within the higher ground of the CA
    and is of ashlar and brick with lead roof. Its earliest parts date from the C11, as part
    of the former priory. It is a rare example of early surviving Norman architecture with
    other significant phases, with external and internal features detailed in the listing
    description. Insofar as related to the appeals, the key features of special interest of
    the listed Church are its external architectural features and its elevated position.
    Most notable is its C15 buttressed tower which appears in view along Bawtry Road
    and within the street of Blyth Hall, and within the wider townscape and surrounding
    landscape at some distance. The listed Church is also a key feature of the CA.
17. The Framework defines the setting of a heritage asset as the surroundings in which
    a heritage asset is experienced. Its extent is not fixed and may change as the asset
    and its surroundings evolve. Insofar as related to the appeals, the immediate setting
    of the CA is largely experienced when travelling along Bawtry Road and at the
    entrance to the street where the historic boundary walling and the listed Church can
    be seen above the walling and at the entrance way. Such views allow not only the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6003318


       significance of the listed Church to be appreciated, but also the value of the listed
       Church to the significance of the CA. Such views are identified within the CAAMP.
18. Insofar as related to the appeals, the immediate setting of the listed Church is
    largely experienced from the entrance way to the street (within the CA) and within
    the street (outside of the CA) as it inclines on its winding route towards the higher
    ground of the listed Church. Views of the listed Church are restricted by the historic
    walling which wraps around the street entrance; by the presence of dwellings with
    their associated ancillary structures; the topography; and some degree of
    vegetation, including trees.
19. The relatively modern development within the street of Blyth Hall (of which the
    appeal site is a part) effectively falls within the immediate setting of the listed Church
    and that of the CA. Views of the listed Church above and between built form in the
    vicinity of the proposals allow the special interest of the listed Church and its
    contribution to the significance and setting of the CA to be appreciated. While the
    proposals are outside of the CA, they are within the immediate setting of the CA and
    the immediate setting of the listed Church.
Appeal A - Effects
20. The proposal would not alter the historic boundary wall of the former hall within the
    CA, which forms part of the boundary of the appeal site. As the proposed extensions
    and alterations would not be within the CA, they would not harm its character or
    appearance.
21. In terms of the setting of the CA, the proposed front and side extensions would
    appear in view when travelling along Bawtry Road, above the historic walling. The
    single storey parts of the garage wing would screen the extensions to some degree.
    The historic boundary walling would still appear in long views along Bawtry Road
    and the proposal would therefore not affect the ability to appreciate the contribution
    that the boundary wall makes to the character and appearance of the CA.
22. Due to its scale and siting, the volume and mass of the front extension would intrude
    into the left-hand side of the frame of view within which the listed Church is seen at
    the entrance to the street at its junction with Bawtry Road. Although views of the
    Church tower would not be obscured, parts of its roofscape and facing elevation
    would be, depending on the angle of view. The extensive glazing to the front
    elevation, together with some degree of contrasting brick work would draw attention
    to this part of the proposal, detracting from views of the listed Church. In my view,
    the scale and design of the front extension would conflict with paragraph 208 of the
    Framework, which seeks to avoid or minimise any conflict between the conservation
    of a heritage asset and any aspect of a proposal.
23. The scale and siting of the side extension would not intrude into views of the listed
    Church at the entrance to the street, as it would be largely confined to the depth and
    height of the existing dwelling.
24. In reaching my findings, I have considered the appellant’s photographs and my own
    observations in experiencing the setting of the listed Church. I note that when
    travelling up the street, existing views of the Church’s facing elevation and roofscape
    are interrupted by the two storey dwelling at No 15, which is at a higher level and
    also by intervening tree cover, but this would be less so when not in leaf. Although
    No 15 obscures parts of the listed Church, it appears to be part of the planned

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6003318


       estate. I also appreciate that the effect of the front extension would be limited in
       duration when entering and travelling up the street. Nonetheless, the front extension
       would not preserve the immediate present-day setting of the listed Church and
       would detract from it.
25. Within more distant views, and within the wider CA, views of the tower and
    roofscape of the listed Church would still be available within gaps between built
    form, and within the surrounding landscape. Therefore, the proposal would not harm
    the wider setting of the listed Church or the wider setting of the CA. The value of the
    listed Church to the significance of the CA would not be harmed in such
    circumstances.
26. The appellant draws my attention to the nature of other properties within the street,
    such that in the appellant’s view, the proposal would not be significantly different and
    thus be acceptable. However, Nos 1-3 (consecutive) are on the opposite side of the
    street and have a different spatial relationship to the listed Church. Due to their scale
    and siting, they do not obscure the listed Church when viewed at the entrance to the
    street or within the street. Consequently, whether the scale and siting of the
    proposed extensions would be similar to No1 or would result in a dwelling of a
    comparatively smaller footprint, volume or mass than No 2 does not render the
    proposal acceptable in terms of the setting of the listed Church.
27. Matters of scale, siting, design and materials are also relevant to the character and
    appearance of the host property and the area outside the CA, and I have considered
    these matters accordingly. My own observations of the area within the street of Blyth
    Hall are that built form, footprints and building lines vary, but dwellings are
    predominantly set within spacious plots with side spaces, such that the character is
    largely open. External materials for elevations vary but are predominantly brick, with
    uniform tones of light brown or red. Roof forms and roof materials vary to include
    slate, clay and concrete roof tiles. Window styles and proportions vary and include
    contemporary styled doors and openings. My observations reflect the individual
    nature of properties that the Council recognises in its characterisation of the area.
28. No 1 is of a similar brick colour to the existing appeal property. It appears to have
    been substantially extended to one side and includes a two-storey projecting gable
    within its main elevation. However, the windows within the main elevation are flush
    to that elevation, such that the projecting gable has no flanking glazing treatments
    and there is no contrasting brickwork. The proposed front elevation would be in
    sharp contrast with No 1 as it would incorporate the footprint of the existing bays
    with extensive glazing and would include contrasting brickwork. For these reasons,
    the presence of a two-storey projecting gable at the front elevation of No 1 does not
    render the appeal scheme acceptable.
29. The dwelling at No 2 is of 2½ storeys, with a triple gabled roof form, extensive
    glazing above its entrance porch, and a linked structure of some considerable height
    which extends well forward of the main elevation. The property occupies almost all
    the width of its plot. There is no evidence before me to demonstrate what
    circumstances might have led to the scale and design of this property. In my view, it
    appears somewhat incongruous to other dwellings within the street due to the scale
    and siting of its projecting wing, in combination with the blue tones within its
    brickwork, and the lack of side space, such that it appears rather dominant within the
    street scene. For these reasons, I do not find that the development at No 2 renders
    the appeal scheme acceptable.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6003318


30. Drawing all the above together, the proposal would fail to preserve the setting of the
    CA and the setting of the listed Church and would harm the character and
    appearance of the host property and the area.
       Appeal A - public benefits and balance
31. Paragraph 212 of the Framework advises that when considering the impact of
    development on the significance of designated heritage assets, great weight should
    be given to the asset’s conservation. Paragraph 213 goes on to advise that
    significance can be harmed or lost through the alteration or destruction of those
    assets and that any such harm should have a clear and convincing justification. I
    find the harm to be less than substantial in this instance but nevertheless of
    considerable importance and weight. In accordance with paragraph 215 of the
    Framework, this harm should be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal,
    including, where appropriate, securing its optimum viable use.
32. There is no compelling evidence to demonstrate that a residential use would cease if
    I were to dismiss the appeal, and no specific public benefits are put forward by the
    appellant. In my judgement, the proposal would result in temporary economic
    benefits during the construction phase, limited by the scale of the development.
    Such limited public benefits would not outweigh the harm that I have found, to which
    I am required to attach great weight.
33. For the above reasons, I conclude that on balance, the proposal would fail to
    preserve the settings of the CA and the listed Church. This would fail to satisfy the
    requirements of the Act and paragraph 215 of the Framework. The proposal would
    also harm the character and appearance of the area and the host property. The
    proposal therefore conflicts with Policies ST33; ST40 and 41 of the Bassetlaw Local
    Plan 2024 (BLP). Taken together, these policies seek to ensure high-quality design
    that conserves the historic environment; and that development within the setting of a
    heritage asset is sympathetic in terms of various factors, including but not limited to
    siting, scale, design and materials.
Appeal B – whether the disputed conditions are reasonable and necessary
34. Due to the siting and scale of the approved outbuilding, it would appear within view
    at the entrance to the street, along the street, and within views towards the listed
    Church, and likely within views above the historic boundary walling near the
    entrance to the street. Consequently, the outbuilding would have the potential to
    harm the settings of the CA and the listed Church by virtue of inappropriate
    materials and/or design features. Even small details could draw the eye and detract
    from their settings.
35. The disputed conditions Nos 3-6 inclusive seek to control the appearance of the
    outbuilding. In this case, conditions to control the appearance of the outbuilding
    would be reasonable, necessary and justified in order to avoid and/or minimise harm
    to the settings of designated heritage assets. Furthermore, the use of conditions to
    control materials is generally reasonable and necessary in the interests of the
    character and appearance of any area and/or any host property.
36. While some materials and design features are indicated in the approved plans and
    supporting information, the approved plans refer to materials intended to match
    those proposed for the Appeal A scheme, which the Council refused. While a brand
    name for solar roof tiles is specified, the product and colour are not. The details of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6003318


       openings are not clearly defined including materials, colour and method of opening.
       The treatment of roof verges and details is not shown on the approved plans. For
       these reasons, I am not satisfied that the final appearance of the outbuilding is
       clearly and precisely defined within the approved plans and supporting information.
       Consequently, I find that conditions Nos 3, 4 and 6 are reasonable and necessary in
       order to provide clarity and certainty to the final appearance of the approved
       development.
37. Condition No 5 is a compliance condition to restrict the means of roof ventilation. My
    observations are that the roofscape of the host dwelling does not include tile vents
    or dentil fillers (also known as dentil slips). During my visit I did not see these
    materials in other roofscapes within the street nor along this section of Bawtry Road.
    Such materials would therefore be discordant within the immediate area and would
    likely draw the eye. While a roof requires ventilation, it has not been demonstrated
    that tile vents are the only way to achieve this, nor the only way to meet the
    requirements of the Building Regulations. I am therefore satisfied that condition No 5
    is reasonable and necessary to ensure that the outbuilding’s roof matches that of its
    host and other properties within the vicinity; and does not detract from the settings of
    the CA and the listed Church.
38. The appellant draws my attention to the comments of the Council’s Conservation
    Officer during the determination phase where suggestions for improvement were
    made following amendments to the scheme. The suggestions include timber garage
    doors in the style of historic cart shed openings, slate roof tiles, solar tiles in buff
    finish, and the use of reclaimed brick. The appellant is concerned that such
    suggestions will become requirements and wishes to install a garage door to match
    the existing ones at the property and use matching materials to the main dwelling. I
    note that the approved plans show horizontal detailing for the garage door which is
    suggestive of the existing garage doors at the property and that roof tiles are
    annotated to match the dwelling. The application form states that doors would match
    existing ones at the property. However, it is not my role to specify what materials
    might be acceptable to the Council. Rights of appeal are available should any
    application to discharge conditions be unsuccessful.
39. In conclusion, the disputed conditions are reasonable and necessary to avoid or
    minimise harm to the settings of the designated heritage assets; and in the interests
    of the character and appearance of the area, including the host property. The
    disputed conditions should therefore be retained.
40. In reaching my findings, I have carefully considered the policies referred to in the
    decision notice. I am satisfied that BLP Policies ST33 and ST40 are relevant to the
    disputed conditions. Taken together they seek to ensure high-quality design, based
    on a robust understanding of local context, including heritage assets; and to
    conserve, enhance and sensitively manage the historic environment. Although BLP
    Policy 41 is not cited within the decision notice, it is most pertinent as it seeks to
    ensure that development within the setting of a heritage asset is sympathetic in
    terms of various factors, including but not limited to siting, scale, design and
    materials. The objectives of the Framework at Chapter 12 (to achieve well designed
    places) and Chapter 16 (to conserve and enhance the historic environment) remain
    relevant.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6003318


Other Matters
41. Appeal A: The appellant raises concerns about the handling of the application by the
    Council. However, such matters are not determinative in my consideration of the
    appeal, which I have considered on its planning merits. The absence of objections
    by the Parish Council and neighbours does not render the proposal acceptable.
Conclusions
42. For the reasons above, and having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude that
    both Appeal A and Appeal B should be dismissed.
       J Moore
       INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
