Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 July 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003055
Gwel An Syllan, Truthwall Lane, Truthwall, St Just, Cornwall, TR19 7PU
•     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•     The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Charlie and Michelle Blaken against the decision of Cornwall
      Council.
•     The application Ref is PA25/04202.
•     The development proposed is the construction of 1 – 9 residential dwellings at land to east of Gwel
      An Syllan, Truthwall Lane, Truthwall, St Just, TR19 7PU.

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.      The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
        advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
        housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
        stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
        is suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent stage’) is when
        the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
        of these two stages.
3.      The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
        land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
        considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if
        permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.      An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
        was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
        parties with an opportunity to provide comments on the new Framework as part of
        the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
        decision.
Main Issues
5.      The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
        regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development.




1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003055


Reasons
6.     Policy 3 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030 (the LP), sets
       out the way in which new housing will be provided across the county within the
       plan period. The main parties appear to agree that the part of the policy that is
       most pertinent to the consideration of this proposal is the clause which refers to
       the rounding off of settlements.
7.     In December 2017, the Council also published a Chief Planning Officers Advice
       Note on Infill/Rounding Off (the CPOAN). The CPOAN provides additional
       information to help interpret the wording of LP Policy 3. While only guidance, I can
       see no reason to depart from the CPOAN in determining whether the proposal
       before me would constitute the rounding off of a settlement.
8.     Both LP Policy 3, and the CPOAN, require the decision maker to consider whether
       or not the proposed number of dwellings would be of an appropriate scale, given
       the role and size of the settlement. Indeed, the permission in principle legislation
       also enables consideration of the amount of development. In this instance,
       Truthwall is a very small village which includes a nucleus of dwellings around a
       crossroads, and linear development which stretches a short distance away from
       the nucleus, including along Truthwall Lane.
9.     The proposal before me presents a range in the quantum of proposed homes of
       between one to nine. I therefore must consider the potential impacts of the upper
       end of that range. Having looked at the settlement as a whole during my site visit,
       it is abundantly clear to me that a development of nine dwellings would appear as
       a very significant addition and would therefore inevitably appear as being
       disproportionate to the size of Truthwall. On that basis, the proposal would conflict
       with local policy and guidance, as well as the matters that can be considered at the
       permission in principle stage.
10. Paragraph 1.68 of the LP also notes that rounding off should not visually extend
    building into the open countryside. During my site visit, I noted the linear row of
    cottages which extends for a short distance along the north side of Truthwall Lane.
    The appeal site is located directly opposite these dwellings on the south side of the
    lane. However, as one walks eastwards along the lane there is a real appreciation
    of development becoming more sporadic and a clear sense of transition from the
    small urban core of the village around the crossroads to the countryside beyond.
11. The lane itself, and the Cornish hedgebank on its southern side therefore appear
    as a logical boundary to the settlement in this location. Indeed, it was apparent
    during my visit that the appeal site seems to have a much closer visual connection
    to the surrounding countryside than it does to the village itself. This is despite the
    presence of existing dwellings on the western and northern sides of the site, and
    the fact that there are hedges on its southern and eastern boundaries. The way
    that the site has been managed, with shorter grass, does not alter its fundamental
    character in my view. With this in mind, it is clear that a development of up to nine
    dwellings, in whatever form it would take, would appear as an incursion into the
    open countryside.
12. Therefore, while the development could be designed in a way that would not
    extend eastwards beyond the existing row of dwellings, thereby avoiding a
    situation where additional land becomes available for rounding off on the northern


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003055


       side of the lane, it must be concluded that the proposal would not represent the
       rounding off of a settlement.
13. The design, scale and layout of the proposal do not form part of the permission in
    principle stage. However, the effect of additional built form more generally can still
    be considered in order to determine whether the appeal site is in a suitable
    location. In this instance, the site is located within the Botallack and Truthwall
    Conservation Area. The significance of the Conservation Area, in so far as it is
    relevant to this appeal, is derived from the development of the village over many
    years, the historic appearance of many of the dwellings and the relationship of the
    village with the surrounding rural landscape.
14. In this instance, I have already noted that there is a strong sense of transition as
    one travels eastwards along Truthwall Lane. Indeed, the undeveloped nature of
    the appeal site plays an important role in maintaining the existing highly verdant,
    bucolic and rural character of the settlement. The site therefore contributes
    strongly to the character and appearance of the immediate area, as well as the
    significance of the Conservation Area.
15. It is absolutely inevitable that a development of up to nine dwellings on the site
    would greatly erode the existing sense of transition from the village to the
    countryside. Moreover, the proposed development would result in dwellings on
    both sides of Truthwall Lane as it extends away from the area around the
    crossroads. As such, it would add significantly more built form and would reduce
    the connection that the village has to the surrounding landscape, including by
    eroding the existing sense of verdancy and rurality. Moreover, it would also be
    perceived as a contrived incursion into the countryside.
16. Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires that special attention is paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
    the character or appearance of the Conservation Area. Given the modest size of
    the site, and with regard to the criteria set out within Policy HE6(1) of the
    Framework, the proposal would result in ‘harm’. In these circumstances, Policy
    HE6(4) of the Framework requires that this harm must be weighed against public
    benefits. Substantial weight must be given to a designated heritage asset's
    conservation.
17. The benefits of the proposal before me include the provision of up to nine
    dwellings in an area that is relatively well served by public transport, and which
    would contribute towards housing need, including the possibility of affordable
    dwellings. It would also provide economic benefits during the construction phase
    and post-occupation. The modest size of the proposal means that the scale of the
    public benefits would be moderate in nature. As a result, I therefore conclude that
    the public benefits do not outweigh the harm that I have identified. The proposed
    development would therefore fail to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the Conservation Area and would result in harm to its significance.
18. The site also forms part of the Cornwall National Landscape (the NL). Policy N4(1)
    of the Framework states that substantial weight should be placed on the
    importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of such areas.
    Furthermore, the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023 requires decision
    makers to actively seek to further the statutory purposes of NL’s.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003055


19. I have already described how the proposal would have a negative impact upon the
    Conservation Area. While new development within NL’s must not automatically be
    refused, it is inevitable in this instance that the described harm would also extend
    to the scenic beauty of the NL.
20. It is also important to note that the site is also located within the St Just Mining
    District of the World Heritage Site (WHS). The Outstanding Universal Value (OUV)
    of the area, in so far as it relates to this appeal, is connected to the history of
    Truthwall as a location that has strong links to the mining industry, including the
    presence of mine worker small holdings. I note that the WHS site office has
    objected to the proposed development on the basis that the scale and form of the
    appeal site strongly suggest that it formed a typical smallholding plot. However, the
    provided details are relatively vague, and the response also sets out that the
    records are somewhat uncertain.
21. Therefore, while I recognise the close links that Truthwall has with the mining
    industry, the WHS designation is not a moratorium on new development and the
    described uncertainty means that I am unclear what contribution, if any, the site
    makes to the OUV of the WHS. As a result, on the basis of the evidence before
    me, I cannot conclude that the proposal would result in harm to the WHS.
22. Nevertheless, for the reasons described, I conclude that the appeal site would not
    represent the rounding off of a settlement and would result in harm to the
    character and appearance of the area, including the Conservation Area and NL.
    These matters could not be overcome at the technical details consent stage. The
    appeal site is therefore not suitable for residential development, having regard to
    its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development.
23. As such, I conclude that the scheme would conflict with LP Policies 1, 2, 3, 12, 23
    and 24, Policy C1 of the Climate Emergency Development Plan Document
    (February 2023), and Policies AH6, AD1 and AD8 of the St Just in Penwith
    Neighbourhood Plan 2021 – 2030. Taken together, the relevant aspects of these
    policies seek to ensure that development is suitably located and that it is well
    designed, including by preserving landscape character and the significance of
    designated heritage assets. There would also be conflict with the Cornwall AONB
    Management Plan 2022 – 2027 which seeks to protect the scenic beauty of the
    NL.
Other Matters
24. The appellant has referred to other developments that have been permitted in the
    immediate area. I do not have the full details of these schemes before me.
    However, the appellant has set out that these applications were approved under
    the principles of previously developed land and infill development. It is clear
    therefore that these schemes are not directly comparable to the proposal before
    me and do not lead me to reach an alternative decision.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
25. The proposal would result in harm to the character and appearance of the area,
    including to the Conservation Area and NL. It would therefore conflict with the
    development plan when considered as a whole, notwithstanding the fact that I
    have not found harm in relation to the WHS. The benefits of the scheme include
    the provision of up to nine dwellings in an area that is relatively well served by

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6003055


       public transport, and which would contribute towards housing need, including the
       possibility of affordable dwellings. It would also provide economic benefits during
       the construction phase and post-occupation. Given the identified harm, I do not
       find that the proposal would result in an efficient use of land. Overall, I find that the
       benefits are moderate in nature when considered in combination.
26. From the evidence before me, the Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year
    supply of deliverable housing sites, with the current figure being just 3.8 years. I
    have no evidence before me to suggest that this position is likely to improve in the
    short-term.
27. The site is outside of the settlement boundary of Truthwall but is well related to the
    existing built form. The requirements of Policy S5(j)(i) of the Framework could
    therefore be said to be met. However, the proposal would clearly not conform with
    part 1 of Policy S5, in the sense that it would conflict with national decision making
    policies in relation to Conservation Areas and NL’s. Indeed, in this instance, the
    harm I have identified would substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposal.
28. Furthermore, even if it was considered that the appeal site was within the
    settlement, the appeal would still not succeed on the basis that the harm
    substantially outweighs the benefits when considering the requirements of Policy
    S4(1). Furthermore, in relation to Policy S4(2)(a)(ii) of the Framework, the proposal
    would also have a substantial adverse impact upon the NL.
29. The appellant has referred to Policy HO7 of the Framework. The proposal would
    provide a mixture of market and affordable dwellings in an area where there is
    housing need. It is unclear to me whether this is sufficient to trigger Policy HO7.
    However, even if it was of relevance, and substantial weight was to be afforded to
    the modest provision of homes in this case, I would still conclude that the harm
    substantially outweighs the benefits in this instance.
30. As such, there are no material considerations, including the provisions of the
    Framework, that outweigh the identified harm and associated development plan
    conflict. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
