Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 April 2026
by John Dowsett MA DipURP DipUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6003398
Blackett Street, outside No.42, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7AN
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications Plc against the decision of
     Newcastle Upon Tyne City Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/1511/01/ADV.
     The advertisement proposed is: Two digital 75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
     Street Hub unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6003400
Blackett Street, outside No.42, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7AN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications Plc against the decision of
     Newcastle Upon Tyne City Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/1512/01/DET.
•    The development proposed is described as: The proposed removal of an existing InLink Unit, and
     the deployment of a replacement Street Hub 3 unit.


Decision
1.    Appeal A
2.    The appeal is allowed, and express consent is granted for the display of two digital
      75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit outside 42
      Blackett Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7AN in accordance with the terms of
      the application, Reference: 2025/1511/01/ADV, dated 22 September 2025. The
      consent is for five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five
      standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning
      (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended), and the
      additional conditions set out in the attached schedule.
3.    Appeal B
4.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the proposed
      removal of an existing InLink Unit, and the deployment of a replacement Street
      Hub 3 unit outside 42 Blackett Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7AN in
      accordance with the terms of the application, Reference: 2025/1512/01/DET,
      dated 22 September 2025, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6003398 & 6003400


Preliminary Matters
5.       These appeals relate to two aspects of the same proposal, namely the removal of
         an existing freestanding unit that provides free public telephone calls and Wi-Fi,
         999 calls, and device charging, and replacing it with an updated version. The
         existing and proposed units also incorporate digital advertising screens. The
         reasons for refusal set out in the decision notices issued by the Council are
         essentially similar although the wording differs slightly to reflect the legal
         differences between the two consenting regimes. I have identified the main issues
         accordingly. I have considered each appeal separately. However, as essentially
         the same matters are to be covered, in order to avoid repetition, this decision letter
         addresses the appeals together except where otherwise stated. Because the
         subjects of the two appeals are integral to one another, for brevity I have used the
         term “the proposal” in this decision to refer collectively to the advertisements and
         the structure which contains them, again, except where otherwise stated.
Main Issue
6.       The main issues in these appeals are:
         •     The effect of the proposed advertisement on visual amenity, with particular
               regard to the effect on the Central Conservation Area and the setting of nearby
               listed buildings (Appeal A).
         •     The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
               the area, with particular regard to the effect on the Central Conservation Area
               and the setting of nearby listed buildings (Appeal B).
Reasons
7.       The appeal proposals would replace an existing “InLink” unit which incorporates
         two digital display screens, that show sequential advertising, with a new “Street
         Hub 3” unit which performs essentially similar functions and which also
         incorporates two advertising screens. The proposed new unit would measure
         1236mm wide, deep, 350mm depth with the maximum height at 2986mm. The
         units two screens would measure 950mm wide and 1670mm in height. The
         existing unit’s current dimensions are 889mm width, 280mm depth and 2896mm
         overall height. The screens are 689mm in width and 1215mm in height. The
         appeal proposals represent an increase of 286mm in width, 70mm in depth and
         90mm in height over the present unit. The Street Hub 3 unit would thus be slightly
         larger than the current unit and feature larger screens.
8.       The site is part of the footway of Blackett Street, a busy route through Newcastle
         city centre. The site is just outside of the boundary of the Central Conservation
         Area and is also within the setting of a number of Listed Buildings including the
         Grade I Earl Grey Monument [List Entry No: 1329931]; the Grade II* Listed 1-4, 6
         and 7 Eldon Square [List Entry No: 1355254]1; and the Grade II Listed Emerson
         Chambers [List Entry No: 1024923]; Eldon Buildings [List Entry No: 1024924];
         Gem House and Messrs Reid and Company [List Entry No: 1355232]; and 139-
         159 Grainger Street [List Entry No: 1320453]. The Grade II listed Parsons’
         Polygon [List Entry No: 1437311] is located a short distance to the east of the
         appeal site.

1
    This List Entry also includes 44b and 44c Blackett Street.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                         2
Appeal Decisions 6003398 & 6003400


9.    Although a List Entry for Eldon War Memorial in Eldon, County Durham, was
      submitted with the Council’s Questionnaire return, I have assumed that this was
      accidental and that it was intended to submit the Entry for the Grade II* Newcastle
      and District War Memorial in Eldon Square [List Entry No: 1115605].
10. Whilst I have been provided with the List Entries for numerous listed buildings, the
    reasons for refusal on the decision notices refer specifically to the settings of The
    Earl Grey Monument, Eldon Buildings and Parsons’ Polygon. In its submissions,
    the Council has not alleged harm to the setting of any of the other nearby listed
    buildings.
11. The Earl Grey Monument is a tall column on a pedestal base with a statue of the
    former Prime Minister Charles Earl Grey, commemorating his achievement of
    parliamentary reform with the passage of the Representation of the People Act of
    1832 (aka the Reform Act). Its significance is derived from its historical
    importance because of the connection to the Northumberland born politician who
    not only oversaw a significant change to the electoral system and expanded the
    franchise, but who’s government also passed the legislation which abolished
    slavery in the British Empire. It has architectural and aesthetic value from its
    design and appearance forming a focal point in the vista up Grey Street, and
    significant cultural value as an important landmark in Newcastle city centre. Listed
    at Grade I, it is of national importance.
12. Eldon Buildings, at 118 Grey Street and 29, 31,and 33 Blackett Street, is Grade II
    listed. It is a four storey sandstone building, originally constructed as a hotel but
    now with commercial premises to the ground floor and unspecified uses on the
    upper floors. It has an eight bay, curved, façade which turns the corner of Grey
    Street and Blackett Street. The roof is partially concealed behind a parapet that
    features three, upward projecting, pediments, with carved panels, the central of
    which contains the name Eldon Buildings in Art Nouveau lettering. From the
    information that I have, its significance is derived from its architectural and
    aesthetic value as a purpose built hotel designed specifically to turn the corner on
    two important routes in the city centre.
13. The closest listed structure is Parsons’ Polygon. Listed Grade II, Parsons’
    Polygon is a sculpture which was commissioned in the early 1980’s to cover a
    concrete ventilation shaft for a tunnel of the Tyne and Wear Metro system. The
    artwork celebrates the work the of the engineer Sir Charles Parsons who did much
    of his work on the development of marine and terrestrial steam turbines in
    Newcastle. The hexagonal, terracotta, structure features relief mouldings of
    abstracted machinery parts taken from Parsons’ engineering drawings. It forms
    part of a series of other art works in stations on the Metro system.
14. Its significance is primarily derived from its aesthetics, combined with its function,
    turning an engineering form into a piece of decorative art that connects the station
    to the region’s industrial heritage, transforming an ordinary piece of infrastructure
    into something meaningful and visually engaging. It also has historic interest due
    to its specific link to the work of the engineer Sir Charles Parsons, and it makes a
    contribution to the public realm as a good example of the commissioning of public
    artwork in the post-war era as a way of enlivening and introducing aesthetic
    pleasure to an otherwise functional structure in a public environment.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6003398 & 6003400


15. The Central Conservation Area covers a large area within the city centre. It
    contains the historic core of the city including the quayside area; the Castle keep;
    cathedral; the mediaeval street layout around the Bigg Market, Cloth Market and
    Groat Market; the mediaeval Blackfriars Friary; remnants of the town walls; and
    the later Georgian insertions of Grey Street and Grainger Street over the older
    street layout. It also contains significant railway infrastructure associated with
    Newcastle Central Station and several industrial buildings linked to Robert
    Stephenson and the development of rail transport. Due to its city centre location,
    the conservation area has a broadly commercial character, although it also
    contains residential uses on upper floors and in purpose built blocks.
16. Insofar as it is relevant to these appeals, the significance of the conservation area
    is derived from the evidence it provides of the evolution of the Newcastle from
    Norman times to a major industrial city in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. It
    has architectural interest arising from the buildings of a range of ages and designs,
    with many fine Georgian and Victorian buildings, particularly those built by Richard
    Grainger in the 1830’s, as well as substantial sections of the mediaeval town wall
    and the well preserved Norman era castle. It has an aesthetic value derived from
    the design of the buildings, their relationships to one another, and to the
    topography of the area and the spaces that the buildings define. It has historic
    interest both from the buildings themselves and their association with prominent
    local architects and, in the case of Grey’s Monument, an important and influential
    politician. It also has evidential value, illustrating the building materials and
    techniques used over a considerable period of time.
17. Regulation 3(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
    (England) Regulations 2007 sets out that control over the display of
    advertisements shall be exercised in the interests of amenity and public safety. In
    this case, the Council has not raised any concerns in respect of public safety, and I
    have noted that the Highway Authority have not raised any objections in principle
    to the proposals, although it has suggested conditions which should be imposed if
    consent were to be granted. I also observed when I visited the site that the appeal
    site is located on a wide section of footway and, whilst there was a significant
    volume of pedestrian traffic in the area, the present “InLink” unit did not interfere
    with pedestrian movements, or cause pedestrians to have to step onto the
    carriageway. From what I have read in the evidence provided by the parties and
    from what I saw when I visited the site, I would agree that there are no public
    safety implications.
18. The appeals, therefore, turn on the effect of the proposed advertisements and the
    hub unit that contains them on the character and appearance of the area. The
    appeal proposals would replace an existing InLink unit on the same site. This
    InLink unit was granted planning permission and express consent in 2018. The
    appellant’s evidence also indicates that prior to that date there was an earlier ST6
    payphone structure that incorporated scrolling advertisement posters on one side
    in the same location. There is no evidence of when this unit was installed or what
    its planning status was although the appellant’s evidence states that it was present
    in 2016. Nevertheless, there has been a structure featuring advertising present at
    the site for approximately 10 years and possibly longer.
19. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) defines the setting of a
    heritage asset as the surroundings in which a heritage asset is experienced.
    Neither party has adduced any substantive evidence in respect of the contribution

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6003398 & 6003400


      that the setting of these various heritage assets makes to the understanding, or
      experience of, the special architectural or historic interest of either the various
      listed buildings, or the Central Conservation Area or to appreciating their
      significance.
20. The proposed new unit, in addition to being slightly larger than the existing one, is
    a different design and colour. The current InLink unit has a two tone grey and
    black colour scheme and features a chamfer, or cut away, toward the base. The
    proposed new unit would be a regular rectangle in shape and coloured a uniform
    black.
21. The appeal proposals would result in a small change within the interlinked settings
    of a number of listed buildings. However, change does not necessarily equate to
    harm. It is not contested that the site has accommodated a telecommunications
    structure incorporating advertisements for at least 10 years. It is also not
    contested that the listed buildings were listed at the time the previous InLink unit,
    which also contains digital advertising screens, was approved. In addition, I have
    noted that the Council’s conservation officer has commented on the current
    proposal to the effect that the overall visual impact on the character and special
    interest of the nearby designated and non-designated heritage assets would
    remain unchanged.
22. Although the Council level a number of criticisms at the proposal in terms of
    obstructing views of Parsons’ Polygon and other listed structures such as the base
    of Greys Monument and parts of Eldon Buildings, this is also true of the current
    unit on the same site. The proposed new structure would not be significantly
    larger than the existing unit. In addition, I saw when I visited the site that
    concurrent views only occur from a small number of very specific viewpoints. I
    also observed that most of the potential visual receptors in this area were in
    motion and, consequently, the proposed hub unit would be experienced in
    sequential views and would only fleetingly obscure views of the heritage assets.
23. Although the advertising screen on the west side of the Street Hub unit would
    appear in the foreground in views towards Parsons’s Polygon, Grey’s Monument,
    Eldon Buildings, this is also the case with the current InLink unit. Beyond
    appearing in a small number of specific viewpoints, there is little in the Council’s
    evidence that sets out in what way the proposal would be harmful to the special
    interest of these buildings or the understanding of their significance.
24. The Council’s suggest that the advertising screens would be brighter than the
    existing advertising screens and other advertisements in the area, which would
    distract from the listed buildings. However, there is no comparative technical
    evidence which would support this assertion. Within this context and in the
    absence of any substantive evidence in respect of how the proposal would harm
    the special interest of the listed buildings, I find that the proposal would have a
    neutral effect on their settings.
25. With respect to the setting of the conservation area, the proposed Street Hub unit
    would only affect a very small part of the setting of a large conservation area. The
    Council has not elucidated either what contribution the setting of the conservation
    area makes to its special architectural or historic interest, or what harm the
    proposal would cause to the setting of the conservation that would diminish the
    understanding or appreciation of its significance. The existing InLink unit was


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
Appeal Decisions 6003398 & 6003400


      clearly considered acceptable as it was given both planning permission and
      express consent. Although I accept that the proposed replacement unit is
      physically larger and features larger advertising screens, no compelling evidence
      has been put to me that would indicate that these slight increases are sufficient for
      the proposal to now be considered harmful to the significance of the conservation
      area as a result of development in its setting, particularly as the same site has
      been used for advertising for at least 10 years. I therefore find that the proposal
      would have a neutral effect on the character and appearance of conservation area.
26. In terms of the character and appearance of the area more generally, the appeal
    site is located in a commercial, city centre, area where there are numerous articles
    of street furniture, much of which is coloured black, and where there are various
    advertisements on bus shelters and buildings. Within this visually complex
    context, the proposed Street Hub unit would not be significantly more visually
    intrusive than the present InLink unit.
27. Given the above, I therefore conclude that the proposal would not cause harm to
    visual amenity or the character and appearance of the area, with particular regard
    to the effect on the Central Conservation Area and the setting of nearby listed
    buildings. In respect of Appeal A, the proposal would comply with the
    requirements of the development plan so far as relevant to the appeal. With
    regard to Appeal B, the proposal would comply with the relevant requirements of
    Policies UC12, UC14 and CS15 of the Urban Core Plan for Gateshead and
    Newcastle upon Tyne 2015, and Policies DM16 and DM20 of the Newcastle upon
    Tyne Development and Allocations Plan 2020. Taken together, these expect new
    development to be of a high standard of design which respects and enhances the
    positive characteristics and context of the site, use materials and colours
    appropriate to the character of the area, responds positively to local distinctiveness
    and character and which conserves or enhances heritage assets and their
    settings.
28. The reasons for refusal on the decision notices cite Development and Allocations
    Plan Policy DM15 which relates to the conservation of heritage assets and
    development directly affecting them such as alterations to listed buildings or
    development within conservation areas. However, Policy DM16 refers specifically
    to preserving or enhancing the setting of heritage assets which is the issue in
    these appeals. Consequently, Policy DM15 is not relevant in this instance.
Conditions
29. I have had regard to the conditions suggested by the Council in respect of both
    appeals.
Appeal A
30. Regulation 14 of the Town and County Planning (Control of Advertisements)
    Regulations 2007 (as amended) sets out that where express consent is granted
    this is for a period of five years and is subject to the five standard conditions in
    Schedule 2 of those Regulations.
31. The appeal site is located adjacent to a highway. During my site visit I observed
    that pedestrians crossed Blackett Street at random locations in the vicinity of the
    appeal site. Whilst the use of Blackett Street is limited primarily to buses, moving
    advertisements would nonetheless have the potential to distract drivers in an area

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    6
Appeal Decisions 6003398 & 6003400


        where there are significant pedestrian movements. It is, therefore, necessary to
        attach a condition which prevents the advertising screens being used to display
        advertisements containing moving components or special visual effects.
32. For similar highway safety reasons, it is necessary to impose conditions that
    prevent the advertisements from changing more frequently than every 10 seconds,
    that prevent advertisements from using transitional effects when changing, and
    which prevent the display of advertisements that resemble traffic signs.
33. Comments were received from the Highway Authority raising concern regarding
    the proposed level of illumination of the advertising screens during the hours of
    darkness potentially causing a distraction to drivers at night. For these reasons,
    the Institute of Lighting Engineers recommends that the night time level of
    illumination for advertisements does not exceed 300 cd/m². Because of the
    proximity of the proposed advertisements to the carriageway, it is necessary to
    impose a condition limiting the level of illumination during the hours of darkness.
Appeal B
34. In order to provide certainty in respect of what has been permitted I have imposed
    a condition specifying the approved drawings.
35. The Council has suggested a condition is required requiring the removal of the
    existing InLink unit before the installation of the new Street Hub unit. Whilst
    redundant structures should be removed to avoid clutter, it is clear from the
    submitted proposed site plan2, that the replacement unit would be installed in
    exactly the same position as the current InLink unit. Consequently, the condition
    requiring compliance with the submitted plan would require the InLink unit to be
    removed in order to install the replacement in accordance with the planning
    permission. Therefore, I do not consider that a condition requiring the removal of
    the existing unit prior to the installation of the replacement is necessary.
Conclusion
36. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that both appeals should be allowed.



John Dowsett
INSPECTOR




2
    Drawing No: 25004474_PLN_SI_2.1


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     7
Appeal Decisions 6003398 & 6003400


Schedule of Conditions
Appeal A: 6003398
1) No part of the advertisements to which this consent relates shall contain any
   prismatic, scrolling or other moving components, images or special effects.

2) The intensity of the illumination of the advertisements to which this consent relates
   shall be no greater than 300Cdm2 after dusk and at other times as recommended
   by the Institute of Lighting Professionals (for an advertisement within Zone 3) in the
   Professional Lighting Guide 05/23 - The brightness of illuminated advertisements
   including digital displays.

3) The minimum display time for each advertisement shall be 10 seconds.

4) The interval between advertisements shall take place over a period no greater than
   one second; the complete screen shall change with no visual effects (including
   fading, swiping or other animated transition methods) between displays and the
   display will include a mechanism to freeze the image in the event of a malfunction.

5) No advertisement displayed shall resemble traffic signs, as defined in section 64 of
   the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.


Appeal B: 6003400

1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
   of this decision.

2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   following approved plans:

    25004474_PLN_LOC_1.1 - Site Location Plan
    25004474_PLN_SI_2.1 - Proposed Site Plan
    25004474_PLN_EL_3.1 - Elevation Plan
    BT Street Hib Unit Dimensions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
