 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 29 June 2026
 by G Ellis BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 9 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6003168
 29 Kingswood Road, Wimbledon, London, SW19 3ND
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Chongguang Liu against the decision of the London Borough of Merton.
 •   The application Ref is 25/P2686.
 •   The development proposed is for the erection of a rear dormer L shaped roof extension above the
     existing main roof & outrigger, raising the main ridge height, the erection of a single storey rear
     extension with pitched roof, erection of an outbuilding in rear garden with flat roof, addition of two
     front rooflights & the removal of the rear chimney.

This decision is issued in accordance with section 56 (2) of the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 as amended and supersedes that issued on 10
July 2026.
Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the erection of a rear dormer L
   shaped roof extension above the existing main roof & outrigger, raising the main
   ridge height, the addition of two front rooflights & the removal of the rear chimney.
2. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for insofar as it relates to
   the erection of a single storey rear extension with pitched roof and the erection of
   an outbuilding in rear garden with flat roof at 29 Kingswood Road, Wimbledon,
   London, SW19 3ND in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/P2686
   and the plans submitted with it, so far as relevant to that part of the development
   hereby permitted and subject to the following conditions: -
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted (single storey rear extension and outbuilding
        only) shall be carried out in accordance with the following approved plans:
        Location Plan PP-14225630v1, Block Plan 29KR-P09 Rev 1, Proposed
        outbuilding 29KR-P08 Rev 1, existing and Proposed Side Elevations 29KR-P07
        Rev 1, Existing and Proposed Roof Plan 29KR-P04 Rev 1, Existing and
        Proposed Rear Elevations 29KR-P06 Rev 1, and Existing and Proposed Ground
        Floor Plans 29KR-P01 Rev 1.
     3) The materials to be used on the external faces of the approved development
        (single-storey rear extension only) shall match the existing dwelling.
Preliminary and Procedural Matters


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6003168


3. The Council have raised no objections to the proposed outbuilding or the single-
   storey rear extension. Based on my observations on site and the information before
   me, I have no reason to disagree. Therefore, my considerations focus on the
   proposed alterations to the roof, including the L shaped dormer.
4. Under section 79 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 I have express
   powers to issue a split decision, and have considered the appeal scheme having
   regard to these powers.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the host property and the John Innes - Wilton Crescent
   Conservation Area, and on the occupiers of the existing and neighbouring property
   with regard to overbearing impact.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
6. No.29 is a traditional mid-terraced property with a canted bay window to the front
   and an outrigger to the rear. It reflects the form of its immediate neighbours with a
   visual cohesion to the terrace. Sited along a tree-lined street, the terrace forms
   part of a pleasant residential area, with the Conservation Area's significance
   derived from the suburban street layout and the quality and homogeneity of the
   Victorian/Edwardian buildings.
7. The proposed roof addition would encompass the full width of the main roof with
   the ridge line slightly raised and would also extend along the outrigger. This part
   would be lower in height but would add significant massing and project for a
   notable depth, creating a prominent addition.
8. From the street, the altered ridgeline would not be especially noticeable. However,
   the scale of the roof alterations would disrupt the existing form, giving the property
   a top-heavy appearance that would jar with the original building’s simpler, more
   modest character and detract from the appearance of the property and the unity of
   the wider terrace.
9. There are roof additions to properties in Kingswood Road, including the immediate
   neighbours to each side, although these are restricted to the main roof and do not
   project along the outrigger. The appellant has drawn attention to examples of L-
   shaped additions, and while similar, they are located on a variety of streets outside
   the Conservation Area. I accept that the character of a conservation area can
   evolve over time. It is also clear that many of the properties have been adapted
   with a range of extensions, and as in this case, the other proposed alterations
   would facilitate additional living space.
10. The statutory duty in Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 is a matter of considerable importance and weight.
    The harm to the significance of the Conservation Area that would result from the
    proposed roof extension would be localised, but the incremental and cumulative
    impact from the diminishment of its character from unsympathetic alterations could
    adversely affect the Conservation Area as a whole.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6003168


11. The effect of the development on the Conservation Area would be less than
    substantial, and thereby, having regard to the approach in paragraph 215 of the
    National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework), harm should be weighed
    against the public benefits of the proposal.
12. In this case, the roof alteration extension would create additional bedrooms, which
    are clearly of personal benefit to the occupiers, indicating that the proposed
    development would support the wider family and that the increased space would
    support working from home. I am, however, not persuaded that these equate to a
    public benefit sufficient to outweigh the harm that I have identified.
13. For the reasons set out above, the roof additions would not respect the character of
    the host dwelling. As such, it would neither preserve nor enhance the character or
    appearance of the Conservation Area. Therefore, the proposal would not comply
    with Policy HC1 of the London Plan March 2021 (the London Plan) and Policies
    D12.3, D12.4 and D12.5 of the Merton Local Plan 2024, which, amongst other
    aspects, afford great weight to the conservation of a heritage asset, seek to ensure
    compatibility with local character, and require development to be of a high
    architectural design quality.
Overbearing Impact
14. The Council also raise concerns that as a result of the dormer addition, the property
    would have an overbearing impact when using the garden with a similar impact on
    the amenity of the neighbouring properties.
15. The terraced properties are a relatively compact form of development with long,
    narrow rear gardens. Additionally, with the proposed single-storey extension, the
    garden would be set back from the main façade of the house, and there are similar
    extensions on the neighbours' properties. Thereby, whilst substantial massing
    would be added to the roof, it would still be the height of the two-storey building
    (albeit with accommodation over three floors), and I do not find that it would be of a
    scale to be intrusive to the use of the garden.
16. The addition would be visually prominent and would contribute to the character and
    appearance harm identified above. However, it would not be so overbearing as to
    materially harm the amenities of the occupiers of the appeal property or
    neighbouring properties when using their gardens. Thus, there would be no conflict
    with the Local Plan policy D12.3, insofar as the requirements of 3g in relation to
    ensuring that a high standard of amenity is provided for existing and future
    occupants.
Conclusion
17. Whilst I have not found harm to residential amenity, the proposed dormer would be
    an incongruous addition to the host property and would fail to preserve the
    character and appearance of the Conservation Area. This aspect of the proposed
    development would conflict with the development plan as a whole and therefore is
    dismissed.
18. The single-storey rear extension and outbuilding are, however, clearly physically
    and functionally severable from the proposed roof alterations. I have express
    powers to split a decision, and I see no reason to withhold planning permission for
    these aspects, subject to conditions in relation to the commencement of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision 6003168


     development and compliance with the approved plans for certainty and for the
     materials to match the existing property in the interest of its appearance. Therefore,
     these aspects are allowed.

G Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
