Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 June 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003718
The New Inn, Main Road, Totton, Hampshire, SO40 7EP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Punch Partnerships PML Ltd against the decision of New Forest District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/10601.
•    The development proposed is the erection of two semi-detached residential dwellings (Use Class
     C3) and change of use of Public House (Sui generis) to allow for conversion into three self-contained
     residential dwellings (Use Class C3), with external alterations, removal of trees and associated hard
     and soft landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of two
       semi-detached residential dwellings (Use Class C3) and change of use of Public
       House (Sui generis) to allow for conversion into three self-contained residential
       dwellings (Use Class C3), with external alterations, removal of trees and
       associated hard and soft landscaping at The New Inn, Main Road, Totton,
       Hampshire, SO40 7EP in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       25/10601, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for an award of costs was made by Punch Partnerships PML Ltd
       against New Forest District Council. This application will be the subject of a
       separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
       parties with an opportunity to provide comments on the new Framework as part of
       the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
       decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are: (i) whether the loss of the public house would be acceptable
       in policy terms; and (ii) the effect of the proposed development on the integrity of
       various European designated habitats sites.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003718


Reasons
Loss of the Public House
5.     Policy DM19 of the New Forest District Local Plan Part 2: Sites and Development
       Management, April 2014 (the LP) sets out the Council’s approach to the potential
       loss of public houses. It notes that development proposals will not be permitted
       where they would result in the loss of an important local facility, or if they would
       leave the local area without such a facility.
6.     As part of the original planning application, the appellant provided a marketing
       report, produced by Savills in September 2025 (the MR) and a separate viability
       study which was also produced by Savills in May 2025 (the VS). The VS is quite a
       comprehensive document which paints a fairly bleak picture in relation to the
       viability of the building as a public house. In terms of historic trade, it is clear from
       the barrelage figures that sales have been declining for several years, with the
       exception of 2021 when lockdown restrictions were eased during the pandemic.
       The VS also sets out likely refurbishment costs and potential future trade and
       concludes that the business is unlikely to be viable in future.
7.     Clearly such reports are based on certain assumptions in terms of future
       projections. However, the VS appears to be based on a robust methodology, and I
       can see no reason to disagree with the conclusions reached.
8.     The public house had been marketed for approximately nine to ten months by the
       time the MR was produced. It notes that twelve enquiries were received during that
       period, and while several viewings were conducted, no offers were received in
       relation to purchasing the building for use as a public house, restaurant or some
       other community facility. The MR notes that the lack of cover numbers and the
       limited internal space were key issues raised by those who undertook viewings.
9.     In essence, it seems clear to me that the building is not financially viable as a
       public house and that there appears to be little interest in purchasing it, either for
       that use or indeed other alternative community uses. I recognise that the public
       house would be a valuable facility for those who did frequent it, and I am mindful of
       the fact that over a hundred people objected to the original application, primarily
       due to the potential loss of the public house on a permanent basis. However, LP
       Policy DM19 clearly requires a judgement as to whether a proposed development
       would result in the loss of an important local facility. Therefore, by extension,
       public houses cannot be considered to automatically meet that description by
       default.
10. In this instance, it seems to me that the VS and MR collectively demonstrate that
    the public house has not attracted sufficient custom to enable it to be regarded as
    an important local facility for some time, and that there is little prospect of that
    situation changing in future. On that basis, I find that the building is not an
    important local facility and therefore the proposal accords with the first requirement
    of Policy DM19.
11. The second part of the policy relates to the matter of alternative provision in the
    wider area. Both the Council’s officer report, and the appellant’s evidence,
    consider this issue in some detail. The closest alternative public house to the
    appeal site appears to be the Peg and Parrott on Rumbridge Street. In my view,
    this is within reasonable walking distance for the majority of people. I note that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003718


       there are also other public houses in the town centre which are within walking
       distance. Moreover, it is clear from the third party representations that The New
       Inn was used for various community events. However, as set out within the
       Council’s officer report, there are alternative facilities nearby, including Hounsdown
       Community Hall and Colbury Memorial Hall. Therefore, on the basis of the
       alternative public houses and community buildings that exist in the area, I am
       satisfied that the proposal would not leave the local area without a comparable
       facility.
12. The final clause of LP Policy DM19 sets out that a change of use to an alternative
    business or community use will be acceptable where the loss of a public house is
    permitted. It therefore does not explicitly say that only those uses are acceptable,
    or that a residential use would be unacceptable. In any event, the MR clearly
    states that, over the marketing period, no offers for alternative community uses
    were received.
13. On the basis that the public house cannot be considered to be an important local
    facility, that there are alternative facilities in the area, and that there has been no
    interest in retaining the building for alternative community uses, I am satisfied that
    the proposed development complies with LP Policy DM19. The relevant aspects of
    the policy seek to retain such uses where possible.
European Designated Habitats Sites
14. The appeal site is within the zone of influence of various protected sites. These are
    the New Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC), the New Forest Special
    Protection Area (SPA), the New Forest Ramsar site, the Solent and Southampton
    Water SPA, the Solent and Southampton Water Ramsar site and the Solent
    Maritime SAC. The sites collectively support an internationally important
    assemblage of flora and fauna including aquatic vegetation and important bird
    populations such as dark-bellied brent geese, common terns, hen harriers and
    woodlarks. The habitats also include important features such as heaths, mudbanks
    and salt meadows.
15. Given the number of protected sites involved, I have elected not to list their
    individual qualifying features in detail in order to avoid making this decision too
    unwieldy. However, this information is readily available on the Natural England
    website, and I can confirm that I have had careful regard to it when making my
    decision. In terms of objectives for the sites, these can be summed up as being the
    need to ensure that the integrity of the sites is maintained or restored as
    appropriate, and that they contribute to achieving the favourable conservation
    status of their qualifying features.
16. The protected sites are an important recreational and economic resource. They
    are well frequented by the public and it is likely that occupants of the proposed
    development would visit the sites. The proposal also has the potential to have
    negative impacts in relation to air quality. It is necessary for me, as the competent
    authority, to conduct an Appropriate Assessment in relation to the effect of the
    development on the integrity of the sites.
17. The evidence before me is clear that the proposal, particularly when combined
    with other development in the area, would have a likely significant effect due to
    increased disturbance through recreational activity and impacts on air quality. The
    appellant has provided a completed Unilateral Undertaking (the UU) which secures

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003718


         financial contributions towards various matters in accordance with the Council’s
         adopted strategies1. In particular, the UU provides £560 towards air quality
         monitoring, £4,995 towards habitats mitigation (access management and
         monitoring), £4,535 towards habitats mitigation (Bird Aware Solent) and £34,110
         towards habitats mitigation (infrastructure).
18. I note that the Council’s solicitor has raised various concerns with the drafting of
    the UU. However, it seems to me that these matters do not prevent the identified
    contributions from being secured. The solicitor has also questioned whether the
    UU provides mitigation for all sites that could be impacted by the proposal and has
    stated that the contributions are not index linked and also that no monitoring of
    commencement contribution has been provided. I note that the Council has not
    pointed me towards particular aspects of policy or guidance that require index
    linking or monitoring of commencement contributions and I do not consider that
    these issues make a material difference to the mitigation provided.
19. Moreover, as part of this appeal, I have consulted Natural England as the statutory
    body for such matters. The concerns of the Council’s solicitor were included in the
    package of material provided to them. As part of the consultation, I specifically
    asked Natural England to confirm that they are satisfied that the financial
    contributions would mitigate the potential effects on all of the stated protected
    sites. They have confirmed that they are indeed satisfied in that regard. On that
    basis I find that the contributions would sufficiently mitigate the level of harm likely
    to be caused by the development in relation to recreational impacts and air quality.
    In the interests of fairness, I provided the main parties with an opportunity to
    comment on Natural England’s response. However, I note that the Council has not
    sought to disagree with the conclusions reached by the statutory body.
20. Natural England has also noted that the proposal could result in significant impacts
    on designated sites in the Solent (Including the Solent and Southampton Water
    SPA and RAMSAR site, the Solent & Isle of Wight Lagoons SAC, Solent Maritime
    SAC, and Solent and Dorset Coast SPA) in relation to nutrient neutrality. As
    before, I have had careful regard to the qualifying features and objectives for these
    sites as set out on the Natural England website.
21. The Council has suggested a condition which would require the details of a
    mitigation package for nutrients to be agreed. I note that Natural England has
    confirmed that they are satisfied with such an approach. The appellant has also
    provided a completed nutrient calculator and details of an email exchange with a
    credit provider which confirms that sufficient credits are available to meet the
    calculated requirement. On that basis, I have sufficient certainty that the necessary
    mitigation will be secured.
22. I therefore conclude that, having had regard to all matters raised, the proposal
    would not result in an adverse effect on the integrity of protected sites. It would
    therefore conform with Policy ENV1 of the New Forest District Local Plan Part 1
    2016 – 2036, as well as LP Policy DM2. Taken together, the relevant aspects of
    these policies seek to protect biodiversity within designated habitats sites. The
    proposal would also conform with the requirements of the relevant SPD which
    have similar aims.


1
    Mitigation for Recreational Impacts SPD, May 2021 and Air Quality Assessments in New Development SPD, June 2022.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6003718


Other Matters
23. The Council regard the existing building as a non-designated heritage asset. Its
    significance is derived from its attractive appearance, including rounded gables,
    decorative window surrounds and cornice string courses. In this instance the
    external changes to the building would be relatively minor in nature, including the
    removal of a non-original single storey link and new windows on the northern
    section of the building to match those on the southern section. I am satisfied that
    these works, and the internal works required on the layout, would not harm the
    significance of the heritage asset.
24. There is no substantive evidence before me that would lead me to conclude that
    the proposed development would increase the risk of flooding or that it would
    result in unacceptable highway safety concerns. Similarly, there is no substantive
    evidence that the development would result in undue pressure on local services
    and facilities, or that Japanese knotweed is a particular concern. The impacts of
    the construction phase can be controlled by condition. The Council has not
    objected to the suggested approach in relation to trees. I can see no reason to
    disagree, and I am content that required works can be controlled by condition.
25. In terms of character and appearance, the Council has no concerns in that regard,
    and I am satisfied that the design, scale and layout of the proposal would conserve
    local character. In terms of the living conditions of neighbouring residents, the
    Council’s officer report concludes that the relationship with the surrounding
    development is acceptable and would not result in undue overlooking or loss of
    outlook, subject to a condition requiring certain windows to be obscure glazed.
    Given the separation distances that would exist, including to the existing homes on
    Jacobs Walk, I agree with this assessment.
26. The proposal would result in the loss of a small number of job opportunities
    associated with the building’s use as a public house. However, given the limited
    scale of the business, the effect would be very limited. It would also be balanced
    out by job opportunities provided by the construction phase of the development.
    Finally, the evidence before me confirms that the public house has not been
    identified as an asset of community value.
Conditions
27. I have imposed conditions to identify the relevant timescales and plans in the
    interests of certainty. A condition to require obscure glazing in certain windows is
    necessary to protect living conditions. For similar reasons, a Construction
    Environmental Management Plan is required to reduce the impact of construction
    on neighbouring occupiers. A condition has also been imposed to reduce water
    usage within the development and to mitigate the impacts on protected European
    sites.
28. Several conditions are required to preserve character and appearance, including in
    relation to materials, trees and landscaping. I have also imposed a condition to
    preserve and enhance biodiversity. Finally, two conditions are necessary to secure
    cycle and car parking spaces in the interests of sustainable travel and highway
    safety.
29. I have not imposed a condition to remove certain permitted development rights.
    Policy DM6 of the Framework states that such rights should not be restricted

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6003718


       unless there is clear justification for doing so. I do not consider that there is such
       justification in this instance.
30. Certain conditions relating to biodiversity, landscaping, trees and construction are
    ‘pre-commencement’ conditions. This is necessary to ensure that the impacts of
    construction on such features or issues are suitably managed from the earliest
    stages.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
31. Policy HC6 of the Framework seeks the retention of key community facilities
    unless certain criteria are met. Part 1(a) of the policy refers to the prospect of the
    facility being retained. As part of that assessment, it sets out a requirement for
    marketing to take place for a period of at least twelve months.
32. The MR before me covers a marketing period of nine or ten months. I note that the
    appellant’s appeal statement sets out that marketing continued after that period,
    and that at the time that the statement was produced, the marketing period was at
    least thirteen months. However, given that the presented MR does not cover a
    twelve month period, I do not find conformity with the stipulation in part 1(a) of the
    policy.
33. Part 1(c) of the policy provides an alternative route. It sets out that community
    facilities should not be lost unless the decision maker is satisfied that there is
    sufficient alternative provision in the local area, and therefore that the loss would
    not diminish access to key facilities. I have considered this matter in detail within
    the main reasoning section. For the same reasons, I find that there are sufficient
    alternative facilities in the area which ensure that access to such facilities is not
    diminished. The proposal therefore conforms with Policy HC6 of the Framework.
34. Moreover, for the reasons given, the proposed development is in accordance with
    the development plan when considered as a whole. Having had regard to all
    matters raised, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6003718


Schedule of Conditions

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
              following approved plans:
                    •    24.3540.101 P5 (Proposed Site Plan);
                    •    24.3540.110 P3 (Proposed Cross Section Elevations);
                    •    24.3540.102 P4 (Proposed Ground Floor Plan);
                    •    24.3540.103 P4 (Proposed First Floor Plan);
                    •    24.3540.109 P1 (Proposed Section AA);
                    •    24.3540.001 P1 (Existing Site Plan);
                    •    24.3540.002 P1 (Existing Ground Floor Plan);
                    •    24.3540.003 P1 (Existing First Floor Plan);
                    •    24.3540.004 P1 (Existing Elevations);
                    •    24.3540.005 P1 (Existing Elevations);
                    •    24.3540.100 P1 (Block and Location Plan);
                    •    24.3540.104 P2 (Proposed Roof Plan);
                    •    24.3540.105 P2 (Proposed Floor Plans Units 4 – 5);
                    •    24.3540.106 P1 (Proposed Elevations Units 4 – 5);
                    •    24.3540.107 P2; (Proposed Elevations)
                    •    24.3540.108 P1 (Proposed Elevations).
     3)       The first floor bathroom windows labelled on the approved plans as the
              south-west elevation of Plot 3, the east elevation of Plot 4 and the west
              elevation of Plot 5 shall be: (i) obscurely glazed, and (ii) non-opening at all
              times unless the parts that can be opened are more than 1.7m above the
              floor. The windows shall be retained as such in perpetuity.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until:
              a) A water efficiency calculation in accordance with the Government's
              National Calculation Methodology for assessing water efficiency in new
              dwellings has been undertaken which demonstrates that no more than 110
              litres of water per person per day shall be consumed within the development,
              and this calculation has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the
              Local Planning Authority. All measures necessary to meet the agreed waste
              water efficiency calculation must be installed before first occupation and
              retained thereafter;
              b) A mitigation package addressing the additional nutrient input arising from
              the development has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the
              Local Planning Authority. Such mitigation package shall address all of the
              additional nutrient load imposed on protected European Sites by the
              development when fully occupied and shall allow the Local Planning
              Authority to ascertain on the basis of the best available scientific evidence
              that such additional nutrient loading will not have an adverse effect on the
              integrity of the protected European Sites, having regard to the conservation
              objectives for those sites; and The mitigation package shall include a
              timetable for implementation and measures for retention and maintenance of
              that mitigation package, which shall thereafter be implemented.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    7
Appeal Decision 6003718


     5)       Before development commences above slab level, samples or exact details
              of the facing and roofing materials to be used shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall
              be implemented in accordance with the approved details.
     6)       Prior to the commencement of development hereby approved, an Ecological
              Enhancement Schedule, supported by an appropriately detailed plan
              showing the locations of the enhancement measure(s), shall be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Prior to occupation,
              evidence shall be submitted to confirm the agreed features have been
              installed, for example, a photographic record and/or a signed statement by a
              suitably qualified ecologist.
     7)       No development (including site preparation, clearance and demolition) shall
              take place until the tree protection measures as set out in the submitted
              Mulberry Arboricultural Implications Assessment Ref TRE/NIH, dated 2nd
              June 2025, and the Arboricultural Method Statement ref TRE/NIH, dated 2nd
              June 2025, have been fully implemented and installed on site. The tree
              protection measures shall be maintained and retained on site in accordance
              with the approved details throughout the development unless otherwise
              agreed with the Local Planning Authority.
     8)       Prior to the commencement of development or any associated works
              (including site clearance, demolition and construction works), three working
              days' notice shall be given to the Local Planning Authority (Tree Officer) to
              attend a pre-commencement site meeting before any development or
              associated works is then undertaken on site.
     9)       Prior to commencement of development, a Construction Environmental
              Management Plan (CEMP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority. The approved details shall be implemented
              before the development hereby permitted commences and shall be adhered
              to throughout the period of construction. The development shall only be
              carried out in accordance with the CEMP as approved.
     10)      Prior to the first occupation of each residential unit hereby permitted, the
              cycle parking facilities for that dwelling as shown on the Proposed Site Plan
              ref 24.3540.101 Rev P5 shall be provided and made available for use in
              accordance with the approved plans, and these cycle parking facilities shall
              thereafter be retained, maintained and kept available for the occupants of the
              development at all times.
     11)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the spaces
              shown on plan 24.3540.101_P5 for the parking of motor vehicles have been
              provided. The spaces shown on plan 24.3540.101_P5 for the parking of
              motor vehicles shall be retained and kept available for the parking of motor
              vehicles for the dwellings hereby approved at all times.
     12)      Before development commences, a scheme of landscaping of the site shall
              be submitted for approval in writing by the Local Planning Authority. No
              development shall take place unless these details have been approved and
              then only in accordance with those details.
     13)      The hard and soft landscaping scheme as approved under Condition 12 shall
              be fully implemented prior to first occupation or in accordance with any
              phasing submitted to and agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6003718


              Any trees or shrubs which die, become damaged or diseased within five
              years of the full completion of the development, or from when they are
              planted, whichever is the later, shall be replaced with the same species in the
              first available planting season (November to March) unless the Local
              Planning Authority has agreed in writing to a change of species beforehand.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
