Appeal Decision
Site visit made 7 September 2026
by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003569
Crockmore Cottage, Crockmore Lane, Fawley RG9 6HZ
•          The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•          The appeal is made by Helen Burton against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•          The application Ref is 24/07796/FUL.
•          The development proposed is Installation of Ground-Mounted Solar Panels (200 kW Total
           Capacity) comprising 12 rows of panels, each oriented 6 degrees west of due south.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the Installation of
   Ground-Mounted Solar Panels (200 kW Total Capacity) comprising 12 rows of
   panels, each oriented 6 degrees west of due south at Crockmore Cottage, Fawley
   RG9 6HZ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 24/07796/FUL, and
   the plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The appeal site is within the Chilterns National Landscape (NL). Section 85 of the
   Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (as amended)(the CRoW Act) required
   decision makers to have regard to the purpose of conserving and enhancing the
   natural beauty of the area. Since 2023, Section 245 of the Levelling-Up and
   Regeneration Act (LURA) amended the duty on relevant authorities in respect of
   their interactions with statutory purposes of Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
   (AONBs – now NLs), as set out in the CRoW Act. In so far as it relates to this
   appeal, the amendment now requires relevant authorities “in exercising or
   performing any functions in relation to, or so as to affect land in an, AONB…must
   seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the
   AONB”.
3. The Council’s second Reason for Refusal (RfR) related to the effect of the proposal
   on ecological interests and Biodiversity net gain. The appellant’s Preliminary
   Ecological Appraisal (January 2026), small sites metric and user guide (2025) and
   statement regarding interpretation of small sites metric have been submitted in
   support of the appeal. Following consideration of the further information, the Council
   informs that it no longer seeks to defend RfR2 as the submitted details demonstrate
   that the proposed development would not have an adverse effect on protected
   species or ecological habitats.
4. Furthermore, the Council also accepts the appellant’s contention that in
   consideration of the small sites metric user guide the scheme would comply with the
   small site’s metric, being under 1ha and as the works are minor there is no credible

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003569


       pathway for the development to affect priority habitats within 500m of the site. I see
       no reason to disagree with these matters and therefore consider this RfR has been
       addressed.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the landscape and visual amenity of
   the surrounding area, and the NL.
Reasons
       Policy Background
6. This application is not an energy development which is a nationally significant
   infrastructure project (NSIP) under the Planning Act 2008. Nonetheless, the
   Overarching National Policy Statement for energy (EN-1) may be a material
   consideration for applications under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
   amended). This sets out the national policy for energy infrastructure and establishes
   the Government’s approach to meeting its net zero objectives. It recognises that to
   meet the Government’s objectives and targets for net zero by 2050, significant large
   and small-scale energy infrastructure will be required. Furthermore, the National
   Policy Statement for Renewable Energy Infrastructure (EN-3) sets out national
   policy in respect of renewable energy and identifies ‘an urgent need for new
   electricity generating capacity to meet our energy objectives.’
7. Whether policies in EN-1 and EN-3 are material, and to what extent, should be
   judged on a case-by-case basis. In this case the proposal is for a solar farm
   creating up to 200 kilowatts of energy and would generate around 203 MWh of
   renewable energy, powering up to 70 homes annually. The site benefits from a
   connection to a three-phase low voltage grid connection within the grounds of the
   property, which provides support for the scheme. It therefore falls below the
   threshold for NSIP but due to its scale, EN-1 and EN-3 are deemed to be policy
   documents of moderate weight.
8. The UK Government has declared a climate emergency and set a statutory target of
   achieving net zero emissions by 2050, and this is also a material consideration.
   Since the declaration, the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
   on Climate Change has indicated that there is a greater than 50% chance that
   global temperature increases will exceed 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial
   levels. The report indicates that delay in global action to address climate change will
   miss a rapidly narrowing window of opportunity to secure a liveable and sustainable
   future for all1.
9. Powering up Britain [2023] seeks to accelerate the deployment of renewables and
   increase our solar power five-fold by 2035. This explains that solar has a huge
   potential to help decarbonise the power sector and that we need to maximise
   deployment of solar to achieve our overall target. Solar power presents significant
   benefits as it is regarded as one of the cheapest forms of electricity generation and
   is readily deployable. It is considered that meeting energy security and climate
   change goals is urgent and of critical importance to the country, and that these
   goals can be achieved together with maintaining food security for the UK.


1
    IPCC Sixth Assessment Report - Summary for Policymakers, paragraph D.5.3


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6003569


10. The National Planning Policy Framework 2026 (the Framework) explains that the
    planning system should support the transition to clean power by planning positively
    for the increased supply and use of low carbon energy in a changing climate. Its
    decision-making policies, at policy W3, explain that substantial weight should be
    given to the benefits of improving energy security, supporting economic
    development and electricity network infrastructure. It also states that planning
    authorities should not require a developer to demonstrate a need for low carbon or
    renewable energy development. It states that substantial weight should be given to
    the contribution that small-scale community-led renewable projects can make to
    reducing greenhouse gas emissions, along with their economic and social benefits.
11. Policy DM33 of the Wycombe District Local Plan [2019] (LP), with respect to
    managing carbon emissions: Transport and energy generation, seeks to integrate
    renewable technologies into developments.
12. The proposed development would make a valuable contribution to achieving these
    local and national goals. The policy context, in supporting the delivery of a
    substantial level of renewable energy projects, provides compelling evidence for the
    need for solar schemes, such as proposed, and conveys significant weight in favour
    of the proposal.
13. LP Policy DM44, with respect to development in the countryside, lists at a) to i)
    criteria for which permission would be granted. The proposal would fail to meet any
    of these criteria and thus would conflict with this policy. Nonetheless, the Council
    asserts that the benefits of renewable energy would clearly outweigh the objection
    in principle established by the conflict with this policy, subject to assessment against
    its detailed development control policies.
Landscape and visual amenity
14. The appeal site consists of the upper half of a small field. The site is enclosed on its
    southwest and northwest boundaries with a post and rail fence. To its southeast
    boundary, marking the limits of the Crockmore Cottage grounds, is a tree and hedge
    screen which is both tall and dense. The southeast boundary would be the midpoint
    through the field and currently has no defined boundary. Accordingly, the site is
    enclosed partly by thick tree and hedge screening and is partly open to surrounding
    fields. The site slopes gradually from southeast to northwest, with Crickmore Lane
    at the lowest point beyond a hedge and tree boundary.
15. The special qualities of the NL include the steep chalk escarpment with areas of
    flower-rich downland, broadleaved woodlands (especially beech), commons,
    tranquil valleys, the network of ancient routes, villages with their brick and flint
    houses, globally rare chalk streams and a rich historic environment of hillforts and
    chalk figures. Its special qualities include its tranquillity and remoteness along with
    visually sensitive skylines, geological and topographical features which contribute
    towards making it a special landscape.
16. The appeal site consists of grassland and as such is relatively common and typical
    of the area. Nonetheless, its undeveloped form and general good landscape quality
    and condition mean it is characteristic of the surrounding rural area. As a result, the
    site makes a positive contribution to the character type and the appearance of the
    area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003569


17. The Framework identifies that development within Protected Landscapes, which
    include National Landscapes, requires substantial weight to be afforded to
    conserving and enhancing their natural beauty. It requires development to be limited
    in scale and extent, be sensitively located and be designed to avoid harm to the
    Protected Landscape. It also requires proposals deemed to be major development
    should be refused unless exceptional circumstances exist. Main parties agree that
    the scheme is not major development and therefore consideration of the proposal’s
    scale and extent, and its overall landscape and visual effects, are required.
18. The proposed development would retain the existing native hedgerows and trees
    around the site. The appellant’s submission includes photographs of the boundary
    hedge in the winter, these demonstrate that whilst foliage is less, transparency is
    still limited forming a thick screen throughout the year, screening the proposal.
    Furthermore, the proposal would also maintain the existing field pattern of the site
    and would not include land reforming. Therefore, whilst the proposed solar panels
    would be man-made structures within a rural setting, these would be low-lying and
    could be absorbed into its local context. This would cause only modest harm to the
    NL and its special qualities. Given the substantial overall scale of the NL, and the
    modest size of the appeal site, the proposal would result in only a minor adverse
    effect to the area’s landscape character.
19. Most of the valued attributes of the relevant NL character area would be unaffected
    by the development, with harm through the introduction of the modest built form
    proposed only affecting the two of its valued attributes being its tranquillity and
    remoteness. In addition, the NL’s most important overall landscape characteristics
    (its visually sensitive skylines, and its geological and topographical features) would
    be unaffected. Combined with the development’s extremely modest scale relative to
    the NL, the overall effect of the development on the NL would be minor adverse,
    causing only modest landscape harm.
20. In terms of visual effects, the appellant’s visual assessment shows the site from
    several views around its perimeter, although these do not show the impact of the
    proposal on these views. Nonetheless, the site is well contained, affording very
    limited public views of the site, causing localised effects only. Views through the
    hedgerow from Crockmore Lane are extremely limited to being barely perceptible.
    Whilst the Council asserts that the site benefits from only partial screening, it has
    not demonstrated where the proposal could be seen from the public realm.
    Furthermore, whilst the Council suggest that the hedge and tree screening should
    be regarded as short term and temporary, on site I found the screening to be robust
    and verdant, enabling long-term screening capability.
21. The appellant’s visibility assessment suggests that views from the South
    Oxfordshire Way would be, at most, brief and limited by vegetation and I see no
    reason to disagree with this conclusion. As such, views from outside the site would
    be negligible causing no adverse visual effects.
22. Consequently, the proposal would cause conflict, albeit modest, with LP policy
    DM30 and the Chilterns Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Plan 2019-2024. These
    require, among other matters, for development to conserve and enhance the natural
    beauty of the AONB. The scheme would also fail to further the purpose of
    conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the AONB, in conflict with
    Section 85 of the CRoW Act, due to the identification of modest landscape harm.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6003569


Planning Balance
23. The proposal would conflict with LP policies DM30 and DM44, causing conflict with
    the development plan. The conflict I have identified with development plan policies
    in relation to this matter therefore leads me to conclude that the appeal proposal
    conflicts with the development plan as a whole. Planning law requires that
    applications for planning permission be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
24. The Framework requires substantial weight to be applied to conserving and
    enhancing the natural beauty of such areas. The proposed development would be
    modest in scale and extent, and its location would limit its visual and landscape
    effects. Accordingly, harm to the NL would be limited based on the development’s
    location, where public views are limited and has been sensitively placed in a well
    screened setting causing only moderate harm. Furthermore, the Framework
    recognises at policy S5(1), that only certain forms of development should be
    approved outside settlements, including at (a) infrastructure projects for energy,
    supporting the principle of the scheme.
25. Furthermore, LP Policy DM33 supports the provision of renewable energy
    development in addition to the support garnered by the Framework at policies CC2
    and W2, which seek substantial weight to be applied to the benefits of renewable
    and low carbon projects.
26. In this case, I have found that the harm to the landscape would be localised and (at
    most) moderate. With the effect of the development on the NL being minor adverse,
    the appeal proposal would also be inconsistent with the promotion of the statutory
    purposes of conserving and enhancing the NL’s natural beauty. On the other hand,
    as detailed above, the development would result in extensive environmental, social
    and economic benefits in support of the provision of renewable energy. Accordingly,
    the adverse impacts, the conflict with relevant development plan policies and the
    inconsistency with the statutory purposes of the NL are outweighed by the scheme’s
    substantial benefits.
Conditions
27. I have considered the use of conditions in line with the guidance set out in the
    planning practice guidance (PPG). I shall take the Council’s suggested conditions
    into consideration and with some amendments and adjustments for clarity. I have
    applied an implementation period and standard condition with respect to approved
    plans as advised by the PPG for clarity and certainty [conditions 1 and 2].
28. Furthermore, conditions are required to secure the decommissioning of the site
    following the cessation of the use to prevent ongoing harm to the NL [3 and 4]. A
    condition is also required to ensure water runoff is captured to prevent off-site
    flooding [5] and to ensure that the requirements of the ecological appraisal are
    complied with in the interests of biodiversity [6].
Conclusion
29. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
    accordance with the development plan unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. In this instance, material considerations outweigh the harm that would
    arise, the conflict with development plan policies and the great weight afforded to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6003569


    conserving and enhancing landscape and scenic beauty of the NL and the
    conservation of designated heritage assets. Consequently, the development should
    be permitted notwithstanding the conflict with the development plan as a whole.
30. For the above reasons, the appeal is therefore allowed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6003569


Schedule of conditions

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than [3] years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be built in accordance with the
              details contained in the planning application hereby approved and plan
              numbers BC1; BC2; BC3; BC4; BC5; 1; 2 (as submitted to Buckinghamshire
              Council on 19th November 2024).
     3)       Should the solar panels not be used continuously for the production of
              energy for a period of six months, the panels, support structures and
              associated buildings shall be removed in their entirety and the land shall be
              restored to its former condition in accordance with a scheme of work
              submitted to and approved (unless otherwise agreed) in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority.
     4)       Within six months of the cessation of electricity generation by the solar facility
              hereby permitted, or within 30 years and six months following a permanent
              cessation of construction works prior to the facility coming into operational
              use, whichever is the sooner, the solar photovoltaic panels, frames,
              foundations, inverter modules and all associated structures and fencing
              approved shall be dismantled and removed from the site. The developer shall
              notify the Local Planning Authority in writing no later than five working days
              following cessation of power production. The site shall subsequently be
              restored in accordance with a scheme, the details of which shall be submitted
              to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority no later than three
              months following the cessation of power production.
     5)       The development hereby approved shall store all additional rainwater runoff
              within the site and either reuse it or release it into the ground through
              infiltration. Where the additional runoff is not to be re-used or on-site
              infiltration methods are not proposed, details of how the risk of flooding
              elsewhere will not be increased shall be submitted to and approved by the
              local planning authority prior to any development taking place. The approved
              details shall thereafter be implemented prior to the development being
              brought into use and thereafter managed and maintained for the lifetime of
              the development.
     6)       The development, hereby approved, shall be undertaken in accordance with
              the ecological mitigation measures specified in the submitted Preliminary
              Ecological Appraisal, by Arbtech, dated 9th January 2026, unless otherwise
              first agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.


End of conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
