Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 June 2026
by M J Francis BA (Hons) MA MSc MClfA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003865
The Boathouse Inn, Elvet Bridge, Durham DH1 3AF
•      The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
       Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
       consent.
•      The appeal is made by RHPD Group against the decision of Durham County Council.
•      The application Ref is DM/25/02524/AD
•      The development proposed is retrospective application for consent to display a mural-style
       advertisement.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted to display a mural-style
         advertisement as applied for. The consent is for five years from the date of this
         decision and is subject to the five standard conditions set out in the Regulations.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The development is described as retrospective, and the mural had been painted
         when I visited.
3.       On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
         Framework) was published, and the main parties have been consulted on the
         implications of the revised Framework on the appeal.
4.       The Advertisement Regulations1 state that control may be exercised only in the
         interests of amenity and public safety. The Council raised no concerns in relation
         to public safety. Based on the evidence and my site visit, I see no reason to take a
         different view.
Main Issue
5.       Therefore, the main issue is the effect of the proposed advert on the amenity of the
         area.
Reasons
6.       The Boathouse Inn2, now a bar and restaurant, was originally a group of early 19th
         century cottages with a later boat yard and workshop. Sited next to the River
         Wear, it is locally listed because of its age, rarity, historic and architectural
         significance and close association with rowing and boatbuilding. Brown’s rowing
         boats, a hire company located in front of the building, is said to have operated from
         the site since the 1900s.
1
    The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended).
2
    The signage on the building, is The Boat Club.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003865


7.       The site is within the Durham City Conservation Area (CA). Therefore, I am
         required by section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
         Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) to have special regard to the desirability of preserving or
         enhancing the character or appearance of that area in so far as it relates to the
         consideration of amenity.
8.       Covering the Durham Peninsula, this part of the CA (character area 1) is centred
         around Durham Cathedral and Castle and associated buildings. Adjoining this is
         the surviving medieval layout and street pattern which contain buildings from the
         medieval period to the 20th century. The significance of the CA in relation to this
         appeal derives from its architectural, historic and archaeological interest. The
         cathedral’s Norman architecture is of great renown, which combined with the
         evidential value of buildings throughout the CA, demonstrate a historically
         important city with exceptional religious significance. The CA includes the River
         Wear with its wooded banks which provides a setting of aesthetic value and
         beauty.
9.       Adjacent to the appeal site is Old Elvet Bridge. This grade I listed building3 and
         Scheduled Ancient Monument, is of early 13th century date. With arches on both
         land and water, one of the stone arches displays late 12th century work. The
         significance of the bridge, insofar as it relates to this appeal, derives from its
         architectural and historic interest because it is one of the two medieval bridges into
         the centre of the city which have survived. From the bridge, there are views into
         the historic core of the city and along the riverbanks.
10. Sited above The Boathouse Inn, level with the bridge, is the grade I listed4, 18
    Elvet Bridge. This is now a shop but was originally a house of later 19th century
    date. The significance of the building stems from its architectural and historic
    interest as it incorporates a House of Correction in the cellar which extends into
    the land arch of Elvet Bridge. This dates to 1632. Running beneath Elvet Bridge,
    and next to the appeal site, is an historic route, known as ‘Jailers Yard’ which was
    the route to the House of Correction.
11. The Boathouse Inn, located on the riverbank between the Old Elvet and the New
    Elvet bridges, appears somewhat isolated. However, steps down from Old Elvet
    Bridge, and the footpath underneath the bridge, provide a busy connecting
    pedestrian route in the town. Behind the Boathouse, it is the rear elevation of the
    Prince Bishops shopping centre which places the site in the core of the
    commercial and retail centre of the city. However, the height and massing of the
    shopping centre dominate views from Old Elvet Bridge and dwarf the building in
    question. This creates an incoherent backdrop to the appeal site, and in particular
    the turquoise-coloured stair tower and curved canopy roof, which are visually
    dominant.
12. Whilst the historic core of the appeal site is legible, the building has been
    diminished by later extensions and alterations. Moreover, it is now within a
    cluttered environment. A large external sitting area under a metal pergola is
    situated next to the building, with a canopy and seating area for another bar, to the
    rear. At the time of my visit, cars were parked next to the pergola, and the hard
    landscaping is now a mixture of broken paving slabs and bitumen infill.


3
    List entry number: 1121355
4
    List entry number: 1323228


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003865


13. The mural is located on the south-west elevation of the building which faces Old
    Elvet bridge. This was previously painted white or cream with blue lettering and
    with an illustration of oars, as seen on the front and rear elevation. The mural is
    painted directly onto the building and shows a toucan and glass, with the text
    ‘Lovely day for a ……’ and images referring to features within the city including the
    cathedral and the riverside with cruiser and rowing boats.
14. Whilst the background colour blue, is bright, it is no more noticeable than the large
    turquoise tower behind it, which is seen at height. Moreover, the building could
    have been painted this colour using permitted development rights5, if a mural had
    not been painted and advert consent was not required. Furthermore, because the
    elevation is not particularly high or large, the mural is limited in size.
15. The appellant has noted that there is a connection between the Guinness toucan
    shown on the mural, and the north-east, as the original designer of the toucan,
    John Gilroy, was an illustrator from Whitley Bay who attended Durham University
    prior to serving in the first world war. Aside from this, the design is lively and,
    because of the bright colours, prominent on this side of the building. However, its
    association with a public house, the river and the former use of the building,
    enlivens the commercial setting of the pub and the area around it. Additionally, I
    saw a variety of advertisements on display in the immediate vicinity.
16. The Boathouse Inn has already had many physical changes to the building.
    Although the mural has visually altered one elevation, painting it has not damaged
    the fabric of the building, and it has not harmed the historic and architectural
    significance of the locally listed building.
17. Despite this, I acknowledge that it does contrast with what is around it, and I have
    not been made aware of other similar murals in the vicinity. However, the mural
    can only be seen from certain points when standing on Old Elvet Bridge, or from
    Jailer’s Yard beneath. Walking across the bridge, away from the centre, the
    images are barely visible, apart from those on the modern curved entrance area,
    as it is the front of the building that overlooks the river, which is the elevation that
    is seen.
18. Viewed from New Elvet Bridge, the appeal site is seen next to Old Elvet Bridge
    and No 18 Elvet Bridge, with a backdrop of the cathedral and castle. However, the
    elevation on which the mural is painted is not visible from this location. Therefore,
    from this position, it does not impinge on key views into the historic city centre.
19. Because the appeal building is set below the bridge and along the riverbank, the
    mural is only visible when near to it. Consequently, direct views of the mural with
    the adjoining listed buildings are limited and localised, as the building is mainly
    seen against the backdrop of the shopping centre, which is described in the
    character area appraisal6, as visually overpowering many of the surrounding
    historic buildings. Consequently, the mural does not have an adverse effect on
    their setting and does not harm the significance of the CA.
20. Therefore, based on the matters and reasons above, I conclude that the proposal
    would not harm the visual amenity of the area.


5
    Schedule 2, Part 2, Class C, The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015
6
    Durham City Conservation Area, Character Area 1: Peninsula, Durham County Council, July 2016


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6003865


21. In accordance with the Regulations, I have considered the provisions of Policies
    29 and 44 of the County Durham Plan, 2020, and Policy H6 of the City of Durham
    Neighbourhood Plan 2020 to 2035, in so far as they are relevant. These policies
    collectively require development proposals within the CA to sustain the
    significance of designated and non-designated heritage assets, including any
    contribution made by their setting and to contribute positively to an areas
    character.
Other Matters
22. Durham Castle and Cathedral is a World Heritage Site. Such sites are of
    Outstanding Universal Value (OUV). As one of the finest examples of Norman
    architecture in Europe and the historic seat of the Bishops of Durham, its OUV
    derives from its architectural importance and its continuous use for worship and
    learning since the 11th century, all within a landscape setting on the banks of the
    River Wear. Historic England, who has been consulted on the proposal, have
    advised that, in their opinion, the proposal does not impact on the setting of the
    WHS. I do not disagree with this view.
23. Reference has been made by the main parties to Policies HE5 and HE6 of the
    revised Framework, and by Historic England to the 2024 version of the
    Framework. However, when determining advertisement consent appeals within a
    conservation area or in relation to a listed building, apportioning harm is not
    relevant, as the policy only applies to heritage-related consent regimes under the
    Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 19907.
24. Additionally, matters such as economic benefits and supporting the vitality and
    viability of centres are not relevant considerations as they do not relate to amenity
    or public safety.
Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above, and taking into account all matters raised, the appeal
    is allowed.

M J Francis
INSPECTOR




7
    Footnote 63, National Planning Policy Framework, August 2026.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 4
