Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by R Sabu BA(Hons), MA, BArch, PgDip, RIBA, ARB
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11TH September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003034
J Sainsbury, 73 High Street, Chislehurst BR7 5AG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by MBNL (EE UK Ltd and H3G UK Ltd) against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 25/01478/FULL1.
•    The development proposed is installation of 6 no. antennas on tripod frames and 4 no. transmission
     dishes on support poles, together with 4 no. equipment cabinets, and ancillary development thereto.
     Overall height of proposed apparatus is 20.6 metres AGL, height of mast taken by itself is 5.6
     metres.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. As the proposal is in a conservation area and relates to a listed building I have had
   special regard to sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
   Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
3. I have taken the description of development from the application form, omitting
   reference to the address.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the local area bearing in mind the special attention that should be paid to the
       desirability of preserving the setting of the nearby Grade II* listed building, (Parish
       Church the Annunciation of Blessed Virgin Mary (Church)), and the extent to which
       it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the Chislehurst
       Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons
5. The site lies within Chislehurst CA. The Chistlehurst CA Supplementary Planning
   Guidance (SPG) states that the CA covers an extensive area and incorporates a
   diversity of forms of development and open space. The scattered village
   settlement developed around a plateau and was surrounded for most of its history
   by large country estates and densely wooded valleys. A network of settlements and
   open areas formed around Chislehurst Common. The arrival of the railway in the
   19th century and the French Imperial Court in exile lead to the further development
   of the settlement as a sylvan residential retreat from the industrialised city.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003034


6. The SPG also refers to Chislehurst High Street town centre as a focal point for
   areas both within and beyond the Conservation Area. The High Street was initially
   part of the hamlet of Prickend, before being subsumed into Chislehurst. It
   comprises a range of types of buildings, including 2 and 3 storey traditional terraces
   with commercial units on the ground floor and retains the character of a traditional
   village. Although the supermarket building on which the proposed equipment would
   be mounted dates from the 20th century and is modern in style, given its use of
   brick as a traditional material and modest height, the building is in keeping with the
   character of the area.
7. Accordingly, the significance of the CA, insofar as it relates to this appeal lies in the
   way the range of types and ages of the buildings reflect the development of the
   area as a fashionable suburb of London, particularly in the 19th century, around the
   open spaces that characterise Chistlehurst.
8.    As set out in the Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA), the Church is an important
     example of a 19th century church designed by James Brooks, a noteworthy
     Victorian Gothic Revival architect. Accordingly, the significance of the Church lies in
     the evidence of ecclesiastical historic architecture by a prominent architect. The
     HIA adds that Chislehurst High Street (including Mead Road) significantly
     contributes to the church’s significance due to the ‘village’-like feel of the
     surrounding Conservation Area and the connection between the church and the
     historic townscape of Chislehurst High Street.
9. The proposal includes antennas, transmission dishes and equipment cabinets
   mounted on the roof of the supermarket building. It would be located on a high
   point of the building at its northern end. The equipment would be visible in views
   with the Church and along the High Street. The modern style of the supermarket
   building has altered the character of the CA. However, the utilitarian appearance,
   height and prominent siting of the proposal would be seen in a number of views
   against the traditional character of the High Street. Accordingly, the proposal would
   harm the character and appearance of the street scene and the CA.
10. The proposed equipment may not be visible from some of the key features of the
    CA such as Chislehurst Common. However, given their height, prominence and
    character, the proposed equipment would detract from traditional character of the
    CA, thereby harming its significance. As the equipment would be significantly taller
    than the roof of the host building and would be visible in close proximity to the
    Church, the harm to the significance of the CA would be substantial.
11. Given that the proposal would detract from the traditional character of the setting of
    the Church, and that it would be seen in views with the Church, it would result in
    substantial harm to the setting of the Church.
12. Part 4 of Framework Policy HE6 states that where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
13. Part 5 of the Framework states that where a development proposal would cause
    substantial harm to, or the total loss of, the significance of a designated heritage
    asset, consent should be refused unless it can be demonstrated that the harm is
    necessary to achieve substantial public benefits that outweigh the harm or loss, or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003034


     if a number of circumstances apply. None of the listed circumstances are applicable
     to this appeal.
14. In terms of public benefits, I note the economic, social, sustainability, health and
    education benefits put forward by the Appellant. The equipment would serve two
    operators and provide replacement and improved network coverage and capacity.
    It would also serve the Emergency Services Network (ESN). The evidence
    indicates that coverage to the area from a site on the rooftop of 3 High Street,
    Chislehurst was decommissioned and lost due to reasons outside the operators’
    control. Accordingly, there is a network deficit in the area and it is common ground
    between the parties that a replacement site is required.
15. Framework Policies CO1 and CO2 support the expansion and upgrading of
    telecommunications infrastructure, in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation
    of equipment and respect important environmental safeguards. Framework Policy
    CO1 states that in considering proposals for the expansion or upgrading of
    electronic telecommunications networks, substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of maintaining or improving network coverage, capacity, reliability and
    resilience.
16. I note the Appellant’s evidence regarding future demand for effective
    communications networks on a national level, as well local network coverage
    issues. As the network would serve the ESN and replace a network deficit, I
    attribute substantial weight to the public benefit associated with the provision of
    network coverage.
17. In terms of alternative sites, the site in the car park to the rear of the supermarket
    benefits from prior approval for a 17.5m high pole supporting 6 x antennas and
    other equipment but has not been implemented. This site has been discounted by
    the Appellant as a sharable solution would require a larger scale structure capable
    of hosting all necessary apparatus for both the host and incoming operators. The
    Appellant’s evidence indicates that this would result in a significant departure from
    the street furniture style aesthetic, a significant height and girth increase, and a
    much greater development footprint. In addition, the verge on which the approved
    apparatus would be located has a limited footprint such that any replacement would
    be likely to encroach on the car parking provision. However, details of the design
    and associated implications for the parking provision and potential effect on the CA
    are not before me to discount this site altogether.
18. Other alternative sites both within and outside the CA have been discounted for
    reasons including noise concerns, proximity to residential areas, operational and
    access restrictions. However, it has not been demonstrated that there are no
    alternative sites that would not be within the setting of listed buildings.
19. Part 1b of Framework Policy CO1 requires development to be sited and designed
    to minimise the visual impact of the proposals, especially in situations where a new
    site or structure is proposed, so far as practical taking into account its operational
    requirements. While I note the operation requirements of the proposal, given the
    proximity of the proposal to the listed building, I find that the proposal would not
    accord with this part of the Policy.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003034


20. I note the comments of the inspector for the case at Hornbrook House Car Park1.
    However, as that case was for a 20m high monopole and associated equipment,
    and in a different location albeit within the same CA, it is not directly comparable to
    this appeal.
21. The Framework states that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a
    matter of considerable importance and weight. It goes on to say that development
    which would cause substantial harm to, or the total loss of, assets of the highest
    significance, notably scheduled monuments, protected wreck sites, registered
    battlefields, grade I and II* listed buildings, grade I and II* registered parks and
    gardens, and World Heritage Sites, should be wholly exceptional.
22. As it has not been demonstrated that alternative sites which do not affect the listed
    building could not yet be found, the substantial weight attributed to the public
    benefit would not outweigh the substantial harm to the CA and Church.
    Accordingly, the development would not be wholly exceptional to justify the
    substantial harm to a Grade II* listed building.
23. Consequently, the proposal would conflict with Policies 37, 38, 41, and 89 of the
    Bromley Local Plan January 2019 which together seek a high standard of design,
    no harm to the setting of listed buildings, preserve and enhance the characteristics
    and appearance of conservation areas and the design, siting and landscaping
    minimises the visual impact of the development.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    as a whole and in the absence of material considerations to indicate otherwise, the
    appeal is dismissed.



R Sabu
INSPECTOR




1
    Appeal ref: APP/G5180/W/22/3302869


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
