Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 May 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003588
The Barn, Bull Lane, Tiptree, Essex CO5 0BE
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr James Clough against the decision of Colchester City Council.
•      The application ref is 251039.
•      The development proposed is custom and self-build dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for custom and self-build
         dwelling at The Barn, Tiptree, Essex CO5 0BE in accordance with the terms of the
         application, ref 251039, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.       As part of the initial appeal submissions the appellant submitted a number of draft
         unilateral undertakings relating to infrastructure contributions, a payment to the
         Essex Coast Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy and
         securing the development as self-build/custom housing. Executed obligations were
         submitted alongside the appellants final comments.
3.       The planning obligations would not evolve the development or fundamentally
         change it from what was originally under consideration by the Council.
         Furthermore, the Council has had the opportunity to comment upon the draft
         documents as part of the appeal prior to their execution. I am satisfied that there is
         no procedural or substantive reasons not to accept the unilateral undertakings. I
         have made my decision on this basis.
4.       In addition, the Council has confirmed in its statement of case that an obligation
         securing the infrastructure contributions and RAMS payment ‘would mean those
         two reasons for refusal would no longer be relevant and fall away’1. In relation to
         the infrastructure contributions, notwithstanding the submission of the planning
         obligation, the appellant’s primary case is the contributions are not required. I
         therefore consider that this remains to be a main issue. In relation to the RAMS
         payment, as competent authority I shall still consider this matter in detail in my
         decision.
Main Issues
5.       The main issues are:
              •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
1
    Council Statement of Case P. 4

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003588


             •   location of the development outside a defined settlement boundary;
             •   accessibility to services and facilities for future occupants;
             •   whether the infrastructure contributions meet Regulation 122(2) of the
                 Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations (2010).
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.       The appeal site is situated outside the settlement boundary of Tiptree. As you
         travel along Bull Lane away from the settlement boundary, the area changes from
         a built-up suburban area to an edge of settlement location with a mix of low density
         commercial and residential development. Adjacent to the appeal site lies a
         complex featuring large agricultural buildings, whilst to the rear are a limited
         number of detached dwellings set in spacious plots and some small scale rural
         buildings. Looking back towards Tiptree along Bull Lane, a number of ridges from
         the suburban edge of Tiptree are visible. There are also a number of open fields,
         bound with established vegetation which provides a verdant character and
         appearance to the area.
7.       The appeal site comprises a triangular green open field bound by established
         hedgerow, with an existing gated access and a dilapidated stable building. The
         appeal site features as a small part of the low-density countryside settlement edge.
8.       The appeal proposal would domesticate and introduce built form to the site.
         However, the area is influenced by existing built form rather than being an
         undeveloped rural environment. The development for a single dwelling would be
         set within a large plot which would be in keeping with the low-density pattern of
         development and would integrate with it as part of the wider mixed settlement
         edge. In terms of the specific design of the proposal, whilst the dwelling is fairly
         large, it would be proportionate to its plot and commensurate with the surrounding
         development. The Council did not find harm in regard to detailed design matters,
         and I see no reason to either.
9.       The evidence shows that the boundary hedging requires removal given it is
         Category U. However, all other existing trees and hedgerow would be retained by
         the development, and a soft landscaping condition would be imposed to help retain
         the verdant character of the area.
10. I note that the Inspector for the previous appeal at the site found that the scheme
    for two dwellings would change the character of the area ‘to that of a conspicuous
    domestic cluster’ and ‘the massing and bulk of the proposed dwellings would be
    untoward and incongruous’2. Given the proposal is for a single dwelling, I am
    satisfied that these previous objections have been overcome by the appeal
    scheme through it reducing the overall density, massing and bulk brought by the
    proposal and subsequently how the proposal reads within the countryside location.
11. As such, I conclude that whilst the proposal would result in change to the appeal
    site, it would not result in any harm to it and the proposal would be in keeping with
    the character and appearance of the area. The appeal would therefore comply with
    Policy SP7 of the North Essex Authorities’ Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan (2021)

2
    APP/A1530/W/23/3323572 p. 11 & 12


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision 6003588


      (SS1P), Policies OV2, ENV1 and DM15 of the Colchester Borough Local Plan
      Section 2 (2022) (LPS2) and Policy TIP02 of the Tiptree Neighbourhood Plan
      (2023) (NP). These policies, amongst other matters, seek to ensure development
      responds positively to local character and context to preserve and enhance the
      quality of existing places and their environs, respects the character and
      appearance of landscapes and the built environment and positively responds to
      context and ensures development positively integrates with arboricultural assets.
Location
12. Policy SP3 of the SS1P, sets out that existing settlements are the principal focus
    for growth, where development will be accommodated within, or adjoining the
    settlement. Policy SG1 of the LPS2 sets out the spatial strategy for the borough. It
    directs development to the most sustainable and accessible locations in
    accordance with Policy SP3 and the spatial hierarchy set out within the policy. It
    recognises Tiptree as a sustainable settlement. Within the countryside of
    Colchester, the policy sets out development will only be acceptable where it
    accords with LPS2 Policy OV2.
13. The appeal site is situated outside of the settlement boundary of Tiptree and is
    therefore within the countryside, as such Policy OV2 of the LPS2 applies. This
    states residential development within the countryside, will need to demonstrate the
    scheme respects the character and appearance of landscapes and the built
    environment and preserves or enhances the historic environment and biodiversity.
14. NP Policy TIP01 sets out that new development shall be focused within the
    settlement boundary and on the site allocations. Outside of the settlement
    boundary proposals would only be permitted if it meets a number of criteria,
    including compliance with Policies SG1 and OV2, along with ensuring the
    development does not result in coalescence between Tiptree village and the
    hamlet of Tiptree Heath.
15. For the reasons previously given the development would not result in harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. It therefore respects the character and
    appearance of landscapes and the built environment. The proposal would enhance
    biodiversity through measures secured by a condition. I have no evidence before
    me of any part of the historic environment which would be affected by the
    proposal. In addition, owing to the location of the site being broadly surrounded by
    existing built form it would not result in any coalescence between Tiptree village
    and the hamlet of Tiptree Heath.
16. The proposal would therefore comply with Policy OV2 of the LPS2, and
    subsequently LPS2 Policy SG1, NP Policy TIP01 and SS1P Policy SP3. These
    policies set out the evidence based spatial strategy and plan-led approach to
    development within the area.
Accessibility to services and facilities
17. The appeal site is situated outside the settlement boundary of Tiptree, which is
    reached through traveling along Bull Lane. The part of Bull Lane outside of the
    settlement boundary is unpaved and unlit. The Inspector of the previous appeal
    described parts of Bull Lane being unmade, in poor condition, and they identified




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003588


         large puddles along the road. On this basis, the Inspector found future occupiers of
         the appeal site would be heavily reliant upon the private car3.
18. However, on my visit I observed Bull Lane to be in a materially different condition.
    The section of Bull Lane set beyond the settlement edge, whilst not paved, had a
    consistent and even surface finished with compacted stones. The surface
    appeared robust and easily navigable by foot or cycle until you reach the part of
    Bull Lane that becomes paved which features footpaths and lighting. I also
    observed that this element of Bull Lane was very lightly trafficked, as observed by
    the previous Inspector.
19. At the junction of Bull Lane with Station Road lies a bus stop, and the evidence
    shows a variety of services and facilities are within 1km of the appeal site within
    the developed area of Tiptree.
20. Whilst the section of Bull Lane outside the settlement boundary is unlit, given the
    improved condition of the surface compared to the previous appeal, low volume of
    traffic, close proximity to the bus stop and Tiptree itself, overall it would be
    comfortable, convenient and perceived as safe for future occupiers to realistically
    access the nearby services and facilities from the appeal site by walking or cycling.
    In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the concerns of the previous Inspector
    have been overcome through the change in circumstances along Bull Lane.
21. Therefore, in this case, I find that future occupiers would have suitable accessibility
    to facilities and services through other means than a private vehicle. In this regard,
    the proposal would comply with LPS2 Policy SG1. This policy, amongst other
    matters, sets out that development will be supported where a real travel choice is
    provided and sustainable travel for different purposes is promoted throughout the
    day.
Contributions
22. The Council contends that contributions towards community facilities and open
    space and recreation are required. Specifically, it is detailed in the Council’s officer
    report that a contribution of £13,348.95 for improvements at Grove Park Playing
    Fields and £4104.05 for maintenance and upgrade work to Tiptree United
    Reformed Church, air conditioning at Tiptree Community Centre, an entrance
    canopy at St Luke’s Church and / or towards a new community facility as part of
    the Elms Farm development is required.
23. The Planning Obligations: good practice advice (2025)4 sets out the evidence that
    is likely to be required in order to enable an assessment as to whether any
    financial contributions provided through an obligation meets the relevant tests of
    the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations (2010) (the Regulations). This
    includes relevant development plan policies, quantified evidence of additional
    demands likely to arise, up-to-date and quantified evidence of the extent that
    existing facilities or infrastructure cannot meet the additional demands, the
    methodology for calculating any financial contribution and details of what the
    financial contribution will be spent on.
24. I have very limited evidence before me to justify these infrastructure contributions.
    It is unclear how the proposal would generate the demand identified and I have no
3
    Paragraph 20 of APP/A1530/W/23/3323572
4
    Section 2


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
Appeal Decision 6003588


         evidence before me showing how the figures have been calculated. In addition, the
         list of upgrades that the money is proposed to be spent on is broad, particularly in
         relation to Grove Park Playing Fields and there is no evidence of how these
         existing facilities cannot meet the additional demands generated by the
         development.
25. Therefore, it has not been demonstrated that the infrastructure contributions would
    be necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms, directly
    related to the development and that it would be fairly and reasonably related in
    scale and kind to the development. It follows that these infrastructure contributions
    would fail to meet Regulation 122(2) of the Regulations.
26. Regulation 122 makes it unlawful for any planning obligation to be taken into
    account as a reason to grant planning permission if it does not meet the three
    tests. A unilateral undertaking has been submitted securing contributions towards
    community facilities and open space and recreation, however these have been
    drafted with blue pencil clauses. As I have found that these contributions do not
    meet Regulation 122 schedule 2 5 and 3 6 of the unilateral undertaking shall have
    no effect and carry no weight.
27. The proposal would not conflict with Policies SP6 of the SS1P. This policy sets out
    that all development must be supported by the provisions of the infrastructure,
    services and facilities that are identified to serve the needs arising from the
    development.
28. I note the Council referred to SS1P Policy SP7 and LPS2 Policy SG6. However,
    these policies respectively refer to place shaping principles and town centre uses
    which are not directly relevant to this main issue.
Other Considerations
Habitats sites
29. The Colne Estuary Special Protection Area (SPA), Blackwater Estuary SPA,
    Abberton Reservoir Estuary SPA, Dengie SPA, Stour and Orwell Estuaries SPA
    and the Essex Estuaries SAC are subject to statutory protection under the Habitats
    Regulations. The evidence shows the qualifying features includes breeding and
    non-breeding populations of seabirds and supporting habitats.
30. The appeal site is situated within the zone of influence of these habitats sites. The
    evidence shows that increases in residential development within the zone of
    influence would result in a likely significant effect to the protected sites in
    combination with other plans and projects through additional recreational
    disturbance. The development would introduce a net gain of dwellings which would
    therefore exacerbate the recreational pressures on these sites. As such, in
    combination with other projects or plans there would be a likely significant effect on
    the SPAs and SAC.
31. As competent authority, I am therefore required to carry out an Appropriate
    Assessment. The Essex Coast Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation
    Strategy (RAMS) SPD (2020) sets out the strategy to mitigate the in combination
    effects of development on these sites in relation to recreational disturbance. The

5
    Open Space Sport and Recreational Facilities Contribution
6
    Community Facilities Contribution


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                        5
Appeal Decision 6003588


      Essex Coast RAMS seeks to secure a financial contribution for each new dwelling
      within the zone of influence to fund a strategic mitigation package. This package
      includes measures such as habitat creation, monitoring, waymarking and
      education, among other measures. As part of the appeal a planning obligation has
      been submitted which secures a financial contribution of £169.45 towards the
      Essex Coast RAMS. Having regard to Regulation 122, I am satisfied that this
      obligation is required to make the development acceptable, is directly related to
      the development and is fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the
      development. From reviewing the submitted UU, I am satisfied that it is a legally
      sound and binding obligation that effectively secures the payment. I am therefore
      satisfied that I can confidently rely on the UU providing significant weight in this
      regard.
32. Natural England (NE) has been consulted as part of my Appropriate Assessment.
    NE has confirmed that the financial contribution of £169.45 towards the mitigation
    measures set out in the Essex Coast RAMS would be sufficient to avoid an
    adverse impact to the integrity of the SPAs and SAC.
33. Therefore, as competent authority, I am satisfied the planning obligation would
    secure and ensure the delivery of mitigation sufficient to address the harm likely to
    be caused by the development. As such, the proposal would not have an adverse
    effect on the integrity of the SPAs and SAC.
34. The proposal would therefore comply with Policies SP 2 of the SS1P and Policy
    ENV1 of the LPS2. These policies, amongst other matters, seek to ensure the
    protection of designated sites and that RAMS contributions are secured from
    developments where required.
Planning Obligations
35. I have previously addressed the merits of the unilateral undertaking relating to
    infrastructure contributions and payment towards the Essex Coast RAMS.
    Schedules 2 and 3 of the unilateral undertaking shall have no effect based on not
    meeting Regulation 122, whereas schedule 4 is necessary, directly related and
    fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development and is
    appropriately drafted to secure the contributions.
36. An obligation has also been submitted which seeks to secure the dwelling as a unit
    in accordance with section 1 of the Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding Act
    (2015). Given the proposal is for a custom/self-build unit the planning obligation is
    required to make the development acceptable, is directly related to the
    development and is fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the
    development. It therefore would meet all the requirements of paragraph 58 of the
    Framework. I am satisfied that it is a legally sound and binding obligation that
    effectively secures the status of the dwelling as a custom/self-build. I can therefore
    place significant weight on the obligation.
Conditions
37. I have considered the suggested conditions against the tests in the Framework
    and the advice contained in the PPG. In meeting the tests of the Framework, I
    have amended the wording of conditions where necessary.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6003588


38. The standard timescale condition for implementation and a plans compliance
    condition are imposed for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty.
39. I have imposed conditions requiring the submission and approval of details of the
    materials to be used in the external surfaces of the dwellings and for a landscaping
    scheme. This is necessary in the interests of the character and appearance of the
    area.
40. A condition relating to unexpected contamination being discovered at the site
    during works is reasonable and necessary in the interests of the safety of future
    occupiers of the site.
41. A condition limiting the hours of construction is reasonable and necessary in the
    interest of ensuring the living conditions of nearby occupiers are not undermined.
42. A condition ensuring that works are carried out in accordance with the
    recommendations and enhancements contained within the Preliminary Ecological
    Appraisal & Preliminary Roost Assessment is necessary in the interest of ecology
    and biodiversity.
43. The Council has suggested the removal of permitted development rights in relation
    to Classes A, B, C, D and E of Part 1, Schedule 2 of the General Permitted
    Development Order (2015). This is stated to be in the interests of visual amenity to
    ensure the development avoids an overdeveloped or cluttered appearance.
    Paragraph 55 of the Framework sets out planning conditions should not be used to
    restrict national permitted development rights unless there is clear justification to
    do so. The provisions of the General Permitted Development Order (GPDO) limits
    the scale of development which could be undertaken through permitted
    development, and it is unlikely that any future development undertaken through the
    GPDO would lead to such an adverse effect on the character and appearance of
    the area to justify the blanket removal. In addition, I have found that the proposal
    would not be harmful to the character and appearance of the area. There is no
    clear justification to remove such rights and as such the condition is therefore not
    necessary to make the development before me acceptable.
44. A condition is also suggested to ensure that the garage space is used for parking
    only. However, I have concerns regarding the enforceability of such a condition. In
    addition two parking spaces are shown outside of the on the hard surfacing, so this
    is not necessary.
Conclusion
45. The proposed development is in accordance with the development plan and there
    are no material considerations that indicate a decision should be made other than
    in accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal should
    be allowed.



C Housden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6003588


                                       -- Schedule of Conditions –
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
             the date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             drawing nos 24_1352: 001 P01, 002 P02, 003 P02, 005 P02, 006 P02, 007
             P01, 008 P02.
     3)      No development above ground level shall take place until details of the
             materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
             development hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved in
             writing by the local planning authority. The development shall be carried out
             in accordance with the approved details
     4)      No demolition or construction work shall take place outside of the following
             times;
             Weekdays: 08:00-18:00
             Saturdays: 08:00-13:00
             Sundays and Bank Holidays: No working.
     5)      In the event that historic land contamination is found at any time when
             carrying out works in relation to the development, it must be reported in
             writing immediately to the Local Planning Authority and all development shall
             cease immediately. Development shall not re-commence until such times as
             an investigation and risk assessment has been submitted to and approved in
             writing by the Local Planning Authority, and where remediation is necessary,
             a remediation scheme has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
             Local Planning Authority. Development shall only re-commence thereafter
             following completion of measures identified in the approved remediation
             scheme, and the submission to and approval in writing of a verification report.
     6)      The dwelling hereby approved shall not be used or occupied until a scheme
             of hard and soft landscaping works, including replacement hedge and tree
             planting and means of enclosure, has been submitted to and agreed, in
             writing, by the Local Planning Authority. This scheme shall incorporate
             suitable native or naturalised species and include any proposed changes in
             ground levels and also accurately identify positions, spread and species of all
             existing and proposed trees, shrubs and hedgerows on the site, as well as
             details of any hard surface finishes and external works.
     7)      The development shall be carried out in strict accordance with the submitted
             Preliminary Ecological Appraisal & Preliminary Roost Assessment by
             Matthew Game Consultancy dated 14 March 2025 for the site, including
             implementation of the recommendations and Biodiversity Enhancements
             contained in the Conclusions, Impacts and Recommendations section of the
             aforementioned report.
     8)      The development shall be carried out in strict accordance with the
             Arboricultural Method Statement and Tree Protection Plan by Matthew Game
             Consultancy dated 14 March 2025. Fencing shall be erected in accordance
             with the approved details before any equipment, machinery or materials are
             brought onto the site for the purposes of the development, and shall be
             maintained until all equipment, machinery and surplus materials have been

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          8
Appeal Decision 6003588


             removed from the site. Nothing shall be stored or placed within any fenced
             area, and the ground levels within those areas shall not be altered, nor shall
             any excavation be made.
                                           -- End of Schedule --




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      9
