Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 April 2026
by Alice James BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003513
127 Pollards Hill South, Norbury, Croydon, London SW16 4LS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Usman Qureshi against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Croydon.
•   The application Ref is 25/00667/FUL.
•   The development proposed is demolition of existing bungalow and garage, erection of two storey
    four-bedroom detached dwelling with accommodation within the roof space and provision of
    detached garden room, bin and cycle store.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of existing
   bungalow and garage, erection of two storey four-bedroom detached dwelling with
   accommodation within the roof space and provision of detached garden room, bin
   and cycle store at 127 Pollards Hill South, Norbury, Croydon, London SW16 4LS in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/00667/FUL, subject to the
   conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
   merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the parties
   with regard to these changes.
3. The emerging revised Croydon Local Plan 2024 has been submitted for
   examination and the Examination in Public (EIP) commenced at the beginning of
   September 2025. The parties agree that the emerging plan is in the early stages
   and thus only carries limited weight at this time.
4. A signed Unilateral Undertaking pursuant to Section 106 of the Town and Country
   Planning Act 1990 (as amended) was submitted during the appeal. I shall return to
   this matter below.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development of the character and
   appearance of the surrounding area.
Reasons
6. There are a variety of different dwelling types with varying architectural styles within
   Pollards Hill South. One side of the road has terrace housing while the other side

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003513


     where the appeal site is located has larger two storey detached dwellings. These
     dwellings are set on a hill which means the roof lines are staggered and follow the
     rhythm of the hill. The dwellings on this side of the road vary in terms of mass and
     scale with fluctuating gaps between the properties. They are generally set back
     from the road with areas for either parking or a mature landscaped front garden.
     Many of the dwellings have either mature vegetation or a small wall before the
     pavement and there are mature trees which intermittently line the street. These
     factors make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the area.
7. A bungalow currently stands in the appeal site. It is set back from the road and has
   parking and landscaping at the front of the property. It would appear the bungalow
   has been extended over the years which has given it a disjointed roof shape which
   does not follow the staggered roof line of the other properties. The existing
   bungalow’s massing and scale is not reflective of the general architectural rhythm
   of the other detached properties along Pollards Hill South.
8. The proposed development would result in a dwelling which is sizable compared to
   the previous bungalow. However, the detached dwellings along Pollards Hill South
   have differing architectural styles and sizes. Collectively there is a trend of these
   dwellings having a larger scale and mass. The proposed development would be of
   a proportional mass and scale when compared to these existing detached
   dwellings.
9. The proposed dwelling’s roof line would fit in with the staggered roof lines of the
   other detached properties. The proposed development will have a hipped roof with
   two front gables creating a stepped façade similar to some of the other detached
   properties in Pollards Hill South. Thus, the height and roof shape of the proposed
   development would be in keeping with the prevailing character and appearance of
   this section of the road.
10. The proposed development would be more visually prominent than the existing
    bungalow due to its larger footprint, mass and scale. Nevertheless, it has been
    positioned within a generous plot, maintaining clear gaps to the neighbouring
    properties. Therefore, its larger footprint can be accommodated. The use of a
    hipped roof reduces the overall massing to an acceptable level, ensuring the
    proposed dwelling would not appear excessive in scale in the street scene. It would
    be setback from the road also allowing for off‑street parking and proposes
    landscaping which is consistent with other properties along the street.
    Consequently, it would be in keeping with the architectural rhythm of the street and
    respect the character and appearance of the area.
11. Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would have an acceptable effect
    on the character and appearance of the surrounding area. Therefore, it would
    comply with the provisions set out in policies SP4 and DM10 of Croydon Local Plan
    (2018) and D3 of the London Plan (2021). In summary, amongst other things, these
    policies seek to protect the character and appearance of the area by ensuring
    proposed developments are designed to a high quality.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6003513


Other Matters
Planning Obligations
12. The submitted Unilateral Undertaking (UU) aims to secure proposed development
    as self-build with the intension that a self-build property would meet the self-build
    exemption with regards to Biodiversity net gain (BNG). I consider that the measures
    in the UU are necessary, related directly to the development and fairly related in
    scale and kind. As such they would accord with the provisions of the tests for
    planning obligations set out in the NPPF.
13. The Council raised concerns about the document with regards to its execution as it
    would appear that not all parties with an interest in the land are party to the UU.
14. The evidence before me indicates that the appellant is now the only party with a
    ‘beneficial’ interest. I acknowledge that there is another party still registered and will
    remain so until the transfer is registered at the Land Registry. However, the nature
    of their residual interest is such that they can no longer carry out the development
    themselves, or dispose of the land to another party, or benefit from it. Therefore, I
    am satisfied that the UU is enforceable and can be relied upon in this circumstance.
Other considerations
15. Third parties have raised a range of concerns. Matters raised relating to the
    principle of development are not in dispute between the Council and appellant.
    The proposal is for a replacement dwelling within the settlement and would not
    result in a net loss of housing. Accordingly, I find the development acceptable in
    principle.
16. Matters have been raised in relation to impacts on neighbouring living conditions,
    including loss of daylight, sunlight, noise, and overlooking. There is no dispute
    between the Council and appellant on these matters and I have no substantive
    evidence before me to come to an alternative conclusion. To prevent any
    unacceptable overlooking, a condition requiring upper-floor side-facing windows to
    be obscured glazed and fixed shut below 1.7m is necessary.
17. Concerns have also been raised regarding noise, disturbance, and pollution during
    demolition and construction. Given the site's proximity to neighbouring properties,
    a condition requiring details of a Construction Method Statement would secure that
    necessary mitigation measures would be put into place.
18. In respect of concerns raised about parking provision, the existing driveway would
    be retained, and there is no evidence before me that it would be inadequate for the
    proposed dwelling. Furthermore, my site visit indicated that off-street parking is
    common in the area and there was no apparent parking stress. Any temporary
    impacts associated with construction traffic would be addressed through a
    Construction Method Statement.
19. Concerns have been raised regarding impacts on trees. There are no protected
    trees within or adjoining the site, and no tree removal is proposed. The submitted
    plans include indicative planting; thus, a landscaping condition would be necessary
    to secure the details and to ensure the proposed development is adequately
    landscaped.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6003513


20. Third parties have raised concerns regarding surface water drainage. Although the
    site lies within Flood Zone 1 and has a low risk of surface water flooding, the
    underlying clay geology may limit infiltration-based drainage solutions. Such
    matters would be covered by a suitably worded condition requiring a surface water
    drainage scheme. Subject to this condition, I am satisfied the proposal would not
    cause harm in this regard.
21. Concerns have been raised regarding pressure on local infrastructure, including
    gas and water supplies. Whilst the replacement dwelling would be larger than the
    existing property, there is no evidence before me that it would place undue
    pressure on local infrastructure. Matters raised in relation to fire engine access and
    fire safety have been raised. A Fire Safety Statement was submitted at application
    stage and would comply with Policy D12 of the London Plan. This would be
    secured by condition.
22. In respect of land stability, given the clay geology underlying the site, a ground
    stability survey would be required. This would be subject to a condition. Third
    parties have also expressed concerns that the dwelling may not remain a family
    home and could be subdivided. However, this is based on a hypothetical
    eventuality. There is no evidence before me to indicate that subdivision into flats is
    proposed or intended. I have determined the appeal on the basis of the submitted
    plans for a single-family dwelling.
23. It has been suggested that the appeal should be dismissed because appeal
    APP/L5240/W/24/3339737 was dismissed on the appeal site. However, that
    proposal was materially different in design and therefore is not directly comparable
    to the scheme before me. I have reached my conclusions based on the evidence
    before me and the merits of the current proposal. This matter does not alter my
    findings on the main issue.
Conditions
24. I have considered the suggested conditions in light of the National Planning Policy
    Framework (the Framework) and the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). In the
    interests of precision and clarity I have undertaken some rationalisation and
    rewording of the conditions suggested without altering their overall aim. The pre-
    commencement conditions have been agreed with the appellant.
25. In addition to those already referred to above, I have attached the standard time
    limit condition. I have imposed the approved plans condition for the avoidance of
    doubt. I have also imposed a condition relating to the materials and landscaping.
    This is necessary to ensure the external changes are of a satisfactory appearance,
    in the interests of the character and appearance of the area. I have attached a
    condition requiring the development to meet a rate and water efficiency target of
    110 litres/person/day to ensure compliance with policy SP6. I have attached a
    condition to ensure that the proposed outbuilding remains part and parcel of
    proposed dwelling. The condition is necessary to ensure a satisfactory relationship
    between the proposed dwelling and proposed outbuilding.
26. A condition requiring the side-facing windows in the upper floors to be fitted with
    obscured glazing and non-openable below 1.7m is necessary in the interests of
    preserving the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. A condition requiring a
    Construction Method Statement is necessary to safeguard the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers during works of demolition and construction. A condition

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6003513


      requiring details of a scheme of surface water drainage is necessary to ensure
      surface water runoff is managed safely and effectively in order to minimise flood
      risk.
27. A condition is necessary to secure the provisions set out in Fire Safety Statement
    and a further condition is necessary to secure a ground stability survey, in the
    interests of safety and protecting the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
28. I have separated the suggested combined cycle and refuse storage condition into
    two separate conditions as these relate to two separate planning matters. The
    cycle condition is necessary to ensure the development provides provision for
    cycle parking to facilitate sustainable travel modes. The bin store condition is
    necessary ensure that refuse is stored in a satisfactory manner.
29. The Council have indicated in their evidence that the proposed development has
    been designed to be to be compliant with Building Regulations 2010 (as amended)
    optional requirement M4(2) 'accessible and adaptable' I find in this circumstance
    that a condition requiring compliance with this regulatory regime would not be
    necessary as the proposed design already complies with requirement M4(2) and
    the approved plans condition secures the design.
30. A condition suggested by the Council regarding and roof areas as balconies or
    roof gardens is unnecessary as this is premised on a hypothetical eventuality. In
    any event, the plans do not show roof as balconies or roof gardens. These plans
    have been secured by condition; therefore, such a condition is unnecessary and
    unreasonable to apply in this circumstance.
31. Conditions 4, 5 and 6 are pre-commencement as they are necessary to ensure
    that any potential mitigation is properly designed in prior to the commencement of
    development.
Conclusion
32. For the above reasons, having had regard to the development plan as a whole and
    all other relevant material considerations, I conclude that the appeal should be
    allowed subject to conditions.

Alice James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6003513


Schedule of Conditions
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
             the date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             drawing nos 2108-PA- 010, 2108, PA-011, 2108-PA-012 Rev A, 2108-PA-
             013 Rev A, 2108-PA-014, PA-015 Rev A, 2108-PA, 016 Rev A, 2108-PA-017
             Rev A, 2108–PA-018 Rev A, 2108-PA-019 Rev A, 2108-PA-020, Rev A,
             2108-PA-029, 2108-PA-030, 210-PA-31.
     3)      The external surfaces of the development hereby permitted shall be
             constructed in the materials shown on plans no. 2108–PA-018 Rev A, 2108-
             PA-019 Rev A, 2108-PA-029 and 210-PA-31.
     4)      No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until a
             construction method statement has been submitted to, and approved in
             writing by the local planning authority. The Statement shall provide for:
             i)    the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors.
             ii) loading and unloading of plant and materials.
             iii) storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development.
             iv) the erection and maintenance of security hoarding including decorative
                   displays and facilities for public viewing, where appropriate.
             v) measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during construction.
             vi) a scheme for recycling and disposing of waste resulting from demolition
                   and construction works.
             vii) delivery, demolition and construction working hours.
             The approved Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to
             throughout the construction period for the development.
     5)      No development shall take place until a detailed surface water drainage
             scheme for the site, based on sustainable drainage principles and an
             assessment of the hydrological and hydrogeological context of the
             development, has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
             planning authority.
             The submitted details shall:
             i)   Calculation of the existing and proposed run-off rate (which should
                  achieve greenfield run-off rates unless an alternative rate is adequately
                  justified and achieved).
             ii) Confirmation of the impermeable and permeable site areas used for the
                  infiltration calculations.
             iii) Details of the on-site infiltration drainage.
             iv) Details of the on-site attenuation tank.
             v) Details of further sustainable drainage measures.
             vi) An updated scaled layout plan of the proposed drainage scheme.
             vii) Details of the ownership and maintenance agreement for the SUDS on
                  the site.
             The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
             details. The sustainable drainage system shall be managed and maintained
             thereafter in accordance with the approved maintenance agreement.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     6
Appeal Decision 6003513


     6)      No development shall take place until a ground stability survey has been
             submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
             submitted details shall:
             i)   Provide details of the ground geology.
             ii) Provide details of foundation design.
             iii) Provide details of construction methods.
             iv) Provide details of any necessary mitigation for land instability or
                  subsidence.
             The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
             details.
     7)      Before the development is first occupied full details of landscaping works
             shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
             These details shall include:
             i)    Hard landscaping materials (including samples as appropriate).
             ii) Soft landscaping details, including existing planting to be retained, the
                   species, size, and density of proposed new planting, as well as the
                   dimensions of new trees and how these will be maintained.
             iii) Boundary treatments which must not exceed 0.6m in height within
                   vehicle sightlines.
             iv) Bio-diversity enhancement measures.
             The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
             details. The completed scheme shall be managed and maintained in
             accordance with an approved details.
     8)      Before the development is first occupied full details of cycle provisions shall
             be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
             These details shall include:
             i)   A minimum of two long stay spaces.
             ii) type and location of a minimum of two cycle stands.
             The development shall not be occupied until cycle parking provision has
             been erected in accordance with the approved details and shall be retained
             thereafter.
     9)      Before the development is first occupied full details of refuse stores shall be
             submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. These
             details shall include the size and number of bins, as well as a dedicated area
             for the storage of bulky waste. The development shall not be occupied until
             refuse store has been erected in accordance with the approved details and
             shall be retained thereafter.
     10)     The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the Building
             Regulations optional requirement of a water consumption rate of no more
             than 110 litres per person per day has been complied with.
     11)     Any upper-floor window located in a wall or roof slope forming a side
             elevation of the development hereby permitted shall be fitted with obscured
             glazing, and restricted to opening no more than 150mm unless the parts of
             the window which can be opened are more than 1.7 metres above the floor of
             the room in which it is installed. Such measures shall be provided and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      7
Appeal Decision 6003513


             completed prior to the first occupation of the development and retained for
             thereafter.
     12)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the provisions of the Fire Safety Statement prepared by PHS Ref:2108.
     13)     The proposed outbuilding shown on plan 2108-PA-014 hereby permitted
             shall not be used other than as part of the main dwelling known as 127
             Pollards Hill South.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     8
