Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 April 2026
by R Dickson BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6003738
19 Millway, Mill Hill, Barnet, London NW7 3QR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Sajjad Dar of Hybrid Planning and Development Limited against the decision
     of the Council of the London Borough of Barnet.
•    The application Ref is 25/4039/FUL.
•    The development proposed is for the conversion of the property into 2no. self-contained flats,
     comprising of a 2-bedroom property at ground floor level and 3-bedroom property on the upper
     floors, and retention of replacement porch and first floor extension with external alterations and
     landscaping works to facilitate the change of use.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion of the
      property into 2no. self-contained flats, comprising of a 2-bedroom property at
      ground floor level and 3-bedroom property on the upper floors, and retention of
      replacement porch and first floor extension with external alterations and
      landscaping works to facilitate the change of use at 19 Millway, Mill Hill, Barnet,
      London NW7 3QR in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
      25/4039/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The proposal is for the conversion of the property into 2 self-contained flats. The
      proposal also includes the retention of a porch and first floor extension. The
      Councils sole reason for refusal relates to the standard of accommodation that
      would be provided for future occupiers, and raises no concerns with other
      elements of the proposal. I have made my decision on that basis.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue is whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions
      for future occupiers, with specific regard to the internal ceiling heights.
Reasons
4.    The appeal site, 19 Millway, appears to be a 2-storey semi-detached dwelling from
      the outside. The dwelling has accommodation on the ground floor and first floor,
      and has a loft conversion, with accommodation within the loft space.
5.    Policy D6 of The London Plan (2021) requires a minimum floor to ceiling height of
      2.5 metres for at least 75% of the Gross Internal Area of each dwelling. The
      Council identifies that this is to provide a sense of space, ventilation and cooling in
      new development, and this is supported by the London Borough of Barnet

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6003738


      Supplementary Planning Document: Residential Design Guidance (2016).
      However, the Nationally Described Space Standards (NDSS) requires the
      minimum floor to ceiling height to be 2.3m for at least 75% of the Gross Internal
      Area. The loft conversion meets the London Plan’s minimum requirements.
      Despite the internal floor to ceiling height of the ground floor and first floor meeting
      the NDSS, it falls below the requirements of the London Plan.
6.    During my site visit, I was able to inspect the internal arrangement of the appeal
      site. Despite slightly lower ceiling heights on the ground and first floor in
      comparison to the loft conversion, the rooms had a sense of space, and did not
      feel confined.
7.    The flats would be dual aspect, meaning that the layout would promote cross
      ventilation which would aid the cooling of the building. The Internal Daylight and
      Sunlight Study Rev B, by Model Environments, dated 1 October 2025, confirms
      that the daylight levels achieved are below the thresholds for overheating. As
      such, I find that although the proposal would fall short of the requirements of Policy
      D6, it would meet the aims of the policy, and would provide rooms with a sense of
      space which would be adequately ventilated without overheating.
8.    I acknowledge that my colleague took a different approach when determining their
      appeal (Ref 3351024). However, the addition of some windows, and the reduction
      in glazing in other areas, together with the accompanying Internal Daylight and
      Sunlight Study mean that the circumstances of the appeal before me differs from
      the previous appeal decided at the site. As such, the previous appeal bears limited
      weight on my decision in this case.
9.    Accordingly, the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for future
      occupiers, with specific regard to the provision of space. The proposal would
      therefore be in accordance with Policies D3 and D6 of The London Plan (2021),
      and Policy CHD01 of the London Borough of Barnet Local Plan (2025), which
      collectively seek to ensure that the proposals are of high quality design and
      provide adequately-sized rooms.
Other Matters
10. It is noted that the postcode on the submitted plans is incorrect. However, it is
    clear that the plans relate to the appeal site. I also note concerns with the side
    access to the proposed flats, however there is a sufficient separation distance
    between the appeal site and the neighbouring property, so as to not cause harm to
    the living conditions of neighbouring occupants with respect to noise and
    disturbance.
Conditions
11. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out following the approved plans, for the avoidance of
    doubt and in the interests of certainty.
12. The Council has suggested a number of conditions, which I have considered. A
    condition has been imposed that requires the submission of a demolition and
    construction management and logistics plan, to ensure adverse impacts on the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers are avoided during the construction
    phase. A separate condition specifying the construction operation times is


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6003738


      necessary to ensure that the proposal does not have any adverse impacts on
      neighbouring occupiers in terms of living conditions during the construction phase.
13. A condition has been imposed to ensure that the building will be used as self-
    contained units under use class C3. This is necessary to ensure that the building is
    retained as family sized residential units, and are not divided any further.
14. A condition has been imposed to ensure that the proposal provides adequate cycle
    parking prior to occupation, to ensure that the proposal promotes cycling.
15. Two conditions have been imposed which ensure that the development will comply
    with the optional Building Regulations standards in respect to accessibility and
    adaptability of housing design and water consumption, which are necessary to
    ensure that the proposal is sustainable. An additional condition requiring details of
    the boilers to be submitted to and approved by the local authority is also necessary
    for the same reason.
16. To protect the amenity of future occupants, a condition is required for the
    submission of pre-completion sound insulation test certificates. A separate
    condition to ensure that the roof is not used as outdoor amenity area is required to
    protect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with specific regard to
    noise and disturbance.
17. Finally, a condition is required to ensure that the side elevation windows are
    obscure glazed is necessary for the privacy of the neighbouring occupiers, and a
    condition requiring the refuse collection arrangements to be in place prior to first
    occupation is necessary to ensure that the living conditions of future and
    neighbouring occupiers are protected.
18. The Council have suggested a condition requiring details of hard and soft
    landscaping to be submitted to and approved in writing by the local authority.
    However, this is not relevant to the proposal, therefore I have not imposed this
    condition. A condition requiring the removal of the permitted development rights for
    the appeal site was suggested by the Council. However, I have not imposed it as it
    would be overly restrictive, and therefore not necessary.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

R Dickson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6003738




    SHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than [three] years
             from the date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             drawing numbers: 1547 PL02 Rev a, and S1-BR-0S-01 Rev C.
     3)      a) No development or site works shall take place on site until a ‘Demolition
             and Construction Management and Logistics Plan' has been submitted to
             and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Construction
             Management and Logistics Plan submitted shall include, but not be limited to,
             the following:
                 •   details of the routing of construction vehicles to the site, hours of
                     access, access and egress arrangements within the site and security
                     procedures;
                 •   site preparation and construction stages of the development;
                 •   details of provisions for recycling of materials, the provision on site of
                     a storage/delivery area for all plant, site huts, site facilities and
                     materials;
                 •   details showing how all vehicles associated with the construction
                     works are properly washed and cleaned to prevent the passage to
                     mud and dirt onto the adjoining highway;
                 •   the methods to be used and the measures to be undertaken to control
                     the emission of dust, noise and vibration arising from construction
                     works;
                 •   a suitable and efficient means of suppressing dust, including the
                     adequate containment of stored or accumulated material so as to
                     prevent it becoming airborne at any time and giving rise to nuisance;
                 •   noise mitigation measures for all plant and processors;
                 •   details of contractors compound and car parking arrangements;
                 •   details of interim car parking management arrangements for the
                     duration of construction;
                 •   details of a community liaison contact for the duration of all works
                     associated with the development.
             b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
             measures detailed within the statement.
     4)      No construction work resulting from the planning permission shall be carried
             out on the premises at any time on Sundays, Bank or Public Holidays, before
             8.00 am or after 1.00 pm on Saturdays, or before 8.00 am or after 6.00pm
             pm on other days.
     5)      The units shall be used as self-contained units as shown in the hereby
             approved drawings under Class C3(a) and no other purpose (including any
             other purpose in Class C3 or C4 of the Schedule to the Town and Country


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
Appeal Decision 6003738


             Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, or in any provision equivalent to that
             Class in any statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order, with or
             without modification).
     6)      Prior to the first occupation of the new dwellinghouse(s) (Use Class C3)
             hereby approved they shall all have been constructed to have 100% of the
             wholesome water supplied to them by the mains water infrastructure
             provided through a water meter or water meters and each new dwelling shall
             be constructed to include water saving and efficiency measures that comply
             with Regulation 36(2)(b) of Part G 2 of the Building Regulations to ensure
             that a maximum of 105 litres of water is consumed per person per day with a
             fittings based approach should be used to determine the water consumption
             of the proposed development. Any use of grey water and/or rain water
             systems needs to be separate from the potable (wholesome) water system
             and needs to meet the requirements and guidance set out in Part G of the
             Building Regulations. The development shall be maintained as such in
             perpetuity thereafter.
     7)      Notwithstanding the details shown in the drawings submitted and otherwise
             hereby approved, prior to the first occupation of the new dwellinghouse(s)
             (Use Class C3) permitted under this consent they shall all have been
             constructed to meet and achieve all the relevant criteria of Part M4(2) of
             Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010 (or the equivalent standard in
             such measure of accessibility and adaptability for house design which may
             replace that scheme in future). The development shall be maintained as such
             in perpetuity thereafter.
     8)      Prior to installation, details of the boilers shall be forwarded to the Local
             Planning Authority for approval. The boilers shall have dry NOx emissions
             not exceeding 40 mg/kWh (0%), and shall be installed in full accordance with
             the details approved.
     9)      Prior to the first occupation of the units, copies of Pre-completion Sound
             Insulation Test Certificates shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority,
             confirming compliance with Requirement E of the Building Regulations 2010
             (or any subsequent amendment in force at the time of implementation of the
             permission).
     10)     a) Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, details of
             enclosures and screened facilities for the storage of recycling containers and
             wheeled refuse bins or other refuse storage containers where applicable,
             together with a satisfactory point of collection shall be submitted to and
             approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
             b) The development shall be implemented in full accordance with the details
             as approved under this condition prior to the first occupation and retained as
             such thereafter.
     11)     Before the development hereby permitted is occupied, a minimum of 4 (long
             stay) cycle parking spaces in accordance with the London Plan Cycle
             Parking Standards and London Cycle Design Standards shall be provided
             and shall not be used for any purpose other than parking of cycles in
             connection with the approved development.
     12)     The roof of the extension hereby permitted shall only be used in connection
             with the repair and maintenance of the building and shall at no time be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     5
Appeal Decision 6003738


             converted to or used as a balcony, roof garden or similar amenity or sitting
             out area.
     13)     Before the building hereby permitted is first occupied the proposed window(s)
             in the first-floor side elevation shall be glazed with obscure glass only and
             shall be permanently retained as such thereafter and shall be permanently
             fixed shut with only a fanlight opening.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     6
