Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026 by J Reed MPlan MRTPI
Decision by H Jones BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004934
105 Wellburn Road, Donwell, Washington, Sunderland NE37 1DD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Rachel Bell against the decision of Sunderland City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/02408/ful.
•   The development proposed is front extension and part change of use to hair salon.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for front extension and
   part change of use to hair salon at 105 Wellburn Road, Donwell, Washington,
   Sunderland NE37 1DD in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   25/02408/ful subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing no. 2025/0023/0001 Rev B and the submitted Location Plan.
     3)       The external materials of the extension hereby permitted shall match those
              used in the existing building.
     4)       The development hereby approved shall at all times be operated and
              managed in accordance with the Operational Management Plan Proposed
              Change of Use: Part of Dwelling to Commercial Hairdressing Salon dated
              06/01/2026.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The description of development set out above is taken from the Council’s decision
   notice, because this is a more accurate description of what is proposed.
4. The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. In making my decision, I have had regard to the Framework’s
   content. I am satisfied that the Framework’s content does not affect the substance
   of the main issues in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I
   have proceeded without further consultation with the appeal parties.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004934


Background and Main Issues
5. It is clear from the evidence that the dispute between the appeal parties relates to
   the proposed part change of use, not the design of the front extension.
6. In this context, the main issues are 1) the effect of the proposed development on
   the living conditions of neighbouring occupants with particular regard to the levels
   of activity that the hair salon would be likely to generate; 2) the effect of customer
   parking on highway safety; and 3) whether the appeal site’s location is suitable for
   the proposed development with particular regard to development plan policy.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Living conditions
7. The appeal dwelling is a two-storey mid-terrace property situated within an area
   which is residential in character. Reflecting this character, during my site visit, I
   noted that activity and noise principally derived from passing vehicles and
   gardening.
8. As part of their submission the appellant has submitted a detailed management
   plan for the appeal site which can be secured via condition. The management plan
   sets out that the salon would operate on a single-chair basis, serving no more than
   10 clients per day. Altogether, the management plan’s measures would limit client
   arrivals and departures resulting in them being dispersed and distributed
   throughout the day. Furthermore, the appellant has outlined that the hours of
   operation of the salon would be between 09:00 – 18:00 Monday to Saturday. This
   would ensure that clients would not be attending the salon in the early hours of the
   morning, late into the evening or on Sundays or Bank Holidays. With these
   measures in place, the comings and goings from the salon would not be
   concentrated or of a frequency that would be out of keeping with the character of
   the local area and, consequently, would not disturb local residents.
9. The proposed development would therefore not result in harm to the living
   conditions of neighbouring occupiers with particular regard to the levels of activity
   that the hair salon would be likely to generate. Thus, it would comply with Policies
   HS1 and BH1 of the Sunderland City Council Core Strategy and Development Plan
   2015 – 2033 (2020) (the CSDP). These seek, amongst other things, that
   development does not result in unacceptable adverse impacts arising from noise
   and provides a good standard of amenity for the occupiers of land and buildings.
Highway Safety
10. The evidence before me indicates that in the surrounds of the site there are some
    allocated and shared parking bays. There is, however, no evidence before me to
    suggest that there are any on-street parking restrictions. In addition, there is no
    substantive evidence before me which indicates that Wellburn Road or the
    neighbouring streets are the subject of any significant parking stress. Reflective of
    this, although only a snapshot in time and undertaken at mid-morning, during my
    site visit I noted that the area was not the subject of any significant parking
    pressures.
11. The single-client-at-a-time operation, coupled with the 10 clients per working day
    limit, would ensure that any vehicular trips associated with the salon would be
    modest and spread out rather than concentrated together. Furthermore, the site is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004934


     within a residential area, and bus stops are located nearby. Consequently,
     sustainable transport modes, such as walking and bus travel would be likely to
     provide a realistic option for some salon clients.
12. For these reasons, the parking demand generated by the development would be
    low, and the local area would be able to adequately accommodate for that demand
    with no prejudicial effects on highway safety arising.
13. Consequently, I find that the effect of customer parking on highway safety would be
    acceptable. Therefore, the development would accord with Policies BH1, ST2 and
    ST3 of the CSDP. Amongst other matters, these policies seek that development
    provides adequate parking and does not harm highway safety.
Suitable Location
14. Policy EN10 of the Unitary Development Plan (1998) (the UDP) seeks to maintain
    existing patterns of land use and sets out that development proposals should be
    compatible with the principal use of the neighbourhood. However, the policy does
    not allocate land for specific uses, nor does it contain any criterion or provision
    requiring development proposals to be refused solely because they would introduce
    a use falling within a different use class from that which predominates in the
    surrounding area.
15. In my remaining main issues, I have set out the reasons why the levels of activity
    the development would be likely to generate would not harm the living conditions of
    surrounding occupants, whilst the effect of customer parking on highway safety
    would be acceptable. Consequently, in these regards, the development would
    assimilate into the area without harmful impacts arising, and I have no reason to
    conclude that it would give rise to any other effects which would be incompatible
    with, or out of keeping with, its residential setting.
16. The Council have also highlighted concerns that if the appeal scheme were to be
    allowed it would set a precedent for other similar development. There is little
    evidence before me to suggest that such development may be forthcoming at other
    sites. In any case, this decision is based firmly on the specifics of the development
    proposed and the evidence before me. Should other redevelopments be proposed
    of a similar nature, they would require assessment on their own merits.
17. As a result, with particular regard to development plan policy, the appeal site’s
    location is suitable for the proposed development and, accordingly, it complies with
    UDP Policy EN10.
Conditions
18. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have imposed a condition requiring
    that the development be carried out in accordance with the approved plans in the
    interests of certainty. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area
    and the host property, it is necessary to impose a planning condition requiring the
    use of matching materials. A condition requiring adherence to the submitted
    management plan is required in the interests of the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004934


Conclusion and Recommendation
19. The proposed development accords with the development plan as a whole.
    Furthermore, I conclude that no adverse effects would arise from the development,
    nor any conflict with the Framework’s decision-making policies. Therefore, the
    Framework’s presumption in favour of sustainable development indicates that the
    proposed development should be permitted. Overall, there are no material
    considerations, that indicate the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, I recommend that the appeal should be
    allowed, subject to the conditions set out above.

J Reed
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
20. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

H Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
