Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by C Shearing BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004899
Lower Fawke Farm, Bitchet Green Road, Fawke Common, Underriver TN15 0JX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by The Knowle Second Trust Fund against the decision of Sevenoaks District
     Council.
•    The application ref is 24/03466/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘Conversion and change of use of former agricultural
     buildings to a mix of commercial B8 (storage and distribution) and E(g) (ii) (iii) uses following
     demolition of buildings unsuitable for conversion’.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion and
       change of use of former agricultural buildings to a mix of commercial B8 (storage
       and distribution) and E(g) (ii) (iii) uses following demolition of buildings unsuitable
       for conversion at Lower Fawke Farm, Bitchet Green Road, Fawke Common,
       Underriver TN15 0JX in accordance with the terms of the application, ref
       24/03466/FUL, subject to the conditions set out in the schedule below.
Preliminary Matters
2.     During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework 2026
       was published (the Framework). The main parties were invited to comment on the
       implications of the new Framework to the appeal and the responses received have
       been taken into account.
3.     The description of development used above is taken from the planning application
       form. Additional documents have been submitted with the appeal including an
       additional highways report and biodiversity information. Since those documents do
       not alter the proposal but respond to the reasons for refusal, they have been taken
       into account in determining the appeal. A Unilateral Undertaking was also
       submitted with the appeal, dated 5 February 2026 (the UU) and has been taken
       into account.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are: the effect of the proposal on the Kent Downs National
       Landscape and, whether the site is suitably located for the proposed development,
       having regard to its accessibility and effects on highway safety.
Reasons
Kent Downs National Landscape


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004899


5.     The relevant duties1 have established that relevant authorities must seek to further
       the statutory purposes of Protected Landscapes. For National Landscapes that
       statutory purpose is to conserve and enhance natural beauty. The Framework
       states that proposals in these areas should be limited in scale and extent and
       sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to the statutory purposes and
       special qualities, and that substantial weight should be placed on the importance
       of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas.
6.     The appeal site lies within the Kent Downs National Landscape (the KDNL). It lies
       in the Sevenoaks Eastern Chart 10c Character Area as defined by the Sevenoaks
       Landscape Character Assessment (LCA) 2017, which describes its key
       characteristics as including undulating landform, small to medium scale fields, a
       sparsely settled landscape and a strong sense of enclosure. The more recent Kent
       Downs LCA describes the characteristics of the area to include a low density of
       settlement with dispersed villages and a network of historic lanes and tracks, many
       sunken and narrow. The management recommendations in the LCA for this area
       include the protection of the undeveloped, tranquil and historic rural character of
       the area and to ensure any new development is well-integrated into the landscape.
7.     The area immediately surrounding the appeal site has a distinctly rural character
       and displays the characteristics identified by the landscape studies, comprising
       dispersed development accessed via narrow winding lanes. The site itself contains
       a cluster of agricultural buildings which form a historic farmstead altered overtime.
       The buildings have a simple, utilitarian appearance typical of a rural location. The
       contribution of the appeal site to the landscape character is appreciated
       predominantly in short range views from the public footpaths which pass adjacent
       to, and on to, the site2.
8.     The site is not an isolated one and the public footpaths both to the west and south
       pass close to existing residential properties and their domestic gardens within a
       short distance of the appeal site. The nearest residential property and garden to
       the south are visible behind the appeal site in views from the public footpath to the
       north east and form a part of its context. Together these factors limit the
       appreciation of tranquillity in this part of the landscape, having regard to the
       definition of tranquillity cited from the National Landscape Management Plan.
9.     The appellant finds the existing use could generate an average of between 90 and
       120 vehicle movements per day across the year, but with seasonal variations.
       Those movements could reasonably involve large agricultural vehicles and
       machinery accessing the site via Fawke Wood Road. Interested parties have
       raised concerns for the figures involved and the evidence includes results of local
       traffic counts reflecting the existing situation. While those findings are not disputed,
       it remains that the site could very reasonably be used more intensively under its
       current agricultural use. Movements will also inevitably vary across different farms.
       The use of TRICS data for this purpose is therefore reasonable.
10. In considering the activity which could occur from the proposal, the Highways
    Authority acknowledge the difficulties in assessing movements arising from farm
    diversification since the types of business can vary considerably. The appellant
    now suggests that vehicle movements from the proposed use could be between

1
  Section 11A(2) of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 and section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of
Way Act 2000, as amended by section 245 of the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023
2
  SR135 and SR136, and Byway SR136A


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6004899


       75 and 116 per day, which is a wide range. These figures have been subject to
       change since the application was determined and the appellant states that they
       reflect the latest version of the TRICS database, with the lower end of the range
       being the more accurate reflection of proposed movements. In the absence of
       compelling evidence to the contrary, I have no strong reason to doubt that this is
       the most effective means of anticipating future movements for the proposal.
11. It is not apparent that farm vehicles would also continue to use the access, or
    would amount to a significant number of movements, given the appeal scheme
    encompasses all the buildings and hard surfaces of the site. The Highways
    Authority accept that, given the size of the buildings involved, numbers of HGV
    movements are likely to be low as small units are unlikely to use large vehicles for
    distribution, and this is a reasonable assumption.
12. Overall and based on the evidence, the traffic movements would be similar to
    those which could arise from the existing use, albeit with a different distribution
    across the day, and would be likely to comprise smaller sized vehicles. As a
    consequence, the vehicle movements associated with the proposal would not
    represent intensified vehicular activity or cause a reduction in the relative
    tranquillity of the site or this part of the landscape.
13. The proposal includes external storage with associated fencing adjacent to
    buildings 3, 4 and 5 and against the southern and eastern site boundaries. The
    yard space of Building 3 in particular would be close to the public footpath and be
    prominent to its users approaching the site from the lower ground to the north east.
    Nonetheless these storage areas would be modest in size and in close proximity to
    the buildings which they relate, and they would be confined to the existing
    envelope of the farmstead. New grass buffers, hedgerows and tree planting along
    the site’s boundaries would also soften the visual effects of the storage and in time
    provide some screening. For these reasons in combination, and given the existing
    paraphernalia and dilapidated structures along the eastern boundary, this aspect
    of the proposal would preserve the landscape character and its tranquillity.
14. Enhancements to the landscape character would be achieved particularly through
    new planting to the northeast of the site beyond the farmstead where the line of a
    former hedgerow has been replaced by post and wire fencing, improving the
    experience of the natural landscape to users of the public footpath. The removal of
    dilapidated structures close to the site boundary would also open up this part of
    the site and provide visual benefit. New native planting to the eastern boundary
    would also provide softness to this side of the site, to the benefit of views from the
    public routes to the northeast.
15. The Council’s concerns do not extend to the alterations to the buildings
    themselves. Given the design of those alterations and subject to appropriate
    conditions, I agree with that finding. The passing bays on Fawke Wood Road
    already exist, albeit informally, in grassed areas at the edge of the road and in
    some cases alongside existing accesses. Their retention and use for this purpose
    would not cause harm to the landscape character. Given the conclusions
    surrounding traffic movements, the proposal would not necessitate additional
    signage with urbanising effects to the south, particularly since existing signage at
    the Bitchet Green Road junction highlights the presence of the public footpath and
    likelihood of pedestrians. As below, conditions can provide safeguards from
    harmful external lighting. Given the development is largely derived from the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004899


       conversion of the existing buildings and reconfiguration of external spaces, I agree
       that the development should not be considered ‘major’ for the purposes of policy
       N4(2) of the Framework.
16. For the reasons given, while the character of the site would change to a more
    commercial one, given the design and layout of the proposal, together with
    landscaping and since the changes are well confined within the farmstead, the
    proposal would preserve and enhance the natural beauty of the KDNL. The
    proposal would comply with policies LO1 and LO8 of the Core Strategy 2011 (the
    CS) and policies EN1 and EN5 of the Allocations and Development Management
    Plan 2015 (the ADMP) which together require high quality design that conserves
    and enhances the character of the landscape. The proposal would not present
    conflict with the national decision-making policies of the Framework in this respect,
    including policy DP3 which requires development to integrate with and enhance its
    surroundings, and policy N4 relating to Protected Landscapes.
Accessibility
17. The site is in a rural location where the roads lack designated footways and
    lighting and have fast maximum speed limits. The site is some distance from
    frequent public transport options. Users of the appeal site are therefore very likely
    to be reliant on private transport rather than using more sustainable means.
18. Policy TR3 of the Framework seeks to locate development where it can support
    sustainable patterns of movement, but states this should take into account the
    vision for the site, the type of the development and its location. It is relevant to
    read this in the context of other policies of the Framework which include policy E4,
    which supports the sustainable growth of businesses in rural areas through the
    conversion of existing buildings and well-designed new buildings. It goes on to
    acknowledge that development proposals that meet business needs in rural areas
    may need to be in locations not served well by public transport. Both these
    circumstances are applicable here.
19. To an extent the combination of proposed uses, which include storage, are
    inherently reliant on the use of private vehicles, rather than, for example, walking
    or cycling. As above, the vehicle movements arising from the proposal would be
    comparable to those which could arise from the existing use and the proposal is
    not one likely to generate a significant amount of movement. Neither is it apparent
    that the site is one where opportunities to improve walking, wheeling, cycling or
    public transport reasonably exist. The combination of these considerations, and in
    the context of the policies of the Framework, leads me to find that the site is
    suitably located in terms of its sustainability for the proposed uses. The proposal
    would not conflict with policies TR3, TR6 nor TR8 of the Framework.
Highway Safety
20. As above, the only vehicular access to the site is via Fawke Wood Road and its
    length from the junction with Bitchet Green Road also comprises a public footpath,
    creating potential for conflict between its users. However, for the reasons set out,
    the extent of vehicle movements would not be substantially different from those
    which could currently be experienced and the vehicles serving the site are likely to
    be smaller in size. Furthermore, given the narrow and partially unmade nature of
    the track, vehicle movements would very likely be slow, and areas of grass verge


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6004899


       including the passing points and other accesses, provide respite from walking in
       the road and opportunities to move out of the path of traffic.
21. On this basis the proposal would not increase potential harm to pedestrian safety
    on Fawke Wood Road. Two permissive footpaths have been put forward by the
    appellant, which would provide an attractive alternative across fields. However, for
    the above reasons this would not be necessary to make the development
    acceptable. While outside the appellant’s control, neither is it substantiated that
    amendments would be required to the Bitchet Green Road junction which
    accommodates two protected trees, since the vehicles associated with the
    proposal would be predominantly smaller than those from the agricultural use and
    similar in amount. There is similarly not substantive evidence that the track to the
    site would need to be resurfaced to support the proposal.
22. I understand there is an application to allow one of the public footpaths to be used
    as an unrestricted byway, which would permit those on horseback and in a horse
    and carriage to use it. There is little information surrounding this application or the
    likelihood of its success and I see no strong reason why this would alter the above
    judgement.
23. In conclusion on this main issue, the proposed development would be acceptable
    in terms of its effects on highway safety and the functioning of the public routes.
    The proposal would comply with policy LO8 of the CS which supports
    diversification of the rural economy, and with the relevant policies of the
    Framework as set out above and including TR8 relating to public rights of way.
Other Matters
24. It is not in dispute that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt. I agree with that finding, given that the material change in use of land
    would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt for the
    reasons set out in the officer report. The development therefore complies with one
    of the exceptions to inappropriate development given by policy GB7 of the
    Framework. The proposal would comply with ADMP policy GB7 relating to the re-
    use of buildings in the Green Belt, as well as CS policy LO8 regarding the extent of
    the green belt. The acceptability of the proposal in Green Belt terms is not
    therefore reliant on very special circumstances.
25. There are some listed buildings to the south of the site including Fawke
    Farmhouse, an outbuilding to its north east and a barn to its south west, which are
    all grade II listed. Fawke House on the southern side of Bitchet Green Road is also
    grade II listed. Based on the evidence and findings of my site visit, their
    significance is appreciated from the road and public footpaths and their rural
    setting forms an important part of how their significance is experienced. The
    appeal site is separated from the Fawke Farmhouse buildings by distance and
    intervening fields and tree planting. As a result there is little, if any, intervisibility
    between them or view points from where those assets and the appeal site are
    appreciated together. The same applies to Fawke House. On this basis the site
    does not form part of their setting or the way in which they are experienced.
26. While forming the only remaining part of the historic farmstead, there is little
    evidence to support that the Old Dairy on the site should be considered a non-
    designated heritage asset and I observed it to be in a very poor state of repair,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6004899


       partially lacking roof and supporting walls. Based on the evidence I have not
       treated it as such.
27. The access track to the site passes in close proximity to some residential
    properties, including one with a bay window close to the edge of Fawke Wood
    Road. However, given the findings above relating to the similarity in vehicle
    movements and focus on smaller vehicles, it follows that this proposal would not
    cause unacceptable additional harm to the living conditions of those occupants.
    There is not convincing evidence to support that the operations on the site would
    cause noise disturbance, particularly given the conclusions of the appellant’s
    Noise Assessment and since those uses within class E(g) are, by definition, those
    which could be carried out in a residential area without detriment to its amenity. A
    condition is discussed below relating to operating hours, preventing operations at
    unsociable hours.
28. I have had regard to the other issues raised by third parties, relating to matters
    including ecology and the nearby SSSI. Those matters are addressed in the
    officer’s report and informed by relevant consultee responses. There is not
    substantive evidence before me which would now lead me to reach a different
    view. The potential inaccuracies in the documents surrounding the existing use of
    the buildings on the site are not of an extent that they are material to the outcome
    of the appeal.
29. The UU deals with Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG), in particular through securing a
    biodiversity and habitat management plan for BNG on the site, maintenance for a
    period of 30 years as well as a monitoring fee. This provides assurances that the
    BNG condition is capable of being successfully discharged and meets the relevant
    tests for a planning obligation.
Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development
30. Policies S3 and S5 of the Framework together set out the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development for development outside settlements. S3(1)c states that
    in all locations, development proposals that accord with both an up-to-date
    development plan and the decision-making policies in the Framework should be
    approved without delay. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development
    would not conflict with any development plan policy or policy of the Framework.
31. S5(5) makes clear that development proposals in the Green Belt should be
    determined in accordance with policies HC8, GB6, GB7 and/or GB8. Since it has
    been found that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the green
    belt, S5(5) sets out that the proposal should be approved unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework, and
    applying paragraph S5(2).
32. In terms of benefits, enhancements to the KDNL and the experience of those on
    the public footpaths have been identified above and there would be significant
    biodiversity enhancements on the site. In addition, the Council acknowledge that
    there is an overall need for developments of this type in the District, particularly
    storage uses. While this was anticipated to be met in the north of the District it
    acknowledges that there may have to be some within the Green Belt. The future
    need to support diversification of farms including converting redundant farm
    buildings into working environments is also recognised. Together with the context

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6004899


       of the policies in the Framework which include those supporting growth of
       businesses in rural areas through conversion of buildings, this benefit attracts
       significant weight. Since the site is not previously developed land by definition, and
       since the acceptability of the proposal relies on the site otherwise being used
       effectively for agricultural purposes, I have not applied the substantial weight set
       out in policy L2 for the effective use of underutilised, vacant or previously
       developed land. Overall, the benefits of the scheme attract substantial weight.
33. While acknowledging there would be changes to the character and appearance of
    the appeal site, the proposal would not cause any adverse effects. Accordingly,
    the benefits of the proposal would not be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects. In applying S5(2), the proposal would not fail to comply with any of the
    national decision-making policies which state that development proposals should
    be refused in specific circumstances.
34. For these reasons the proposal would benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development given by the Framework, which is a material
    consideration of critical importance in decision-making.
Conditions
35. The Council have suggested conditions which it considers should be imposed in
    the event that the appeal were allowed. These have been considered in light of the
    relevant tests for planning conditions and in some cases the wording has been
    amended to ensure compliance with the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG).
36. In addition to the standard time limit condition, approved drawings are listed to
    provide certainty to all parties. For the safety of future users, ground contamination
    investigations are secured. To ensure appropriate consideration of archaeological
    remains, details of investigations are conditioned, and for amenity and highway
    safety, construction management is conditioned. These are pre-commencement
    conditions since a later trigger could limit the effectiveness of the investigations
    and measures which could be used.
37. For reasons of amenity, a condition is imposed limiting operating hours. For
    reasons of visual amenity and highway safety, the final treatment of the passing
    points is conditioned. For visual amenity and protection of bats, details of external
    lighting is secured. The landscaping scheme, and a provision for replacement
    planting, as well as a restriction on areas of external storage, is also conditioned
    for visual reasons. For sustainability reasons and to meet the policy requirement,
    the BREEAM standard is secured. For the reasons set out in the officer report, to
    secure the final design of the parking areas and appropriate turning areas on the
    site, final details should be conditioned.
38. Having regard to the Framework, which states that conditions should not be used
    to restrict national permitted development rights, and since it is not clear why a
    more restrictive approach is necessary here, the permitted uses are not restricted.
    Given the findings above relating to the site’s location, and since it is not clear how
    the proposal could reduce car dependency, a Travel Plan is not considered
    reasonable.
39. Since details of cycle storage are part of the approved plans, further details are not
    necessary. As above, based on the evidence, additional signage along the access,
    permissive routes, alterations to the junction with Bitchet Green Road including

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6004899


       tree protection measures do not meet the test of necessity for the planning
       permission. Neither would they meet the test of reasonableness where located
       outside the appellant’s control. Given the distance from the nearest residential
       properties, the appellant’s Noise Assessment, and the nature of the proposed
       uses, further noise assessments are not necessary or reasonable.
40. Having regard to comments of the Flood Risk Officer and since hard surfaces and
    built areas would be reduced by the proposal, details of surface water treatment do
    not meet the test of necessity for the purposes of the planning permission. Neither
    do details of foul drainage, given the other mechanisms that exist outside the
    planning system.
41. A BNG condition is not imposed here since it is deemed to be imposed as a pre
    commencement condition by the relevant legislation as set out in the PPG. Given
    the findings of the Council with regard to ecology impacts and protected species,
    and the nature of the appeal site, it is not substantiated that an Environmental
    Management Plan meets the test of necessity. Since it is not clear that the
    development should be considered major development for the purposes of policy
    T3 of the ADMP, charging points are not conditioned and a provision exists outside
    the planning system.
42. The appellant has suggested a condition to restrict the number of buildings which
    could be used for storage at any one time. However, based on the evidence this
    would not meet the test of necessity.
Conclusion
43. The proposal would comply with the development plan and there are not material
    considerations of sufficient weight to indicate that a decision should be made other
    than in accordance with it. The appeal is therefore allowed.

C Shearing
INSPECTOR



Schedule of Conditions

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
               KBC/24/046/01 Rev.C (Site Location Plan), KBC/24/046/02 Rev.C (Block
               Plan), KBC/24/046/10 Rev.C (Site Layout Plan as Proposed),
               KBC/24/046/11 Rev.B (Proposed Plans and Elevations Building 1),
               KBC/24/046/12 Rev.0 (Proposed Floor Plans Building 2), KBC/24/046/13
               Rev.A (Proposed Elevations and Roof Plan Building 2), KBC/24/046/14
               Rev.A (Proposed Floor Plans and Elevations Buildings 3 and 4),
               KBC/24/046/15 Rev.A (Proposed Floor Plan and Elevations Building 5),
               KBC/24/046/16 Rev.0 (Demolition Plan), KBC/24/046/17 Rev.C (Site Access
               Road and Plan as Proposed), KBC/24/046/18 Rev.0 (Bike Store- Single),


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6004899


               KBC/24/046/19 Rev.0 (Bike Store- Double), KBC/24/046/20 Rev.0 (Bike
               Store- Triple), KBC/24/046/22 Rev.0 (Fencing Details), LLD3257-LAN-DWG-
               010 Rev.05 (Landscape Strategy Masterplan), Unnumbered ‘Materials
               Schedule’.
     3)       No development, including demolition, shall take place until a Construction
              Management Plan has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
              Local Planning Authority. This shall include:
                i.   Routing of construction and delivery vehicles to the site;
                ii. Timing of deliveries and details of areas for unloading/ loading of plant
                    and materials;
                iii. Storage of plant and materials for construction;
                iv. Programme of works including any temporary traffic management and
                    signage;
                v. Wheel washing facilities;
                vi. Measures to control the emissions of dust and dirt during construction;
                vii. Details of waste management;
                viii. Hours of works.
              The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              details.
     4)       Prior to commencement of the development, details of the following shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority:
                i.   Archaeological field evaluation works including a specification and
                     written timetable;
                ii. If deemed necessary by the Local Planning Authority following part i., a
                    scheme for archaeological investigation, recording and reporting, and a
                    programme of post excavation assessment and publication.
               The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
               details.
     5)       Prior to the commencement of development, a land contamination report in
              the form of a Phase 2 site intrusive assessment, shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. In the event that
              contamination is found, a remediation scheme shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority along with a programme
              or timetable for its implementation. Following the completion of all
              remediation works, a verification report shall then be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
     6)       If, during the construction of the development, contamination not previously
              identified is found to be present at the site then no further development
              (unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority) shall be
              carried out until a remediation strategy detailing how the contamination will
              be dealt with, has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The remediation strategy shall be implemented as
              approved.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     9
Appeal Decision 6004899


     7)       Prior to the commencement of development, details shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority to demonstrate how the
              development shall achieve a minimum of the BREEAM ‘very good’ standard
              or comparable alternative. The development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved details.
     8)       The materials to be used in the construction of the development shall be
              those indicated on the approved plans and on the Materials Schedule.
     9)       Prior to the first use of any part of the development hereby permitted, details
              of an external lighting scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing
              by the Local Planning Authority. External lighting shall be installed only in
              accordance with the approved details.
     10)      Prior to the first use of any part of the site, details of the treatment of the
              passing spaces shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. They shall be completed in accordance with the approved
              details prior to the first use of the site.
     11)      Prior to the first use of any part of the site and notwithstanding the approved
              plans, details of the parking areas and turning areas on the site shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
              development shall be completed in accordance with the approved details.
     12)      The approved soft landscaping scheme shall be implemented in full not later
              than the first available planting season following the first use of the site. Any
              trees or plants which, within a period of five years after planting, are
              removed, die or become seriously damaged or diseased in the opinion of the
              Local Planning Authority, shall be replaced in the next available planting
              season with others of a similar size, species and number.
     13)      The development hereby permitted shall not operate other than between the
              hours of 07:00 and 19:00 Mondays to Saturdays (inclusive) and shall not
              operate on Sundays or Bank or National Holidays.
     14)      External storage shall take place only in the areas specifically labelled for this
              purpose on the approved plans.


     End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
