Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by Roger Catchpole BSc (hons) PhD CEcol MCIEEM IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004977
77 Long Street, Middleton, M24 6UN

•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr M Suleman against Rochdale Metropolitan Borough Council.
•    The application reference is 25/00577/FUL.
•    The development proposed is a change of use of the former Middleton Conservative Club and
     Kohinoor Banqueting Hall into a new multi-functional events space including a part single/part two
     storey side extension, erection of external stairway and retaining wall, creation of access to rear and
     conversion of the former bowling green into a car parking area together with associated boundary
     treatments and landscaping.


This decision is issued in accordance with section 56 (2) of the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 as amended and supersedes that issued on
2 September 2026.
Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for Costs
2.    An application for a full or partial award of costs was made by Mr Suleman against
      Rochdale Metropolitan Borough Council. An application is also made by the
      Council for a full award of costs against Mr Suleman. These applications are the
      subject of separate decisions.
Preliminary Matters
3.    As the proposal is in a conservation area and could affect the setting of a listed
      building, I have had special regard to sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning
      (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended) (the Act). The
      Council considered the setting of two other listed buildings to be affected but I do
      not share this view for the reasons set out below and do not consider them further
      in my main reasoning.
4.    Insofar as the effect of the proposal on the setting, as it relates to the special
      interest of “83-78 Long Street” (Ref: 1481123), is concerned, I find that the
      massing of the intervening building and setback of the appeal site creates a visual
      discontinuity in an otherwise eclectic street frontage. The evidential value of the
      sliding sash windows of the top floor and their association with silk weaving would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004977


      remain unchanged and clearly legible. The way in which it is experienced would
      not be diminished by the proposal and its special interest would thus be preserved.
5.    Turning to the effect of the proposal on the setting, as it relates to the special
      interest of the “Former National School” (Ref: 1068503), I find that the verdant and
      open areas to the north and to the rear of this building places it within a wholly
      different context and street scene in comparison to the dense urban grain which
      characterises the context of the appeal building. The setback of the appeal
      building, separation distance and the deviation of the road is such that there is no
      consistent visual relationship between the two. The way in which the listed
      building is experienced would not be diminished by the proposal and its special
      interest would thus be preserved.
6.    The appellant attempted to submit late evidence concerning badgers after the
      deadline for submissions had lapsed. The appeal Start Letter sets out the
      necessary timetable including a link to the procedural guide. This clearly indicates
      that information outside of the normal time limits will usually be disregarded unless
      exceptional circumstances apply. These include a material change of
      circumstance, another relevant appeal decision, changes to legislation or
      Government policy and in the interests of natural justice. As none of these applied
      and neither the Council nor interested parties would have had an opportunity to
      comment, this evidence was not admitted.
7.    A revised National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026
      (the Framework) prior to the determination of this appeal. The main parties have
      been given an opportunity to comment on changes relevant to their respective
      positions. I have taken their views into account in reaching my decision and am
      satisfied that no party has been prejudiced as a result.
Main Issues
8.    The Council failed to give notice within the statutory time period but has set out its
      putative reasons for refusal. Bearing this in mind, as well as the representations of
      interested parties and consultees, I find the main issues to be the effect of the
      proposal on:
           •    the character and appearance of the area bearing in mind the special
                attention that should be paid to the desirability of preserving the special
                interest of the adjacent Grade II* listed building, known as “Long Street
                Methodist Church Long Street Methodist Sunday School” (Ref: 1068504)
                (the LB), and the extent to which it would preserve or enhance the character
                or appearance of the Middleton Town Centre Conservation Area (the CA);
           •    highway safety with respect to pedestrian access and movement within the
                site;
           •    the living conditions of nearby residents with respect to noise and air
                quality; and
           •    protected species with respect to badgers.
Reasons
9.    The appeal relates to a largely derelict building comprising the former Middleton
      Conservative Club which is a Regency period building constructed in a polite

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004977


      classical style with red stock brick and Baroque stone trimmings. An unused
      bowling green is situated at a higher level, to the rear of the building which is
      identified as ‘enhanced green space’ within the Middleton Centre Masterplan. The
      property was originally built as a large family residence which was later extended
      and modernised. The building is identified as a non-designated heritage asset (the
      NDHA).
10. A raised car park is situated at the front of the building which incorporates a small
    row of shops that front directly onto the walkway of Long Street. This has led to
    the visual isolation of the main building which no longer fully engages with the
    active street scene. However, the massing and status of the building is
    nevertheless apparent from the entrance to the appeal site which is framed by two
    substantial stone piers with simply ornamented copings and a low stone wall with
    railings to one side.
11. The site levels rise considerably from Long Street through a combination of sloping
    ground and stepped, retaining walls situated to the rear of the building. The
    disused bowling green is situated at the highest level. This remains open and is
    surrounded by mature trees on two sides. Whilst long distance views are present
    to the southwest, this area is not intervisible with any views from the surrounding
    townscape or the CA.
12. The appeal site covers an area of approximately 0.3 ha and is bounded with walls
    to neighbouring buildings to the north and south, including the LB which abuts part
    of the northern boundary. The eastern boundary, to the front of the building,
    comprises a railing overlooking Long Street. The first floor of the facing buildings
    is at a similar level to the car park and comprises a number of residential dwellings
    above the shops below. The western boundary, to the rear of the building and the
    bowling green, is bounded by a light industrial site with residential buildings
    beyond.
13. The proposal is seeking to refurbish and extend the footprint of the building to the
    north in order to provide a new multi-use function space. Works would include a
    part single storey and part two-storey side extension designed to provide access to
    both floors of the existing building as well as the upper and lower levels of the site.
    This would include a reception area with a lift and staircase between levels as well
    as guest amenities and an office.
14. A car ramp would also be constructed along part of the northern boundary to
    provide access to new parking at the rear of the building on the area currently
    occupied by the bowling green. The existing car park would be retained and a
    total of 58 parking spaces would be provided to the front and rear of the building.
    The proposal would utilise the existing access from Long Street whilst retaining the
    wall and gate piers. Other works would include a new boundary treatment and
    landscaping as well as a sustainable drainage scheme which would provide
    biodiversity enhancements.
Character and Appearance
15. The Council considers the scale and massing of the extension to be generally
    appropriate in terms of the established street scene. It views the architectural
    language and use of brick detailing as a positive and sympathetic response to the
    historic context of the site and I agree. I also note that the setback from the main
    elevation of the existing building and matching parapet level would provide a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004977


         degree of integration whilst clearly differentiating it from the historic building core in
         a respectful manner.
16. The Council suggests that the side and rear elevations are less well resolved but
    not sufficient to warrant refusal. However, I note from the plans that the side
    elevation of the proposed extension would comprise an articulated surface with a
    raised brick pattern as well as an ornamental sandstone banding course 1. The
    same drawing also shows that highly constrained views of the new retaining wall
    from outside the site, to the north, would mostly be present along its lowest reach.
    I find this to be both an acceptable and consistent design approach.
17. In terms of the appearance of the retaining wall from within the site, I note the ‘hit
    and miss’ detailing and matching materials would provide a consistent architectural
    expression when juxtaposed with the detailing of the proposed extension. Whilst
    the rear elevation is mediocre and somewhat incongruent given the rounded
    portico entrance, I do not find that this significantly detracts to the point that it
    would harm the existing appearance of the building as a whole. I also note that
    this elevation would not be visible from the public domain.
Heritage
18. The CA was first established in 1978 and covers an irregularly shaped area of
    approximately 16 ha to the north of the town centre of Middleton. The main
    thoroughfare and central axis of the CA is formed by Long Street. This comprises
    an eclectic range of shop frontages and buildings at its southernmost extent with
    prominent buildings, such as the LB, making a significant contribution to the
    historic street scene. Further significant visual anchors are provided by Middleton
    Library and the Local Studies Centre as well as the substantial 17th century,
    timber-framed, Old Boar’s Head public house. The street scene becomes more
    open to the north of the public house as views are gained of Jubilee Park and the
    walled and wooded garden of the Rectory.
19. Remnants of its pre-industrialised textile manufacturing in the latter half of the
    eighteenth century still remain legible in some buildings, such as the 83-78 Long
    Street, where continuous lights reveal the original use of the upper floor for silk
    weaving. The accumulating wealth of this community from the progressive
    industrialisation of the textile industry to the south is exemplified in the range and
    status of its buildings and public open spaces. It also has a number of buildings
    designed by the notable architect Edgar Wood which significantly contributes to its
    architectural value.
20. Insofar as relevant to this appeal, I find the significance of the CA to be related to
    the historical layering and architectural diversity of its street scene and its
    well-integrated open spaces.
21. The LB was constructed in 1899 and originally formed a Wesleyan chapel and
    Sunday school and includes a number of subsidiary buildings. It was designed by
    Edgar Wood. It comprises header bond red brick and is rendered in parts, with
    stone dressings and a graduated stone slate roof. It is a tightly planned group
    arranged around a garden courtyard with access to Long Street through a
    prominent, arched gateway. The main entrance to the chapel projects and wraps
    around its eastern gable which fronts onto Long Street and is accessed via

1
    Proposed Elevations with Existing Building (Ref:23.150.404 P1)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  4
Appeal Decision 6004977


      ascending steps. The architecture is in a Free Gothic style incorporating Arts and
      Crafts as well as Art Nouveau details.
22. Insofar as relevant to this appeal, I find the contribution of the setting to the special
    interest of this building to be tightly defined and associated with its immediate
    street frontage and the enclosed area within the courtyard.
23. The Council maintains that less than substantial harm would be caused to the CA
    by the loss of the bowling green as well as the visual and structural implications of
    the new access ramp and associated retaining wall. In terms of the latter, I do not
    find this to be the case for the reasons set out above and also because this
    classification no longer applies. Turning to the former, I observe that whilst the CA
    Appraisal notes the presence of the bowling green, it is not identified as a feature
    of any historic significance. Whilst the open space and mature trees flanking Long
    Street play an important role in helping to define the hierarchy of spaces, I
    observed that the bowling green does not play any role in helping to define this
    character given its lack of prominence.
24. I do not consequently find that the proposal would be detrimental to the character
    or appearance of the CA. This is because the loss of the bowling green would not
    have any effect on how open space within the CA is perceived and because I am
    satisfied that the ramp and retaining wall would be of an appropriate form and
    material. Furthermore, the bowling green is not visible from the public or private
    domain and Policy HE9(2) of the Framework states that proposals must be judged
    according to their effect on a CA as a whole and must therefore have a moderate
    degree of prominence. Given the above, I find that the proposal would not be
    detrimental to the CA and would thus preserve its significance.
25. Turning to the LB, the intervening street scene is such that there would be no
    effect on its setting which is primarily experienced from the immediate environs of
    Long Street. The proximity of its ancillary buildings to the northern boundary of the
    site is noted but these elevations are not part of the architectural set piece
    designed by Wood which addresses Long Street and the internal courtyard.
    Given the above, I find that no harm would be caused to the setting of the LB and
    that its special interest would consequently be preserved in terms of potential
    visual impacts.
26. However, I cannot rule out direct harm to the fabric of the listed building given the
    proximity of the ramp and the lack of detail concerning its construction. Although
    direct structural harm was not considered by the Council, this matter was raised by
    the current occupant of the LB who raised concerns over the stability of the
    retaining wall between the properties. Not only could groundworks lead to its
    collapse, but vibration from construction activities could also cause direct harm to
    the LB fabric. Whilst I have considered a condition to secure further detail and any
    mitigation that may be necessary, this would inevitably be predicated on an
    assumption that there would be an acceptable structural engineering solution
    within the parameters of the existing design. Consequently, I cannot be certain
    that such a condition would not amount to a material change that should, more
    appropriately, be considered as part of a new application.
27. Furthermore, Policy HE5(1) of the Framework states that development affecting a
    heritage asset should be accompanied by an assessment of the potential effect of
    the proposal on its significance. Having considered the appellant’s Heritage


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6004977


         Statement, I note that no assessment of direct harm to the LB was considered. As
         such, I find that insufficient information has been provided and that harm to the
         significance of the asset cannot be ruled out. Policy HE6 of the Framework states
         that substantial weight should be given to the conservation of an asset and that the
         more important the asset, the greater the weight.
28. In this instance any potential harm to the LB would be localised and I do not
    consequently find that it would be substantial. Under such circumstances Policy
    HE6(4) of the Framework states that this harm should be weighed against any
    public benefits resulting from the proposal. As these overlap with the wider
    benefits of the scheme, I shall consider this as part of the final planning balance.
29. Policy HE7 of the Framework states that development proposals which would have
    a positive effect on NDHAs should be supported. Whilst bringing the building back
    into use should have a positive effect overall, there is a notable absence of a
    schedule of repair works to the historic fabric despite being requested by the
    Council at an early stage. Unless a comprehensive scheme for the repair and
    retention of historic fabric is secured then potential harm cannot be judged against
    the benefits, as required by Policy HE7(2) of the Framework. However, I am
    satisfied that this could be secured through a suitable condition and should not,
    therefore, be a reason for refusal, unlike the potential harm to the LB.
30. Given the above, I find that the proposal would not be consistent with the Act and
    would conflict with Policy P2 of the Rochdale Core Strategy (2016) (the CS) and
    Policy JP-S1 of the Places for Everyone Joint Development Plan (2024) (the JDP).
    These policies seek, among other things, to conserve key heritage assets and to
    ensure sustainable development through net gains across each of the different
    objectives.
31. Turning to wider matters of character and appearance and the setting of heritage
    assets, I am satisfied that no harm would be caused. The proposal would, insofar
    as these matters are concerned, be consistent with the Act and Policies DM1, P2
    and P3 of the CS. These policies seek, among other things, to ensure that
    development is well designed and enhances the quality of an area, conserves and
    enhances townscape character, key heritage assets and NDHAs and conforms to
    key design principles that enhance identity and sense of place.
32. The Council has also drawn my attention to Policy JP-G1 of the JDP in its putative
    reason for refusal of this issue. However, as this relates to landscape character, I
    do not find it relevant to the foregoing issues.
Highway Safety
33. The Local Highway Authority (the LHA) has confirmed that the amendments to the
    plans are satisfactory and that there are no outstanding objections in terms of the
    safe and efficient operation of the highway or vehicular access to the site 2. Whilst
    a number of interested parties were concerned about increased traffic, these
    concerns were unsubstantiated and not consistent with the views of the LHA which
    the Courts have established, carries great weight. The Council maintains that
    there is still an outstanding issue insofar as pedestrian access to the site is
    concerned. More specifically, it highlights the absence of clear and intuitive,


2
    Paragraph 8.66, Council’s Statement of Case


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          6
Appeal Decision 6004977


         segregated pedestrian routes through the site from the building access points to
         the main access on Long Street 3.
34. It suggests that the revised proposals still fail to give due consideration and priority
    to pedestrian movements through the site and therefore give rise to conflict with
    Policy TR4(1)(a) of the Framework which seeks to give priority to walking,
    wheeling and then cycle movements. Although the putative reason for refusal also
    highlights substandard drop-off arrangements that are likely to result in reversing
    conflicts and congestion onto Long Street, I find this to be at odds with the LHA
    response which considered the revised plans, unlike the original response from
    Transport for Greater Manchester, upon which this concern is founded. The views
    of the LHA are consequently to be preferred on this matter.
35. The appellant maintains that a revised drawing showing revisions to internal
    movement through the site, including designated pedestrian walking routes, which
    addresses the Council’s concerns 4. However, I note that this still fails to
    adequately demonstrate any provision for a safe pedestrian access between Long
    Street and the building. In particular, there is no segregation at the existing site
    entrance and pedestrians would be forced to cross an area where cars are
    manoeuvring to enter and leave the site. This would place them in direct conflict
    with vehicles when seeking to either access the building via the rear car park
    entrance or the retained entrance at the front of the building.
36. I have considered whether this could be mitigated through the use of a suitably
    worded condition. However, given the constrained nature of the site and the
    dominance of the vehicular access arrangements, the provision of a safe and
    suitable pedestrian route may necessitate significant amendments to the layout,
    parking and circulation routes. This could amount to a material redesign of the
    development rather than the approval of a minor outstanding detail. As with the
    construction detail of the ramp, such a change should more rightly be considered
    through a new planning application.
37. Given the above, I find that the development would not provide a safe pedestrian
    access and would therefore be contrary to Policy TR4(1)(a) of the Framework. It
    would also be contrary to Policy T2 of the CS and Policy JP-C8 of the JDP. These
    seek, among other things, to ensure that development prioritises the needs of
    pedestrians and provides a safe and secure access to facilities through the layout
    and design of proposals.
Living Conditions
38. The Council is concerned that the proposed development would result in
    unacceptable noise impacts on nearby residents, which includes the present and
    future occupants of the first-floor flat which is part of the main building. It
    maintains that the submitted noise assessment fails to adequately address the full
    range of noise sources and scenarios associated with the proposed use. It
    highlights potential noise from multiple events, music breakout, external plant
    operation and vehicle movements. It maintains that there would be a significant
    risk of adverse effects given the proximity of residential dwellings to the site and
    the potential for late-night disturbance.


3
    Paragraph 8.67, Council’s Statement of Case
4
    Proposed Accessibility Plan (Ref: 23.150.206 P1)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               7
Appeal Decision 6004977


39. The appellant submitted an updated noise assessment the day before the appeal
    was lodged which the Council was unable to consult upon. However, it
    nevertheless points out that the potential impact on the present and future
    occupants of the flat would only be adequately addressed through the cessation of
    residential use. It highlights that fact that this is not part of the application nor
    indicated on the proposed plans and cannot be required by condition. It also notes
    that there is limited evidence as to the frequency and intensity of events in relation
    to the historic use of the building to support the assertion of unrestricted, past use.
40. Considering the updated assessment and memorandum, I am satisfied that the
    impacts on nearby residential receptors, with the exception of the flat, would be
    below the existing background and ambient levels for music breakout and vehicle
    movement bearing in mind that the revised assessment now includes the
    simultaneous operation of both wedding halls. I see no reason why residual noise
    impacts from car revving, firework detonation or external plant operation cannot be
    controlled via a suitable condition that either prohibit such activities and/or ensures
    that an emission threshold is set. Similarly, the opportunities for late night
    disturbance could be controlled through restricting the hours of operation.
41. Turning to the matter of the flat, I note that it would be within the highest external
    noise contours for vehicle movement and music breakout and would also be prone
    to disturbance from the comings and goings of vehicle owners parked nearby, loud
    conversations of groups of guests congregating outside the venue and transmitted
    vibrational sound through the building fabric. The appellant observes that this
    accommodation has historically been ancillary to the past operation of the building
    and is intended to remain as part of the proposed development. The appellant
    maintains that it does not function as a separate planning unit and should not be
    treated as a sensitive third-party receptor.
42. Be that as it may, the extent to which it can continue to function as ancillary
    residential accommodation is questionable given the proposed change of use
    which could adversely affect future occupants who might not be directly associated
    with the running of the venue, e.g. dependents of a caretaker. Whilst I accept that
    it is not a separate planning unit, it was open to the appellant to apply for a change
    of use to the flat as part of the wider scheme or to simply include it in the noise
    assessment so that suitable mitigation measures could be secured to ensure that it
    can remain habitable.
43. Even if only occupied by a caretaker, Policy P3(2)(a) of the Framework makes it
    clear that all development proposals need to provide healthy living conditions for
    occupiers in terms of avoiding exposure to pollutants, such as noise, that could
    have an unacceptable adverse effect on health and quality of life. The proposed
    change of use of the building represents a significant intensification of activity and
    it is unclear whether the continued, ancillary use of the flat would be possible
    under such circumstances without further assessment.
44. The other matter upon which this issue turns relates to potential changes in air
    quality. The Council notes that the appellant has failed to submit an Air Quality
    Assessment to demonstrate that the development would not result in an
    unacceptable deterioration in air quality or expose future occupiers to poor-quality
    air. It maintains that this omission is particularly significant given that the proposal
    would intensify the existing use of the site and introduce a new car park
    accommodating more than 50 vehicles as well as given the fact that the site is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6004977


      within the Long Street Air Quality Management Area (the AQMA) which requires all
      development proposals to avoid unacceptable pollution impacts and incorporate
      appropriate mitigation.
45. The appellant acknowledges the AQMA but observes that no technical objection
    has been raised nor has any evidence been presented to demonstrate that the
    proposed reuse of the building would result in significant, adverse air quality
    impacts. However, it is the responsibility of the appellant to prove that this would
    not be the case given the obvious increase in the number of vehicles that would
    use the site and the concomitant potential for increased emissions, particularly
    during peak hours of use. Moreover, Policy P3(2)(c) of the Framework clearly
    states that development proposals should take account of AQMAs to ensure
    compliance with the relevant limit values and be consistent with the objectives of
    relevant Air Quality Action Plans. I see no evidence of compliance on these
    matters.
46. Whilst I have considered whether these harms could be addressed through
    suitably worded conditions, the air quality assessment is fundamental to
    determining the acceptability of the proposed development. Although sound
    proofing measures in relation to the flat could be effective, I do not have any
    indication as to whether these would be technically feasible in the absence of an
    assessment by a suitably accredited expert. As with the other conditions, the
    required mitigation could lead to a material change to the proposal which should,
    more rightly, be considered through a new application.
47. Given the above, I find that the proposal has the potential to harm the living
    conditions of adjoining and nearby residents and is therefore contrary to Policies
    P3(2)(a) and P3(2)(c) of the Framework. I also find that it would conflict with
    Policies DM1 and G9 of the CS and Policies JP-S1 and JP-S5 of the JDP. These
    seek, among other things, to secure sustainable development that mitigates
    against any impacts due to noise or air pollution and ensures that there are no
    unacceptable increases. They also require the submission of relevant air pollution
    data so that adverse impacts on air quality can be fully assessed.
48. The Council has also drawn my attention to Policy DM2 of the CS in its putative
    reasons for refusal of this issue. However, as this relates to planning
    contributions, I do not find it relevant to the foregoing issues.
Protected Species
49. The Council highlights the fact that a badger survey was not completed and that
    this was necessary prior to determination. It points out that the impact on a badger
    sett constitutes a material consideration and that an adequate badger survey is
    needed otherwise it cannot be lawfully concluded that there would be no harm or
    what form mitigation might take. The appellant suggests that a badger survey
    could be conditioned and that its absence is insufficient grounds for refusal but has
    nevertheless attempted to submit one after the deadline for submissions, as
    considered above.
50. It is essential that the presence or otherwise of protected species, such as
    badgers, and the extent that they may be affected by the proposal is established
    before a planning permission is granted. As the Council points out, this is because
    any such decision risks not taking into account a relevant material consideration
    and securing any mitigation that may be necessary. The need to ensure surveys

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6004977


         are carried out should therefore only be left to planning conditions in exceptional
         circumstances, as set out in the relevant British Standard 5. No such
         circumstances apply in this instance.
51. Given the above, I find that the proposal has the potential to harm a protected
    species and is therefore contrary to Policy N2(1)(f) of the Framework. I also find it
    would be contrary to Policy G7 of the CS and which seeks, among other things, to
    ensure that development protects existing biodiversity.
52. The Council has also drawn my attention to Policy JP-G8 of the JDP in its putative
    reasons for refusal of this issue. However, as this relates to securing a net
    biodiversity enhancement, I do not find it relevant to the foregoing issue and also
    note that there is no dispute that a biodiversity net gain could be secured.
Planning Balance
53. The appellant highlights a number of benefits:
              •    Securing a use for the NDHA that would be consistent with its conservation
                   and prevent further deterioration. I accept that a consistent use would be
                   beneficial but the extent to which this would be secured is equivocal given
                   the absence of a comprehensive scheme for the repair and retention of
                   historic fabric. I consequently give this limited weight in favour of the
                   development.
              •    The provision of social benefits relating to health, wellbeing and inclusion as
                   well as enhancing community, cultural and leisure opportunities within the
                   borough. I have no doubt that the proposal would lead to the creation of a
                   space that would be of value to the local community which could
                   accommodate a range of uses. This would be consistent with its former use
                   and focus as a community hub. However, the extent to which there is an
                   unmet need is unclear from the evidence before me. I consequently give
                   this limited weight in favour of the development.
              •    Economic benefits from improving the vitality and viability of the Middleton
                   Town Centre through the reintroduction of an active town centre use that
                   would generate employment and associated expenditure. I accept that
                   there would be a positive benefit in terms of bringing the building back into
                   active use which would have an economic benefit. I also note a number of
                   empty commercial properties in the wider area. Policy E2(1)(a) of the
                   Framework stresses the need to support business growth and the economic
                   benefits of commercial development and determines the weight that should
                   be given. This consequently carries substantial weight in favour of the
                   development.
              •    The effective use of previously developed land within a defined urban area.
                   Policy L2(1)(b) of the Framework stresses the importance of making better
                   use of vacant and underutilised land and buildings and determines the
                   weight that should be given. This consequently carries substantial weight in
                   favour of the development.



5
    BS 42020:2013 Biodiversity: Code of Practice for Planning and Development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 10
Appeal Decision 6004977


             •   Environmental improvements arising from the sustainable drainage,
                 landscaping and the delivery of a Biodiversity Net Gain. As these are no
                 more than is needed to make the proposal acceptable in planning terms, I
                 consequently give this limited weight in favour of the development.
54. The development of this largely derelict building and the social and economic
    benefits that it would bring are not insignificant when considered in the round.
    Added to this is the policy imperative of the weight to be afforded to making better
    use of vacant buildings and economic growth from commercial development which
    is substantial, according to the Framework.
55. In terms of the public benefit balance of the harm that would be caused to the
    adjacent LB, there are clearly some significant public benefits relating to economy
    and use of a vacant building. This comes at a potential cost in terms of a failure to
    ensure that the historic fabric of the adjacent LB is preserved. It seems to me that
    there is not a clear and convincing justification for potential serious harm to be
    accepted which could be resolved through the submission of further information.
    Bearing in mind that the LB is an asset is of the highest significance 6, I do not find
    the public benefits sufficient to outweigh the harm that might be caused in this
    instance.
56. Considering the wider balance, I find that the likely harm to the adjacent LB carries
    substantial weight in accordance with Policy HE6(1) of the Framework. Harm to
    the living conditions of existing and future residents of nearby and adjoining
    dwellings also carries substantial weight due to the potentially serious implications
    for human health. I give the lack of a safe pedestrian access to the site significant
    weight, bearing in mind the harm that would result from potential vehicular conflict.
    I give the harm to badgers moderate weight, bearing in mind the potential effect on
    a species protected by law. Overall, I find that these sufficient to outweigh the
    benefits of the scheme.
57. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (as amended)
    requires that planning applications be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise. Although
    there would be compliance with some aspects of the development plan, such as
    Policies SO2, C6 and C8 of the CS, this is outweighed by the conflict I have found
    with policies G7, G9, T2 and DM1 of the CS and Policies JP-S1, JP-S5 and JP-C8
    of the JDP. Consequently, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan when read as a whole.
58. I do not find that material considerations are of sufficient weight in this instance to
    indicate that a decision should be made that is not in accordance with the
    development plan. I therefore conclude that, on balance, the appeal should be
    dismissed.
Conclusion
59. For the above reasons and having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

Roger Catchpole

6
    HE6(6)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6004977


INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
