Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 July 2026
by H Marriott MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004929
1 - 3A Doggett Road, London SE6 4PZ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Bal Kanda of Catford Assets Ltd against the decision of the Council of the
    London Borough of Lewisham.
•   The application Ref is DC/25/140280.
•   The development proposed is for the erection of a 4-storey building containing 9 self-contained flats
    and a commercial unit.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a
   4-storey building containing 9 self-contained flats and a commercial unit at 1 - 3A
   Doggett Road, London SE6 4PZ in accordance with the terms of the application,
   Ref DC/25/140280, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr Bal Kanda of Catford Assets Ltd against
   the decision of the London Borough of Lewisham. This application is the subject of
   a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This latest version of the Framework has introduced
   plan-making and national decision-making policies. It is effective from the day of
   publication. The main parties were given the opportunity to comment on the revised
   Framework, and any comments received have been taken into consideration.
4. The appellant has submitted a viability appraisal with the appeal. Established case
   law requires consideration of whether or not such material introduces a substantial
   difference or a fundamental change to the proposed development, and whether its
   admission would result in procedural unfairness. In this case, the viability appraisal
   has been submitted in response to the Council’s second reason for refusal in
   relation to the provision of affordable housing. It does not materially alter the nature
   of the proposed development. The Council was given the opportunity to comment
   on the additional material. I am therefore satisfied that no party would be prejudiced
   by taking it into account.
5. Although the Council’s reasons for refusal do not refer to the effect of the proposed
   development on protected species, the Council’s ecologist raised concerns during
   the application process that no survey work had been undertaken to demonstrate

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004929


     that there would be no adverse effect on protected species. The main parties were
     therefore invited to comment on this matter. In response, the appellant submitted a
     Preliminary Roost Assessment and then a Bat Emergence and Re-Entry Survey.
     The Council was given the opportunity to comment on this additional evidence. The
     surveys conclude that the proposed development is unlikely to result in a harmful
     effect on protected species and that the works could proceed without the need for
     further surveys or license. I am therefore satisfied that the proposed development
     would not result in unacceptable harm to protected species. Consequently, this
     matter does not need to be considered further.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the area, including the significance of Catford Bridge Tavern (the Tavern)
                and Catford Bridge railway station (the Station) regarded as non-designated
                heritage assets, having particular regard to their settings;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the provision of houses in
                multiple occupation (HMOs) in the area;
           •    whether or not the proposed development should provide or make a
                contribution towards the provision of affordable housing;
           •    whether or not the proposed development would provide suitable living
                conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to outlook, ventilation,
                daylight/sunlight, accessibility, privacy and the provision of storage space.
           •    whether or not the proposed development makes suitable cycle parking
                provision; and
           •    the effect of the proposed development on neighbouring occupiers at
                3C Doggett Road (No 3C) with particular regard to privacy.
Reasons
Character and appearance
Site Context
7. Doggett Road is predominantly lined by two and three-storey terraced properties
   featuring London stock brick and a regular rhythm of fenestration, bay windows and
   chimney stacks. The end building on one side of the street comprises a recently
   constructed four-storey building. Around its junction with Catford Road, the area is
   characterised by a mix of residential and commercial development, including the
   Station and the Tavern. While the Station building is single-storey, larger and taller
   buildings are visible in more distant views. Building styles and ages vary resulting in
   a diverse townscape character. The presence of bus stops, hard surfacing,
   on-street parking, signage and other street furniture contributes to a busy and
   functional urban environment. Nevertheless, a degree of visual coherence is
   provided by the generally continuous building frontages, the regular rhythm of
   terraced buildings along much of Doggett Road and the broadly consistent scale
   and form of development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6004929


8. The appeal site (Nos 1-3A) occupies a prominent peninsular plot at the junction of
   Doggett Road and the turning circle serving Catford Bridge railway station. It
   comprises a two-storey building with basement accommodation beneath a pitched
   tiled roof. The building is finished in render and incorporates single-storey
   commercial units projecting from, and attached to, its front elevation. It presents a
   mixed commercial and residential appearance, with shopfronts at ground-floor level
   and domestic-style windows at first-floor elevation. Its plot shape, siting, materials
   and attached commercial frontages distinguish it from other buildings in the vicinity,
   such that it forms a visually separate element within the street scene and acts as a
   focal building at the junction. However, its prominence derives principally from its
   location rather than its architectural qualities and, as such, makes a largely neutral
   contribution to the character and appearance of the area.
Non-designated heritage assets (NDHAs)
9. There is no dispute between the main parties that the Tavern and the Station are
   both NDHAs. The Tavern is a prominent building fronting Catford Road, with its
   side elevation addressing Doggett Road. Its interest is derived in part from its use
   as a public house and its distinctive architectural design, including its decorative
   timber framing, steeply pitched roof and prominent chimney stacks. Its age and
   historic relationship with the Station are also an important elements of its historic
   interest. The Station, of traditional brick construction, occupies a position to the rear
   of the Tavern with a turning circle to its frontage. Although its modest scale makes
   it less prominent in wider views, it forms an importance gateway to the area.
10. The significance of both buildings is therefore derived from their historic and
    architectural value as locally distinctive landmarks. Their locations, close physical
    relationship and visibility within the street scene contribute positively to their
    respective settings and reinforce their role as positive buildings in the area.
11. Policy HE7 of the Framework is clear in relation to NDHA’s, that development
    proposals that would have a positive effect on such assets should be supported.
    Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a NDHA, this should
    be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced judgement be
    made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the
    asset.
Effects
12. The design of the proposed building has required a bespoke solution to respond to
    its prominent position on an unusual shaped plot, with frontages to three sides. The
    Council contends that the submitted drawings are incoherent and contradictory. It
    also considers that additional street-scene drawings should have been provided,
    particularly to illustrate the relationship between the proposed building and the
    properties on the opposite site of Doggett Road. While additional street-scene
    drawings may have assisted in the assessment of the proposal, I find that the
    submitted plans, including the street-scene drawings, are sufficiently clear and
    provide adequate understanding of the relationship between the appeal site, the
    proposed development and the surrounding built environment.
13. The Council’s Small Site Design Guidance Supplementary Planning Document
    (2021) (SPD) advises that where existing building heights are varied, new infill
    development may be up to one storey taller than its neighbours, provided that it
    achieves a high degree of design quality. The proposed building would have a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004929


      greater height and massing than the building it would replace, comprising four
      storeys stepping down to three-storeys adjacent to the terrace. It would also be
      higher than the three-storey end of terrace building (No 3C) recently constructed1
      immediately adjacent to the appeal site. However, the majority of the fourth floor
      would be set back from the principal elevation and finished in grey cladding, while
      the curved main body of the building would be faced in London stock brick, in
      keeping with materials found in the surrounding area. These design measures
      would assist in reducing the visual prominence of both the upper storey and the
      building as a whole.
14. The Council’s Officer report confirms that the Council consider the proposed height
    and massing to be acceptable in design terms. Having regard to the character and
    varied scale of surrounding development, I find no reason to disagree.
    Furthermore, I observed during my site visit that many of the dwellings opposite the
    appeal site are set at a lower level behind a ramped and stepped footway. Whilst
    the proposed building would present a noticeably taller form of development, the
    separation distance across Doggett Road, would ensure that it would not appear
    unduly visually dominant viewed in tandem with these properties.
15. The proposed building would have a modern appearance and would provide a
    positive response to this prominent peninsular site, particularly when compared
    with the existing development on the appeal site. While the three projecting
    balconies facing the Station entrance would add a degree of visual clutter to that
    elevation, the majority of balconies would be recessed within the building envelope,
    and the effect would be limited. In addition, these balconies would provide natural
    surveillance of the public realm.
16. The Council’s concerns relate primarily to the proposed boundary treatments,
    design details, accessibility including ramp gradients and internal layout. The
    submitted plans indicate that the building would address the street for the majority
    of its frontages and any limited gaps or details of boundary treatments could
    reasonably be secured by condition. Matters of detailed design, including precise
    materials, external details including fenestration and ramps could reasonably be
    addressed through the planning conditions.
17. In relation to the proposed access arrangements and internal configuration, there is
    no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that the proposed flats and
    commercial unit would fail to provide satisfactory accommodation or accessibility
    for future occupiers and users having regard to the London Plan Guidance -
    Housing Design Standards (2023). Whilst compliance with building regulations is a
    separate matter, there is insufficient evidence before me to conclude that the
    proposal would be unable to meet the relevant regulatory requirements or would
    otherwise be unacceptable in planning terms. This is in line with Policy DM7 of the
    Framework, which advises decision-makers to assume that other regulatory
    regimes will operate effectively.
18. Although an interested party suggests that the scheme should have been reviewed
    by a design panel, I am not aware of any policy or procedural requirement for such
    a review in this case.



1
  Council ref: DC/19/111980 Demolition of the existing lean-to building and construction of a three storey including roofspace, end-
terrace building at 3C Doggett Road, SE6 to provide 2 x two-bedroom self-contained units.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  4
Appeal Decision 6004929


19. Overall, and subject to the imposition of conditions relating to materials and finished
    design details, the proposed development would create a distinctive building with
    active frontages on three sides, making a positive contribution to the character and
    appearance of the area. For the same reasons, the proposed development would
    not result in harm to the settings of the NDHAs, through development within their
    respective settings.
20. I conclude that the proposed development would result in an acceptable effect on
    the character and appearance of the area and would preserve the significance of
    the Tavern or the Station having regard to their settings. In this regard, it would
    comply with Policies D3, D4 and HC1 of The London Plan (2021) (TLP) and
    Policies QD1, QD8, QD10 and HE3 of the Lewisham Local Plan (2025) (LLL) which
    require all development to make the best use of land by following a design-led
    approach that optimises the capacity of sites, the delivery of good and high quality
    design, for development proposals affecting the setting of heritage assets to
    conserve their significance and requires development proposals on street corners
    to make a positive contribution to local character.                         .
21. For the same reasons, there would be no conflict with the policies of the
    Framework insofar as it seeks to achieve well-designed places.
Provision of HMOs
22. The proposed development would result in the loss of a 13-bedroom HMO,
    although I observed during my site visit that one of the rooms was being used as
    ancillary office space.
23. Policy HO8 of the LLL states that development proposals that result in the loss of a
    HMO will be refused unless it can be suitably demonstrated that a. the existing
    building does not meet the appropriate standards for a HMO and has no realistic
    prospect of meeting the standards; and b. adequate replacement provision can be
    secured within the Borough; or c. any replacement use includes housing provision
    that meets an acute local need. The supporting text to this policy states, in
    essence, that good quality HMOs make an important contribution to local housing
    provision, particularly for vulnerable groups and those on lower incomes. Therefore,
    the loss of good quality shared living accommodation, including those that could be
    improved to a decent standard, will be resisted.
24. In determining a previous appeal at the site in February 20262, relating to the
    conversion of part of the appeal site into 5 self-contained flats, that Inspector noted
    that the main parties accepted at that time that the existing HMO was not of high
    quality. That decision records that occupiers shared two small kitchens and five
    bathrooms, with no communal living area. In the current appeal, the Council
    suggests that the reference in Policy H08 to ‘appropriate standards’ should be
    interpreted as compliance with HMO licensing requirements. However, the
    supporting text makes clear that the policy is concerned with protecting good-
    quality accommodation rather than simply accommodation that satisfies minimum
    licensing requirements.
25. Whilst the appeal site may benefit from a HMO license, I observed during my site
    visit that the standard of accommodation is variable, and I concur with the views of
    the previous Inspector in this regard. In particular, the communal areas, including

2
    Appeal ref: APP/C5690/W/25/3376331


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6004929


     kitchen space, are limited relative to the number of occupiers and the HMO is
     served by a relatively small number of shower rooms. The rooms within the roof
     rely on small windows, have restricted headroom due to the roof form and do not
     have access to bathroom facilities on the same floor. In addition, while the
     basement rooms contain windows, they are below ground level and provide little
     meaningful outlook. Taken together, these factors indicate that the living conditions
     experienced by its occupiers fall short of those reasonably associated with good
     quality HMO.
26. No replacement HMO is proposed. Nevertheless, there is no substantive
    information to indicate that the is a shortage of HMO accommodation or that the
    loss would materially undermine the supply of such accommodation within the area.
    Furthermore, the Council confirm that housing completions are significantly
    under-performing against its delivery target where in the past the Housing Delivery
    Test was 32% and the latest result show for 2025 a delivery level of 65%. This
    therefore represents an acute need in the Borough for conventional self-contained
    housing, including for families, as referred to in the supporting text to Policy HO8.
27. I conclude that the proposed development would not result in an unacceptable
    effect on the provision of houses in multiple occupation (HMOs) in the area. In this
    regard, there would be no conflict with Policy H9 of TLP and Policy HO8 of the LLL
    which require Boroughs to take account of the role of HMOs in meeting local and
    strategic housing needs and where they are of a reasonable standard they should
    generally be protected.
Provision of affordable housing
28. The proposed development would provide nine residential units. Policy H08 of the
    Framework states that development proposals should meet or exceed up-to-date
    development plan requirements in respect of the provision of affordable homes. In
    this regard, Part J of Policy H03 of the LP requires developments delivering
    between 2 and 9 dwellings to make provision for affordable housing. The policy
    states that affordable housing should be provided on-site wherever feasible. Where
    it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Council that an off-site contribution
    is acceptable, this should be secured through a planning obligation. The supporting
    text to this policy advises that the local plan viability assessment demonstrated that
    this requirement would not adversely impact on the development viability of small
    sites across the Borough.
29. Policy DM5 of the Framework nevertheless recognises that there may be
    circumstances in which a viability assessment demonstrates that it would not be
    possible for development to proceed on a policy compliant basis. In such cases, the
    submission of a viability assessment as part of a development proposal may be
    justified following the recommended approach in Planning Practice Guidance
    (PPG).
30. In this case, the appellant’s Viability Assessment (VA), undertaken by a suitably
    qualified professional, refers specifically to the recommended approach advocated
    in the PPG. The VA contends that a site-specific VA is justified in order to compare
    the broad assumptions in the viability that informed the development plan with the
    site level circumstances and current market conditions. In particular, it points to
    increased finance costs arising from higher base lending rates, together with what it



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6004929


      describes as abnormal costs associated with demolition, site clearance and the
      provision of a green solar roof.
31. While I do not doubt that economic circumstances have changed, it is unclear
    whether or not they have changed significantly. Furthermore, demolition and site
    clearance would ordinarily be anticipated as part of the redevelopment of a
    previously developed site, whilst the green solar roof appears to arise from the
    appellant’s chosen design approach to increase the development’s sustainability
    credentials, rather than in response to any inherent constraints of the site.
32. Nevertheless, the Council has not contested the conclusions of the VA through
    either the submission of an appeal statement or an independent viability appraisal.
    Consequently, there is no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that the
    assumptions made in the VA, including those relating to land value, construction
    costs and development value, are unreasonable. The weight to be attached to a VA
    is a matter for the decision-maker having regard to the circumstances of the case.
    In this instance, while I have some reservations regarding the abnormal costs
    identified, the VA nevertheless indicates a significant viability deficit even in the
    absence of those costs and before any affordable housing contribution is taken into
    account.
33. Therefore, on the evidence before me, I conclude that the proposed development
    would not viably support the provision of affordable housing or an off-site financial
    contribution towards its delivery. Accordingly, there would be no conflict with
    Policies HO1 and HO3 of the LLP which seek to ensure a wide range of suitable
    housing provision and the delivery of affordable housing.
Living conditions (future occupiers)
34. The appellant’s Internal Daylight and Sunlight Assessment (the Assessment)
    indicates in respect of daylight, that all assessed rooms within the proposed
    development could meet their respective illuminance targets across 50% of the
    reference plane, for at least 50% of the daylight hours.
35. However, the Assessment notes that, without mitigation, including the use of lighter
    internal finishes to maximise reflectance and the distribution of natural light, three
    rooms in Flats 2, 5 and 8 would not meet the 50% requirement, achieving 40%,
    44% and 49% respectively. Flats 2, 5 and 8 are one-bedroom flats, each
    comprising a bedroom served by two windows and an open plan kitchen/living area
    served by a window plus windows onto the balcony area. The bedrooms in these
    flats would achieve 100% of their target daylight factor target. While it would not be
    reasonable to impose a condition requiring specific internal decorate finishes, the
    shortfall identified is limited. Having regard to the overall layout of the flats and
    ability of the occupiers to access to natural light within each flat as a whole, I am
    satisfied that occupiers would experience acceptable levels of daylight and that the
    flats would not appear unduly dark or oppressive places in which to live.
36. In respect of sunlight, the Assessment indicates that all flats would receive a
    minimum of 1.5 hours of sunlight on 21st March in at least one habitable room, in
    accordance with industry guidance3. While the hours of sunlight within the


3
  Building Research Establishment’s publication “Site Layout Planning for Daylight and Sunlight – A Guide to Good Practice”
(2022).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 7
Appeal Decision 6004929


        kitchen/living area of Flats 2 and 3 would fall marginally short of this amount, the
        bedrooms within these flats would exceed the sunlight exposure target.
37. Six of the proposed flats would be single aspect. Policy D6 of the TLP advises that
    a single aspect dwelling should only be provided where it is considered a more
    appropriate design solution. The Housing Supplementary Planning Guidance
    (2016) also advises that development should minimise the number of single aspect
    dwellings. In this case, the proposed design responds to its peninsular shaped plot.
    The open plan kitchen/living areas serving Flats 1, 4 and 7 would be served by
    patio doors leading out onto their balconies, with each of their bedrooms also
    served by a window. Therefore, those flats, along with the occupiers of Flats 2, 5
    and 8 would be afforded adequate levels of outlook. The appellant also confirms
    that all habitable rooms would be fully openable, served by multiple openings, and
    the occupiers would therefore be unlikely to experience poor levels of ventilation.
38. The Council contend that there would be an under provision of internal storage for
    Flats 1-8. It is unclear how much storage for each flat would be provided.
    Nevertheless, it is clear that as the size of each flat overall, exceeds the minimum
    national space standards4, that there is sufficient opportunity for built-in storage to
    be included within the overall gross internal floorspace of each flat.
39. The Council also contends that there would be poor levels of privacy to the
    balconies and windows of Flats 1 and 2 which would be located at ground floor
    level. However, owing to difference in land levels, Flat 2 would be positioned above
    the level of the adjoining footway, which would assist in reducing views into its
    windows and balcony from passer-by. Moreover, the neighbouring occupiers on the
    opposite side of the street would be sufficiently distant to avoid material
    overlooking.
40. In relation to Flat 1, the separation between the public footway and the balcony,
    together with the screen would provide an adequate degree of privacy for future
    occupiers. Whilst the plans indicate a small permeable paved area beneath the
    balcony rather than an external seating area associated with the proposed café,
    even if such seating were provided at the lower basement level, the elevated
    position of the balcony, within an existing commercial environment, would assist in
    limiting opportunities for overlooking. Consequently, I am satisfied that future
    occupiers of Flats 1 and 2 would benefit from an acceptable of level of privacy.
41. As previously set out in relation to character and appearance, there is no
    substantive evidence before me to indicate that the proposed Flats would be
    unable to provide an inclusive and accessible environment. While concerns have
    been raised regarding ramp gradient and door widths, these are detailed matters
    that could be dealt with by planning condition as appropriate, and in any event fall
    principally within regulatory regimes outside of planning. Accordingly, I have no
    substantive evidence basis on which to conclude that the proposed development
    would be unacceptable in planning terms.
42. I conclude that the proposed development would provide suitable living conditions
    for future occupiers, with particular regard to outlook, ventilation, daylight/sunlight,
    accessibility, privacy and the provision of storage space. In this regard, there would
    be no conflict with Policies D5, D6 and D7 of the TLP and Policies QD2 and QD8 of
    the LLP which amongst other things, require development proposals to achieve the
4
    Department for Communities and Local Government, Technical housing standards – nationally described space standard (2015).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 8
Appeal Decision 6004929


     highest standards of accessible and inclusive design and to provide adequately
     sized rooms with comfortable and functional layouts which are fit for purpose.
Cycle storage
43. The basement level of the proposed building would contain 28 cycle storage
    spaces, accessed via a ramp from street level. While there is no dispute between
    the main parties regarding the number of spaces proposed, the Council’s concerns
    relate to accessibility to the cycle storage for visitors to the commercial unit. The
    appellant has confirmed that 18 of the spaces would be allocated to the flats with
    the reaming number allocation to the commercial use and its customers. The
    provision and availability of cycle storage could be secured by planning condition.
44. I conclude that the proposed development would makes suitable cycle parking
    provision. In this regard, there would be no conflict with Policy T5 of the TLP and
    Policy TR4 of the LLL which require development proposals to make provision for
    high-quality and fit-for-purpose cycle parking.
Living conditions (neighbouring occupiers)
45. The rear elevation of the proposed building would face toward the three-storey side
    elevation of No 3C, which contains two self-contained flats. The only opening within
    this elevation is an entrance door at ground level. The proposed building would be
    positioned close to the shared boundary, removing the existing outdoor amenity
    space and leaving only a limited separation distance between the buildings.
46. Although the proposed development would result in fewer doors and windows
    facing No 3C than the existing building, the balconies serving Flats 1, 4 and 7
    would project from the main part of the building and allow views towards the turning
    circular in front of the Station as well as surrounding buildings and land. The rear
    elevation of No 3C is staggered. Consequently, the balconies would be positioned
    behind the projection of the single storey element of No 3C and forward of the
    second-floor balcony serving that property. As a result, views towards the existing
    balcony would either be screened by the building form or so oblique as not to result
    in a materially increased level of overlooking. The proposed balconies would allow
    views towards the rear outdoor space serving No 3C. However, my site inspection
    confirmed that this area is primarily used as a walkway and cycle store area rather
    than as the principal sitting-out space associated with the dwellings. Accordingly,
    the proposed development would not result in a materially harmful loss of privacy,
    either for the occupiers at No 3C or any other nearby dwellings.
47. I conclude that the proposed development would not result in an adverse effect on
    neighbouring occupiers at No 3C with particular regard to privacy. In this regard,
    there would be no conflict with Policy D3 of the TLP and Policies QD1, QD8 and
    QD10 of the LLP which require development proposals to deliver appropriate
    outlook, privacy and amenity, to deliver a high standard of amenity, to protect and
    enhance amenity of adjoining users and uses and to retain appropriate garden
    space for adjacent residential properties.
Other Considerations
Flood risk
48. The evidence before me indicates that the northern part of the appeal site lies
    within Flood Zone 3A, with the remainder located in Flood Zone 2. The northern

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6004929


        part of the site is also identified as being at high-risk of surface water and
        groundwater flooding. The Council raises no concerns in respect of flood risk or
        drainage, and accordingly, these matters do not form one of the Council’s reasons
        for refusal.
49. However, given that the site is, in principle, at high risk of fluvial flooding, I am
    mindful that a sequential test would ordinarily be required. Policy SD7 of the LLP
    requires development proposals to apply a sequential approach to the location of
    new development to avoid flood risk. The evidence before me indicates that a large
    part of Doggett Road and the surrounding area is similarly affected by flood risk,
    and I cannot therefore be certain that there are any sequentially preferrable site
    available. Nevertheless, I am not aware that a sequential test has been undertaken
    and the Council’s evidence is silent on this matter. Notwithstanding this, the
    appellant’s Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) expressly acknowledges the requirement
    for a sequential test, having regard to the advice contained in the PPG5. Therefore,
    I am satisfied that no party would be prejudiced by considering this matter6.
50. An exception test should be applied only where it has first been demonstrated that
    it is not possible for development to be located in areas with a lower risk of flooding.
    While a sequential test has not been undertaken in line with Policy F5 of the
    Framework, the considerations in Policy F6 remain relevant. The proposed
    development would redevelop a previously developed site in a highly sustainable
    location adjacent to the Station. Furthermore, the FRA confirms no residential
    accommodation would be provided at basement level, which would represent a
    significant betterment compared with the existing situation, where HMO bedrooms
    are currently located within the basement. Given that the existing use forms a
    fallback position, and even though the proposed development would likely result in
    a greater number of people residing at the appeal site, the removal of sleeping
    accommodation from the area of greatest flood risk would reduce of number of
    residential occupants potentially exposed to flooding. This is a significant material
    consideration which would result in a sustainability benefit to the community.
51. The FRA proposes a range of flood resistance and resilience measures, including
    specified finished floor levels. In addition, the site would be registered for the
    Environment Agency’s (EAs) Flood Warning Service. The EA raises no objection
    which indicates that the development could be made safe and would not increase
    flood risk elsewhere. Accordingly, there would be no conflict with Policy F7 of the
    Framework.
52. Notwithstanding the above, the ability to make the development safe for its lifetime
    without increasing flood risk elsewhere does not negate the requirement to apply
    the sequential test. On the evidence before me, I cannot be satisfied that the
    proposed development has demonstrated it passes the sequential test required by
    Policy SD7 of the LLP. Consequently, the proposed development conflicts with that
    policy in this respect, notwithstanding the practical benefits to flood risk for
    residents of the site were the development to go ahead.
Traffic and Parking
53. Given the appeal site’s location close to the Station and accessibility to London’s
    transport network, it has a high PTAL score of 6a. The Mayor of London - Housing

5
    Paragraph: 027a Reference ID: 7-027a-20220825.
6
    in accordance with Section 79(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            10
Appeal Decision 6004929


     Supplementary Planning Guidance (2016) confirms that Boroughs are encouraged
     to promote higher densities in town centres, especially those with the good public
     transport connectivity. The appellant has confirmed that the proposed development
     would be car-free, a matter I return to in the conditions section below. There is no
     substantive evidence before me to indicate that a materially adverse effect on traffic
     and parking would arise from the proposed development.
Human Rights
54. The proposed development could affect the ability of the occupiers of the existing
    HMO to continue to live in their homes. I have had regard to human rights of the
    individuals concerned, including under Article 8 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The
    proposed development seeks to meet a housing in the forms of self-contained flats,
    which is a legitimate planning objective and would replace accommodation which is
    not high quality in the ways that I have explained. I am satisfied that any
    interference with the rights of the occupiers would be proportionate and justified in
    the wider public interest. Accordingly, these considerations do not alter my findings
    on the planning merits of the scheme.
Planning Balance
55. The appeal site lies within a settlement where the principle of redevelopment is
    acceptable. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
56. It has not been demonstrated that the proposed development satisfies the
    sequential test. While the proposed development would remove habitable
    accommodation from the basement of the existing building, reduce flood risk overall
    and, subject to the mitigation, be safe for its lifetime without increasing flood risk
    elsewhere, these considerations do not negate the requirement for the sequential
    test. Although the resulting conflict is principally one of policy compliance rather
    than direct flood risk harm, the sequential test remains an important requirement of
    the development plan and weighs in favour of finding conflict with the development
    plan as whole. There would also be conflict with Policy F5 of the Framework.
57. Nevertheless, Policy HO7 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given
    to the benefits of providing homes that contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. Given the Council’s Housing Delivery
    Test position, the provision of nine dwellings would make a modest, but
    nonetheless important, contribution towards housing delivery. In accordance with
    Policies L2 and L3 of the Framework, I also attach substantial weight to the
    redevelopment of this previously developed site in a sustainable urban location.
    The proposal would deliver a higher-density mixed-use scheme in a highly
    accessible location, close to public transport services, while providing acceptable
    living conditions in keeping with the character and appearance of the area. It would
    also incorporate modern construction methods, energy-saving measures including
    a biodiverse solar panel green roof. These are all matters that gain Framework
    support.
58. Although the existing commercial units would be replaced by a single larger unit,
    the Council has raised no concerns regarding that consolidation. While the limited

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6004929


     information provided regarding existing and proposed employment levels restricts
     the weight that can be attached to economic benefits, the development would
     provide a modern purpose-built commercial unit, maintain an active frontage,
     support ongoing economic activity and generate modest economic benefits during
     construction and occupation. However, given the existing use of the site, I attach
     only limited weight to these factors.
59. The proposed development would result in the loss of a HMO. However, for the
    reasons given above, I have not found that this would result in the loss of a
    high-quality HMO or materially undermine the supply of such accommodation within
    the area. Furthermore, although the proposed development would not deliver
    affordable housing, the unchallenged viability evidence demonstrates that such
    provision would render the development unviable. Accordingly, neither of these
    matters weighs in favour of or against the proposal in the planning balance.
60. Taking into account the above conclusions, I find that the benefits of approving the
    proposed development would not be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework. Accordingly, the proposed development would constitute sustainable
    development within the meaning of the Framework.
61. Therefore, while the proposed development would conflict with the development
    plan, the material considerations including the provisions of the Framework,
    indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
Conditions
62. The Council has not suggested a list of conditions in the event the appeal is
    allowed. Nevertheless, I have compiled a list based on the evidence before me and
    considered these against the tests set out in the Framework and Planning Practice
    Guidance. The main parties were also given the opportunity to comment on the list.
63. In addition to the standard time condition (1), a condition requiring the development
    to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans (2) is necessary in the
    interests of certainty.
64. A condition requiring the provision and retention of (3) cycle storage is reasonable
    in the interests of sustainable travel. In the same regard, the Council’s delegated
    report refers to the appellant agreeing to enter into a legal agreement in line with
    Policy T6 of the TLP to restrict future occupiers from applying for residents parking
    permits except for blue badge disabled parking. A unilateral undertaking in this
    regard has not been submitted with the appeal. Nevertheless, there is no
    substantive evidence before me to indicate that planning condition (12) would not
    be effective, as well as reasonable and necessary, in achieving this aim and to also
    ensure no material increased demand for parking in the vicinity of the site.
65. Any disruption to the local area during the construction period would be temporary
    and would be mitigated by a condition requiring adherence to the measures set out
    in the Appellant’s construction management plan (5), in the interests of the living
    conditions of surrounding occupiers and air quality.
66. Conditions (6) and (7) are reasonable and necessary to ensure the implementation
    of mitigation measures set out in the FRA, which is also in line with the comments



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6004929


     received from the EA to ensure the development remains safe for its lifetime in the
     interests of minimising flood risk.
67. In relation to contamination, the Council’s environmental health officer noted the
    absence of a desk top study submitted at the application stage. From the evidence
    before me, a condition requiring a contaminated land survey (8) is reasonable and
    necessary in the interests of human health.
68. In order to ensure the delivery of high-quality design, conditions relating to
    materials (9) and design details (10) are reasonable and necessary in the interests
    of the character and appearance of the area.
69. A condition requiring the provision of a biodiversity enhancement measures (11) is
    reasonable in accordance with the recommendations of appellant’s ecology survey
    and in the interests of the biodiversity of the area.
70. A condition specifying the use class of the commercial unit (13) is reasonable and
    necessary in order to ensure that it is occupied as proposed in the interests of
    planning certainty and the living conditions of existing and future occupiers.
Conclusion
71. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

H Marriott
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6004929




SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing nos 24/3629/02, 24/3629/03 Rev A, 24/3629/04, 24/3629/07 Rev A,
              24/3629/10 and 24/3629/11.
     3)       No part of the development shall be occupied until cycle storage provision in
              accordance with drawing no 24/3629/04 has been provided and that space
              shall thereafter be kept available for the storage of bicycles by both occupiers
              of the flats and staff and visitors to the commercial unit for the lifetime of the
              development.
     4)       No part of the development shall be occupied until bin stores in accordance
              with drawing no 24/3629/04 have been provided. Those spaces shall
              thereafter be kept available for the storage of bins and waste in association
              with the use of the flats and the commercial unit for the lifetime of the
              development.
     5)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing no 24/3629/09 ‘Construction Management Plan’ and the measures
              set out in the Construction Method Statement throughout the construction
              period for the development.
     6)       No part of the development shall be occupied until all of the flood risk
              mitigation measures for the development have been completed in
              accordance with the submitted Flood Risk Assessment (April 2025). This
              shall include but not be limited to finished floor levels for the ground floor
              being set no lower than 16.15m AOD. The mitigation measures shall
              thereafter be managed and maintained for the lifetime of the development.
     7)       No part of the development shall be occupied until a flood evacuation plan
              has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              The plan shall thereafter be adhered to for the lifetime of the development.
     8)       No development, with the exception of any works relating to the demolition of
              the existing building, shall take place until an assessment of the risks posed
              by any contamination, carried out in accordance with British Standard BS
              10175: Investigation of potentially contaminated sites - Code of Practice and
              the Environment Agency‚ Land Contamination Risk Management (LCRM) (or
              equivalent British Standard and Model Procedures if replaced), has been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. If any
              contamination is found, no development shall take place until:
              i)   a report specifying the measures to be taken, including the timescale, to
                   remediate the site to render it suitable for the development hereby
                   permitted has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
                   planning authority;
              ii) the site has been remediated in accordance with the approved
                   measures and timescale; and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6004929


              iii)    a verification report has been submitted to and approved in writing by
                      the local planning authority.
              If, during the course of development, any contamination is found which has
              not been previously identified, work shall be suspended until:
              iv) additional measures for the remediation of the site have been carried
                    out in accordance with details that shall first have been submitted to and
                    approved in writing by the local planning authority; and
              v) a verification report for all the remediation works has been submitted to
                    and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
     9)       No development above ground level with the exception of works relating to
              demolition shall take place until samples of all external facing materials have
              been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              sample details.
     10)      Notwithstanding the approved plans, no development above ground floor
              level, with the exception of demolition, shall take place until detailed
              drawings, sections and specifications (as applicable) have been submitted to
              and been approved in writing by the local planning authority. The details shall
              include the following:
              a) boundary treatments, retaining walls, ramps, enclosures and hard
                 surfacing materials;
              b) external windows, doors and their immediate surroundings, including
                 details of glazing and any glazing bars;
              c) parapet detailing;
              d) treatment of window and door heads and cills, verges and eaves;
              e) solar panels;
              f) balustrades, railings, screens and
              g) vents, meter boxes, and any other external accretions (as required).
              The development shall thereafter be carried out and thereafter retained in
              accordance with the approved details.
     11)      Notwithstanding the submitted details, no development above ground level
              shall take place until full a biodiversity enhancement scheme has been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              The scheme shall include, but not be limited to:
              a) details of bird and bat boxes, including their number, type and location in
                 accordance with the recommendation of the Bat Emergence and Re-Entry
                 Survey (14/08/2026) and Preliminary Roost Assessment (05/08/2026);
              b) details of the biodiverse green roof, including its location, extent,
                 specification and planting schedule; and
              c) details of the long-term management and maintenance of all biodiversity
                 enhancement measures.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     15
Appeal Decision 6004929


              The measures shall be implemented in full prior to the first occupation of
                 the development and shall thereafter be retained and maintained in
                 accordance with the approved scheme.
     12)      No development shall take place until arrangements shall have been made to
              secure the development as a car-free development in accordance with a
              detailed scheme or agreement which shall have been approved in writing by
              the local planning authority. The approved scheme or agreement shall
              ensure that:
                        (i) no occupiers of the approved development shall apply for, obtain
                            or hold an on-street parking permit to park a vehicle on the public
                            highway within the administrative district of the local planning
                            authority (other than a disabled person’s badge issued pursuant to
                            section 21 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970
                            or similar legislation); and
                        (ii) any occupiers of the approved development shall surrender any
                             such permit wrongly issued or held.
              Such scheme or agreement shall be implemented prior to the occupation of
              the development hereby permitted and shall be retained and operated for so
              long as the use hereby permitted continues.
     13)      The commercial unit hereby approved shall only be used for Use Class E(b)
              the sale of food and drink principally to visiting members of the public where
              consumption of that food and drink is mostly undertaken on the premises and
              for no other purpose (including any other purpose in the Schedule to the
              Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) (or in
              any provision equivalent to that Class in any statutory instrument revoking
              and re-enacting that Order with or without modification).

END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     16
