Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 May 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004526
147 Eastcote Lane, Harrow, HA2 8RR
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Marlpark 71 HA4 Ltd against the decision of the Council of the London
       Borough of Harrow.
•      The application Ref is PL/2879/25.
•      The development proposed is outline planning consent (access reserved) for the erection of 2 new
       detached single storey dwellings with accommodation in the roof space.

Decision
1.      The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for outline planning
        consent (access reserved) for the erection of 2 new detached single storey
        dwellings with accommodation in the roof space at 147 Eastcote Lane, Harrow,
        HA2 8RR in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref PL/2879/25, subject
        to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.      An application for costs was made by Marlpark 71 HA4 Ltd against the Council of
        the London Borough of Harrow. This application is the subject of a separate
        decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.      The planning application is submitted in outline with access reserved for a
        subsequent reserved matters application. The proposed development is shown on
        the Proposed Site Plan. However, matters relating to access are not before me
        and I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.      I have amended the description of development in the above banner heading to a
        more concise description of the proposals.
5.      There are two other appeals on this site relating to different schemes1. I am the
        Inspector appointed to all three appeals.
6.      The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
        Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. There have been significant
        amendments made against the 2024 version, and the parties have had the
        opportunity to comment on the changes in relation to this appeal.



1
    6006890 and 6005188.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004526


7.     The decision notice cites policies contained within the Harrow Core Strategy, 2012
       (CS) and the Harrow Development Management Policies Local Plan, 2013. During
       the determination of this appeal, the London Borough of Harrow Local Plan 2021-
       2041, 2026 (LP) has been adopted and thus has superseded the policies
       contained within the CS and Development Management Policies Local Plan. I
       have been provided with the relevant policies and determined this appeal
       accordingly.
8.     The appellant has submitted further detail as part of this appeal in relation to the
       second reason for refusal which relates to Biodiversity Net Gain. I will return to this
       matter below.
Main Issues
9.     The main issues are:
     •        The effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of existing
              occupiers of 147 Eastcote Lane (No 147) and the future occupiers of the
              proposed bungalows with regard to privacy; and
     •        The effect of the proposed development on biodiversity.
Reasons
Living conditions
10. The appeal site is located on the southern side of Eastcote Lane, adjacent to the
    crossroads with Alexandra Avenue and comprises a two-storey detached property,
    with a garage to the rear. Adjacent the site to the west is 149 Eastcote Lane, which
    comprises a detached dwelling. To the east, the site adjoins public land running
    along Alexandra Avenue. The appeal site effectively comprises two parcels of land
    which are now under the same ownership. The first being the existing detached
    dwelling, garden and detached garage, and the second being a former grassed
    strip of land which, at my site visit, was covered in gravel with planting along its
    boundary.
11. Outline planning permission is sought for two detached single-storey bungalows
    located to the front and rear of the site. The proposed development would be sited
    largely on the former grassed strip of land. The rear bungalow would have two
    gardens, one to the north of the bungalow and one to the west, which utilises land
    from the garden of the existing dwelling at No 147. The bungalows would have
    accommodation in the roof space and would both provide 4-bedroom 7 person
    dwellings.
12. The rear property would include accommodation at first floor level and dormer
    windows on both sides of the roof and rear roof slope of the bungalow. The
    appellant has confirmed that the dormer windows to the rear and western side of
    the rear bungalow would be obscure glazed and fixed shut. This would alleviate
    the concerns regarding overlooking into the rear garden area of No 147. The
    dormer windows located towards the rear of both the front and rear properties
    would also be obscure glazed and fixed shut. This would again alleviate concerns
    of loss of privacy between both properties and their garden areas. Such mitigation
    can be controlled via the use of planning conditions which I have applied.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004526


13. The Council raise concern regarding perceived overlooking from such windows.
    However, given that the windows would be obscure glazed and fixed shut, existing
    occupiers of No 147 and future occupiers of the proposed properties would be well
    aware that such windows do not provide any outlook into either their garden areas
    or their properties and thus any perception of overlooking would be negligible. In
    coming to such findings, I have had due regard to the separation distances and
    height of the dormers, but this would not alter my findings as there would be no
    outlook from these windows.
14. For the above reasons, the proposed development would not unacceptably harm
    the living conditions of existing occupiers of No 147 and the future occupiers of the
    proposed bungalows with regard to privacy. It would therefore accord with Policy
    D3.D (7) of the London Plan, 2021 and Policy GR1 of the LP which together,
    amongst other matters, explain that development proposals should deliver
    appropriate privacy and amenity. For the same reasons, the proposed
    development would also accord with the Residential Design Guide Supplementary
    Planning Document, 2010 which seeks to protect the amenity and privacy of
    neighbours. The Framework has been referred to within the Council’s first reason
    for refusal. However, the revised Framework has altered its approach and does
    not now refer to amenity in a general sense as it previously did but rather it now
    refers to amenity in some specific areas. I do not find reference to the Framework
    to be strictly applicable in the particular circumstances of this appeal.
Biodiversity
15. In England, Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is required under a statutory framework
    introduced by Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (inserted
    by the Environment Act 2021) (the Act). Development must deliver at least a 10%
    increase in biodiversity value relative to the pre-development biodiversity value of
    the onsite habitat. This increase can be achieved through onsite biodiversity gains,
    registered offsite biodiversity gains or statutory biodiversity credits. In summary,
    this requires development to result in more, or better-quality, natural habitat than
    there was before development.
16. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)2 explains that the statutory framework for
    BNG has been designed as a post-permission matter. Its purpose is to ensure that
    the biodiversity gain objective of achieving at least a 10% gain in biodiversity value
    will be met for development granted planning permission. Once planning
    permission has been granted, unless exempt, a Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP) must
    be submitted and approved prior to the commencement of that development. The
    BGP is the mechanism to ensure that the biodiversity gain objective is met.
17. The PPG3 clarifies that where the applicant believes the development would be
    subject to the biodiversity gain condition; the application must be accompanied by
    minimum information set out in Article 7 of the Town and Country Planning
    (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015. This includes
    confirmation that the applicant believes that planning permission, if granted, the
    development would be subject to the biodiversity gain condition; the pre-
    development biodiversity value(s); the completed metric calculation tool; a
    statement regarding activities that have been carried out; a description of any
    irreplaceable habitat and plan(s), drawn to an identified scale and showing the
2
    Paragraph: 002 Reference ID: 74-002-20240214
3
    Paragraph: 011 Reference ID: 74-011-20240214


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decision 6004526


         direction of North, showing onsite habitat existing on the date of application (or
         earlier proposed date), including any irreplaceable habitat (if applicable).
18. The PPG4 goes on to explain that development may not be begun until the BGP is
    approved. Given this framework, decision makers are not normally expected to
    refuse an application on the grounds that the biodiversity gain objective will not be
    met. However, they should consider, more broadly, whether the biodiversity gain
    condition is capable of being successfully discharged.
19. The officer’s report refers to aerial imagery of the site from 2020 which shows the
    site as grassland which is therefore the baseline. On this basis, the Council did not
    accept the submitted Small Sites Metric relating to gravel, as it was not considered
    consistent with the baseline. The Council explained that any conclusion drawn
    from the data is incorrect. Based on the guidance and evidence before me, I reach
    the same conclusion as the Council that the baseline condition is grassland.
20. There is some dispute on what information was supplied to the Council at
    application stage although I note that the Planning Statement included two
    scenarios. The first referred to the Small Sites Metric with the gravel surface as a
    baseline. The second referred to a grass-covered baseline for the site. This
    indicates that both scenarios have been considered, and that the appellant
    accepts grassland as the baseline condition.
21. Notwithstanding the dispute regarding information submitted with the application
    and what was taken into consideration during the assessment, the Council has
    since reviewed the Small-Scale Metric relating to the grassland baseline. It
    explains that the information, excluding plans, site photographs, and commentary
    on habitat creation or enhancement, is not sufficient to allow a comprehensive
    assessment. The Council also considers that the results of the BNG assessment
    are also likely to be inaccurate, because the proposed habitats are unsuitable
    within private gardens in accordance with the adopted government guidance.
22. The completed Small Site Metric quantifies the pre-development position and
    models the post-development habitats and enhancements proposed within the
    scheme. The appeal is also accompanied by a BNG Assessment based on a site
    survey and application of the statutory metric. The report provides: a description of
    the site and its baseline habitat condition; the methodology applied, including use
    of the Small Sites Metric; calculations of pre-and post-development biodiversity
    value; and supporting plans, photos and mapping identifying the spatial distribution
    of habitats.
23. The latest Small Site Metric concludes that the net unit change for area habitats
    on-site is calculated at 0.0421 units, which correlates to a 30.04% increase in
    habitat biodiversity. This is to be achieved by the enhancement of grassland and
    planting of trees in garden areas, and the introduction of scrub habitat around the
    edges of the site. The non-native ornamental hedgerow that has established also
    contributes to an overall increase in habitat units.
24. Even if I were to accept the additional information relating to BNG, which appears
    to provide sufficient information to allow a comprehensive assessment, the results
    of the assessment rely on areas located within the private garden areas. DEFRA’s


4
    Paragraph: 019 Reference ID: 74-019-20240214


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decision 6004526


       Statutory Biodiversity Metric User Guide (Updated June 2026)5 notes that, where
       post-development gardens are private and have no public access, biodiversity net
       gains cannot be legally secured. Their long-term management and maintenance
       cannot be guaranteed. Therefore, the proposed habitats are unsuitable within
       private gardens in accordance with the adopted government guidance.
25. The appellant has provided a revised illustrative landscape arrangement which
    seeks to address such issues. It sets out that the depth of the garden areas can be
    reduced marginally to include the principal areas of proposed habitat enhancement
    to be located outside the private garden curtilage. These areas are along the outer
    edges of the site and are claimed to be capable of being treated as publicly
    accessible or otherwise non-private space for the purposes of the metric. Even
    considering this, the land would still be within the boundary of the property and
    classified as private garden. The mandatory 10% BNG could not therefore be
    secured on the site.
26. In such instances, a Section 106 or other legal agreement could secure the long-
    term management and maintenance of the proposed onsite gains within the
    private garden, that would not otherwise generally count towards the required 10%
    gain. While there is no such mechanism before me, where garden-based gains are
    not viable, the statutory conditions for BNG enable alternative BNG contributions
    to be sought through other means, such as off-site habitat creation or statutory
    credits. This would also be secured through a legal agreement, which would form
    part of the BGP for the development. The evidence before me indicates that the
    main parties both see this as a realistic and achievable alternative to onsite gains.
    Accordingly, this provides sufficient certainty that the biodiversity gain condition is
    capable of being successfully discharged.
27. For the above reasons, the proposed development would achieve the statutory
    minimum 10% BNG required by the Act. I am therefore satisfied that the
    development would result in more, or better-quality, natural habitat than there was
    before development and thus would not unacceptably harm biodiversity. It would
    therefore accord with Policy G6 of the London Plan, 2021 and Policy GI3 of the
    LP. Together, amongst other matters, such policies require development proposals
    to manage impacts on biodiversity and aim to secure net biodiversity gain. For the
    same reasons, the proposed development would also accord with Policy N2 of the
    Framework relating to improving the natural environment.
Conditions
28. I have reviewed the Council’s suggested planning conditions within their Statement
    of Case. During the determination of this appeal, the Council has granted consent
    for an outline application (appearance, landscaping, scale and layout only) for the
    erection of two detached single storey dwellings at the site6. That scheme relates
    to a materially identical scheme on the same site, differing only in that the
    approved scheme does not include the dormer windows now proposed. For the
    sake of consistency in decision-making, I have reviewed the suggested conditions
    against those imposed by the Council on application PL/0427/26 and have altered
    the wording of some conditions to align with those already imposed by the Council
    whilst also reflecting the development proposed. I have also added the condition

5
  Page 59, Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs, The Statutory Biodiversity Metric User Guide, last updated: June
2026
6
  PL/0427/26


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                5
Appeal Decision 6004526


       relating to a Construction Method Statement which was imposed on application
       PL/0427/26.
29. A condition relating to approval of the reserved matters detail is necessary to
    comply with the provisions of Section 92 of the Town and Country Planning Act
    1990. Along with a condition for the standard time limits for the permission, a plans
    condition is also necessary in the interests of certainty. A condition relating to a
    Construction Method Statement is necessary in the interests of the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers and highway safety of users of the
    surrounding road network. A condition relating to site levels is also necessary to
    ensure that the works are carried out at suitable levels in relation to adjoining
    properties, the appearance of the development, drainage, gradient of access and
    future highway improvement. The suggested conditions relating to surface and foul
    water disposal, along with permeable paving and long-term maintenance and
    management of drainage are necessary to ensure that the site is adequately
    drained and to avoid flood risk elsewhere, but also to ensure an acceptable
    appearance.
30. A condition relating to materials is necessary to ensure that the development is
    carried out to the highest standards of architecture and materials. The appellant
    has queried if physical samples would be proportionate and necessary. However,
    the condition also allows for appropriate specification to be submitted, and I find
    the wording to be reasonable and proportionate. Similarly, a condition relating to
    window reveals is necessary to enhance the appearance of the development and
    safeguard the character and appearance of the area.
31. A further condition is necessary to ensure some of the dormer windows are
    obscure glazed and fixed shut in the interests of privacy. Conditions relating to soft
    and hard landscaping and implementation are necessary to enhance the
    appearance of the development and safeguard the character and appearance of
    the area.
32. Conditions relating to details of cycle parking provision and refuse storage are
    necessary to ensure these would be available for use by the occupants of the site
    and to safeguard the appearance of the locality. A condition relating to secure by
    design is necessary in the interests of creating safer and more sustainable
    communities and to safeguard amenity by reducing the risk of crime and the fear
    of crime. A condition relating to control over the provision of car parking is
    necessary to ensure these would be available for use by the occupants of the site
    and to safeguard the appearance of the locality.
33. A condition relating to fire safety is not necessary, as a Fire Safety Strategy was
    submitted with the Planning Statement and the Council is satisfied it provides
    sufficient information regarding the intention to provide high standards of fire safety
    for all users. On this basis, additional information is not required, as the scheme
    would be regulated under Building Regulations. I have therefore omitted this
    condition.
34. A condition relating to the BGP is also not necessary where the statutory condition
    is imposed, as it duplicates this and the DEFRA guidance. I have therefore omitted
    this condition as the proposals are subject to the statutory condition.
35. The Council has suggested restrictions on the usage of the site and permitted
    development rights. Policy DM6 of the Framework specifically explains that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6004526


       conditions should not be used to restrict national permitted development rights
       unless there is clear justification to do so. There is limited information before me as
       to why these conditions are reasonable and necessary and such restrictions were
       not imposed on application PL0427/26. I have therefore omitted these suggested
       conditions.
36. While some conditions, namely; materials, window reveals, permeable paving,
    long term maintenance and management of drainage, soft and hard landscaping
    and implementation as well as car parking were not imposed on application
    PL/0427/26, I am uncertain of the exact detail provided for that scheme. In
    considering this scheme and the information before me, I find these conditions to
    be necessary in the particular circumstances of this case.
Conclusion
37. For the reasons given above and having had regard to the development plan as a
    whole, the appeal is allowed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6004526


                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
    1) Approval of the details shown below (the reserved matters) shall be obtained
       from the local planning authority in writing before any development is
       commenced:

         (a) Access

    2) Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
       planning authority not later than three years from the date of this permission.

    3) The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than two years from
       the date of approval of the reserved matters to be approved.

    4) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following plans: Location Plan (scale 1:1250); Proposed Site Plan (A108
       Revision D); Proposed Site Block Plan (A109 Revision D); Proposed Floor Plans
       (A110 Revision D); Proposed Floor Plans (A111 Revision D); Proposed
       Elevations Bungalow 1 (A112 Revision D); Proposed Elevations Bungalow 2
       (A113 Revision D); Proposed Street Elevations (A114 Revision D); Proposed
       Floor Plans Area Information (A117 Revision D); Proposed Sections (A118
       Revision D); Proposed Section (A119 Revision D).

    5) No development shall commence until a Construction Method Statement has
       been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local planning authority in
       accordance with the format and guidance provided by Transport for London. The
       Construction Method Statement shall provide for:

         a) parking of vehicles of site operatives/visitors.
         b) HGV access to site – loading and unloading of plant and materials.
         c) number of HGVs anticipated.
         d) storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development.
         e) programme of work and phasing.
         f) site layout plan.
         g) highway condition (before, during, after).
         h) measures to control dust and dirt during construction.
         i) a scheme for recycling/disposing of waste resulting from demolition and
            construction works; and
         The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
         Construction Method Statement, or any amendment or variation to it as may be
         agreed in writing by the local planning authority.

    6) No development shall commence until details of the levels of the building(s),
       hardstanding and terrace areas in relation to the adjoining land and highway(s),
       and any other changes proposed in the levels of the site, have been submitted
       to, and approved in writing by, the local planning authority. The
       development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details and
       shall thereafter be retained.

    7) No development shall commence until full details of the permeable paving
       construction and details relating to the long-term maintenance and management

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          8
Appeal Decision 6004526


         of the on-site drainage shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
         planning authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
         approved details and shall thereafter be retained.

    8) No development shall commence (other than works of demolition) until works for
       the disposal of surface and foul water, including the incorporation of sustainable
       drainage features as appropriate, have been provided on site in accordance with
       details to be submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local planning
       authority. These works shall thereafter be retained.

    9) Notwithstanding the details shown on the approved drawings, the development
       hereby permitted shall not progress beyond damp proof course level until
       samples of the materials (or appropriate specification) to be used in the
       construction of the external surfaces noted below have been submitted to the
       local planning authority to be agreed in writing:

              a) facing materials for the buildings, including roof;
              b) details of the brick work bond;
              c) windows;
              d) doors;
              e) rainwater goods;
              f) ground surfacing.
          The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details
          and shall be retained as such thereafter.


    10) Notwithstanding the details shown on the approved drawings, the development
        hereby permitted shall not commence beyond damp proof course level until
        there has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
        authority detailed sections at metric scale 1:20 through all external reveals of the
        windows and doors on each of the elevations. The development shall be
        completed in accordance with the approved details and shall thereafter be
        retained.

    11) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the dormer
        window to the rear of bungalow 1 (shown as Proposed Elevation 3 on the
        approved plans) and the dormer windows to the rear and side of bungalow 2
        (shown as Proposed Elevations 2 and 3 on the approved plans) have been fitted
        with obscured glazing, and no part of those windows shall be capable of being
        opened. Details of the type of obscured glazing shall be submitted to and
        approved in writing by the local planning authority before the window is installed.
        Once installed the obscured glazing shall be retained thereafter and fixed shut at
        all times.

    12) Notwithstanding the approved details, the development hereby permitted shall
        not be occupied until there has been a scheme of hard and soft landscape works
        for the site submitted to and approved by the local planning authority.
        Soft landscape works shall include: planting plans (at a scale not less than
        1:100), schedules of plants, noting species, plant sizes, plant container sizes (all
        at time of planting) and proposed numbers / densities. Hard landscape works
        shall include; details of boundary treatments (materials, scale of boundary,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6004526


         location) and details of hard surfacing materials to be used in the landscaping of
         the site. Hard landscaping shall be completed prior to first occupation, in
         accordance with the approved details.

    13) All planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the approved details of landscaping
        shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding seasons following the
        occupation of the building(s), or the completion of the development, whichever is
        the sooner. Any existing or new trees or shrubs which, within a period of 5 years
        from the completion of the development, die, are removed, or become seriously
        damaged or diseased, shall be replaced in the next planting season, with others
        of a similar size and species, unless the local authority agrees any variation in
        writing.

    14) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until details relating to
        the provision of cycle storage has been submitted and approved in writing by the
        local planning authority. The development shall be completed in accordance with
        the approved details and shall thereafter be retained.

    15) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until details of refuse
        storage (including screening) for 3 bins for each dwellinghouse shall be
        submitted and approved by the local planning authority. The development shall
        be completed prior to occupation in accordance with the approved details.

         The refuse bins shall be stored at all times, other than on collection days, in the
         designated refuse storage area, as shown on the approved drawing.

    16) Evidence of certification of Secured by Design Accreditation for the development
        shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority
        before any part of the development is occupied or used.

    17) The proposed parking spaces shall be used only for the parking of private motor
        vehicles (and domestic storage if appropriate) in connection with the
        development hereby permitted and for no other purpose and shall be made
        available prior to occupation.


End of schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
