Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 April 2026
by L Bartle BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004496
Land to rear of 223A Main Street, Thornton, Coalville, LE67 1AH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Iain Long against the decision of Hinckley and Bosworth Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00775/OUT.
•    The development proposed is outline application for demolition of all existing buildings and structures
     and erection one detached dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The planning application is made in outline with details of access and layout
       provided for consideration at this stage. All other matters are reserved for future
       consideration. I have taken the submitted plans relating to access and layout as
       forming part of the application. I have treated other plans as indicative only.
3.     A Landscape and Visual Appraisal dated January 2026 was submitted with the
       appeal. It responds to the Council’s reason for refusal and was carried out after the
       planning application was determined by the Council. Although the Council’s
       Statement of Case does not refer to this supplementary evidence, it has, along
       with other interested parties, had the opportunity to consider its findings. There
       would not be procedural unfairness if I take it into account in my consideration of
       the appeal and I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     During the appeal, it was brought to light that the ownership certificate submitted
       with the application did not accurately reflect all interests in the appeal site. The
       appellant subsequently provided evidence that the requisite notice had been
       served on the relevant landowner. Having regard to the information before me, I
       am satisfied that the necessary notification requirements have been complied with
       and that no prejudice has arisen. I have therefore proceeded on the basis of the
       corrected certification.
5.     The appellant contends that the proposal would be exempt from the biodiversity
       net gain (BNG) requirements set out in Schedule 7A of the Town and Country
       Planning Act 1990 (as amended) on the basis that it would comprise self-build and
       custom housebuilding. To support that position, a signed Unilateral Undertaking
       (UU) was submitted and subsequently revised during the appeal process to
       address the Council’s comments.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004496


6.     Although an executed UU is before me, it contains inconsistencies regarding the
       land to which it relates. In particular, Schedule One refers to land at 223A Main
       Street, Thornton, Coalville, whereas the definition of "Site" refers to land adjacent
       to Welton Lodge, Hunts Lane, Desford, Leicestershire. Furthermore, the plan
       attached to the UU differs from the application location plan. Taken together, these
       discrepancies create uncertainty as to the land bound by the planning obligations.
7.     Consequently, I cannot be satisfied that the development would qualify for the
       claimed exemption from the BNG requirements. Accordingly, a main issue in this
       appeal is whether the proposal would comply with the statutory BNG requirements.
8.     During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given
       an opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the
       appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching my decision.
       References to the Framework in my decision are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issues
9.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal makes adequate provision for BNG; and,
           •    whether the proposed development would be in a suitable location for new
                housing with regard to the local development plan and the character and
                appearance of the site and surrounding area.
Reasons
Biodiversity
10. Unless exempt, the proposed development would be subject to the statutory BNG
    requirements, which require development to achieve a biodiversity net gain of at
    least 10%. The appellant's case is advanced on the basis that the development
    would comprise self-build and custom housebuilding and would therefore be
    exempt from those requirements.
11. The Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended by the Housing
    and Planning Act 2016) places duties on local authorities in relation to the
    provision of serviced plots for self-build and custom housebuilding. Furthermore,
    section 123 of the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 provides that
    development permissions may only count towards meeting those duties where the
    development is genuinely self-build or custom housebuilding and is secured as
    such.
12. For the reasons set out above, I am not satisfied that the submitted UU would
    effectively secure the development as self-build and custom housebuilding.
    Consequently, I cannot be satisfied that the proposal would qualify for the
    exemption from the statutory BNG requirements relied upon by the appellant.
13. The Preliminary Ecological Appraisal indicates that the appeal site is
    predominantly comprised of buildings and artificial hard surfaces. Nevertheless,
    the minimum biodiversity information required by Article 7(1A) of the Town and
    Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015
    (DMPO) has not been submitted. In the absence of that information, I am unable to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004496


       determine the pre-development biodiversity value of the site or whether the
       proposal would achieve the required minimum 10% BNG.
14. Accordingly, based on the evidence before me, I cannot conclude that the
    proposal would either benefit from an exemption from, or comply with, the statutory
    BNG requirements. The proposal therefore conflicts with Schedule 7A of the Town
    and Country Planning Act 1990 and the requirements of the DMPO. It would also
    conflict with Policy N2 (1) (a) of the Framework and the requirement for BNG
    where applicable.
Location of development
15. There is no dispute between the parties that the site lies outside the defined
    settlement boundary of Thornton and is therefore located within the countryside for
    planning policy purposes. Policy DM4 of the Hinckley and Bosworth Site
    Allocations and Development Management Policies Development Plan Document
    (the DPD) seeks to safeguard the countryside from unsustainable development.
    The proposed dwelling would not fall within any of the categories of development
    identified by Policy DM4 as being acceptable in principle within the countryside.
16. The site itself is physically separated from the built form of the village and
    accessed via a lengthy private track extending from Main Street. It contains a
    range of existing buildings and structures, including stables, storage buildings,
    hardstanding and other associated features, resulting in a developed and
    somewhat fragmented appearance.
17. The evidence before me indicates that the proposed dwelling would replace much
    of the existing built form and occupy a smaller overall footprint than the buildings
    currently on the site. Furthermore, with the exception of the site's more open
    boundary towards Thornton Reservoir, the site is largely enclosed by boundary
    vegetation and mature tree planting. Consequently, visibility from surrounding
    public viewpoints, including sections of the National Forest Way, is limited and
    filtered by vegetation.
18. In addition, the sloping landform between the site and Thornton Reservoir further
    reduces its visibility, particularly in relation to the area where the proposed dwelling
    would be located. The site is also experienced within a wider context that includes
    St Peter's Church, nearby residential curtilages and other settlement-edge
    features. Consequently, the proposal would be viewed against a wider backdrop of
    some existing development and landscape features rather than as an isolated
    intrusion into the countryside.
19. Whilst the dwelling would introduce a residential use and associated domestic
    activity, the submitted layout demonstrates that a single dwelling could be
    accommodated within the site without causing unacceptable harm to the character
    and appearance of the site or its surroundings. On the evidence before me there is
    no evidence to indicate that the development would be incapable of according with
    the principles established in the Good Design Guide and Policy DM10 of the DPD.
    Accordingly, it would not erode important open views, nor would it materially alter
    the wider landscape character of the surrounding countryside.
20. Turning to the provisions in the Framework, Policy S5 identifies particular forms of
    development that may be acceptable outside settlement boundaries where
    specified criteria are satisfied. The Council has confirmed that it cannot currently

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004496


        demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites. Consequently, Policy
        S5(1)(j) is engaged, requiring consideration of whether the development is
        physically well-related to an existing settlement and of a scale that can be
        accommodated having regard to existing or proposed infrastructure provision.
21. In this case, although the proposal would comprise backland development to the
    rear of properties on Main Street, the site lies within the wider fringe of the built-up
    edge of Thornton. Moreover, there is no compelling evidence before me to suggest
    that a single dwelling would place unacceptable pressure upon local infrastructure
    or services. I therefore find that the proposal satisfies the criteria of Policy S5(1)(j).
22. Although the site lies outside the settlement boundary and therefore conflicts with
    Policy DM4 of the DPD, that policy is not wholly consistent with Policy S5 of the
    Framework. In accordance with Annex A of the Framework, I have therefore
    afforded the conflict with Policy DM4 only very limited weight.
23. Taking these matters together, I conclude that the proposal would represent an
    acceptable location for new housing. It would satisfy the requirements of Policy
    S5(1)(j) of the Framework and, for the reasons given above, would not unduly
    harm the character and appearance of the site and surrounding area.
    Consequently, the proposal would accord with Policy DM10 of the DPD insofar as
    it requires development to complement or enhance local character, and with the
    design principles of Policy DP3 of the Framework.
24. Accordingly, notwithstanding the very limited weight given to the conflict with
    Policy DM4 arising from the site's location outside the settlement boundary, I find
    that the proposal would accord with the development plan when read as a whole
    and with the Framework in respect of this main issue.
Other Matters
25. The appellant refers to an appeal decision1 in which the benefits of a self-build
    dwelling were found to outweigh identified conflicts with the development plan.
    However, that decision turned on its own facts and, importantly, the Inspector was
    satisfied that the proposed dwelling would be secured as self-build development.
    For the reasons given above, I have not reached the same conclusion in this case.
    Accordingly, I attach limited weight to that decision.
26. The Council refers to Policy DM17 in its reason for refusal, which relates to
    highways and transportation matters. However, the Council has identified no
    specific highway or transport concerns, and I have no compelling evidence before
    me to conclude that the proposal would conflict with the objectives of that policy.
    Accordingly, I attach little weight to the alleged conflict with Policy DM17.
Planning Balance
27. I have found that the proposal has not been demonstrated to qualify for the
    claimed exemption from the statutory BNG regime. Furthermore, the biodiversity
    information required by the DMPO has not been submitted. Consequently, I cannot
    conclude that the proposal would comply with the mandatory BNG requirements.
    This would conflict with Policy N2(1)(a) of the Framework insofar as it expects
    development to address BNG requirements where they apply. I attach substantial
    weight to that harm.
1
    APP/G2435/W/24/3343890


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6004496


28. Against this, I acknowledge that the appeal site is reasonably accessible to
    services and facilities within Thornton and that future occupiers would not be
    wholly reliant on the private car for day-to-day needs. The proposal would also
    provide one additional dwelling and would generate limited economic benefits
    during construction and through the expenditure of future occupiers within the local
    economy. Taken together, I afford moderate weight to these benefits.
29. Accordingly, I find that the adverse impacts of the proposal would substantially
    outweigh its benefits. The presumption in favour of sustainable development in
    Policy S3 of the Framework does not therefore apply.
Conclusion
30. Although the proposal would accord with the development plan when considered
    as a whole, I have identified material considerations which indicate that the appeal
    should be determined other than in accordance with the development plan.
31. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

L Bartle
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
