Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 June 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004780
Land at Pear Tree Farm, Alburgh Road, Hempnall, Norfolk NR15 2NS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Simon Carver against the decision of South Norfolk District Council.
•    The application ref is 2025/1962.
•    The development proposed is erection of 1no detached self-build dwelling and ancillary storage
     outbuilding.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for erection of a
       minimum of 1 and a maximum of 1 detached self-build dwelling and ancillary
       storage outbuilding at Land at Pear Tree Farm, Alburgh Road, Hempnall, Norfolk
       NR15 2NS in accordance with the terms of the application, ref 2025/1962.
Procedural Matters
Permission in principle
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing
       led development. The permission in principle consent route has two stages: the
       first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in
       principle and the second (technical details consent) stage is when the detailed
       development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these two
       stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle (PIP) is limited to
       location, land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent (TDC) application if
       PIP is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
Description of development
4.     The description of development in the banner heading is taken from the decision
       notice which the appellant has confirmed that they have no objection to. I have
       however added the words ‘minimum and maximum’ to my formal decision as the
       PPG1 and legislation2 set out that the amount of development should be
       expressed as a range with the minimum and maximum number of dwellings that
       are, in principle, permitted.

1
 Paragraph: 052 Reference ID: 58-052-20180615
2
 Article 5A(3)(a) of the Town and Country Planning (Permission in Principle) Order 2017 as amended by Article 4 of the Town and
Country Planning (Permission in Principle) (Amendment) Order 2017

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004780


New evidence
5.     Additional information has been submitted as part of the appeal, including a
       Nutrient Neutrality and Habitats Regulations Assessment Report and three
       unilateral undertakings. Whilst this evidence seeks to address the reasons for
       refusal, this evidence would not evolve the development or fundamentally change
       the proposal from what was originally under consideration by the Council. In
       addition, the Council has had the opportunity to comment upon these documents
       as part of the appeal. I am satisfied that there is no procedural or substantive
       reason not to accept this evidence and have made my decision on this basis.
National Planning Policy Framework
6.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. Therefore, I sought the views of the parties on the implications of the
       new Framework on the appeal. I have taken these submissions into account in
       reaching my decision.
Habitats development
7.     Article 5B(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Permission in Principle) Order (as
       amended) sets out that permission in principle cannot be granted for habitats
       development, which is development that is likely to have a significant effect on a
       European site3 either alone or in combination with other plans or projects4.
8.     In circumstances where a proposal would have a likely significant effect on a
       protected site, the competent authority should ensure an appropriate assessment
       has taken place before granting permission in principle. The PPG advises that if
       the competent authority is satisfied after taking account of mitigation measures in
       the appropriate assessment and concluding that the development will not
       adversely affect the integrity of the protected sites then, subject to compliance with
       other statutory requirements regarding the PIP process, PIP can be granted5.
9.     It is common ground between the parties that, without mitigation, the proposal
       would result in a likely significant effect on protected sites. While the appellant has
       set out mitigation measures secured through unilateral undertakings, the parties
       do not agree whether this mechanism could be relied upon to secure the
       mitigation.
10. The PPG advises that planning obligations cannot be secured at the permission in
    principle stage6. However, there are no legal reasons why an obligation cannot be
    entered into at any time. I am therefore satisfied that I can take into account the
    unilateral undertakings that the appellant has entered into as material
    considerations when conducting my appropriate assessment.
       Recreational disturbance
11. The appeal site is situated within the zone of influence (ZOI) from recreational
    disturbance of a number of protected sites. These include the Broadland SPA and
    Ramsar, Breydon Water SPA, Great Yarmouth North Denes SPA, the Broads

3
  Schedule 5, Part 1 of the Planning and Infrastructure Act 2025 means Ramsar sites have the same protection as European sites
as a matter of law.
4
  Full definition contained within Article 5B(5)
5
  PPG: Paragraph: 005 Reference ID: 58-005-20190315
6
  Paragraph: 022 Reference ID: 58-022-20180615


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6004780


       SAC, Winterton – Horsey Dunes SAC and the Norfolk Valley Fens SAC. The
       qualifying features of the sites include breeding and/or non-breeding birds and a
       range of habitat including wetland, lakes, dunes, grassland and marshland.
12. Within the ZOI, the evidence shows that increases in residential development
    would result in a likely significant effect to the qualifying features of these protected
    sites either alone or in combination with other plans and projects through
    additional recreational disturbance. The development would introduce a net gain of
    a dwelling which would therefore exacerbate the recreational pressure on these
    sites. As such, alone or in combination with other projects or plans there would be
    a likely significant effect on the protected sites.
13. As competent authority, I am therefore required to carry out an Appropriate
    Assessment. The Norfolk Green Infrastructure and Recreational impact Avoidance
    and Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS) sets out the strategy to mitigate the in-
    combination effects of development on these sites in relation to recreational
    disturbance. The GIRAMS seeks to secure a financial contribution for each new
    dwelling within the ZOI based on the number of bedrooms to fund a strategic
    mitigation package. This package includes measures such as monitoring, signage,
    hiring rangers, ground nesting bird fencing and local mitigation projects, amongst
    other measures.
14. As the application is for PIP the number of bedrooms is not set. However, I have
    been provided with a unilateral undertaking (UU), which restricts the
    commencement of any development until such a payment in accordance with the
    GIRAMS based on the number of bedrooms established at the TDC stage has
    been made. From reviewing the submitted UU, I am content that it is a legally
    sound and binding obligation that effectively secures the contribution towards the
    measures set out in the GIRAMS. I am therefore satisfied that I can confidently
    rely on the UU to deliver the mitigation in relation to recreational disturbance.
15. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that I have sufficient certainty as to what the
    mitigation entails and that it would indeed be adequately secured should a future
    TDC be granted and a planning permission created.
16. Natural England (NE) has been consulted as part of my Appropriate Assessment.
    NE has confirmed that the future financial contribution towards the GIRAMS would
    be sufficient to avoid an adverse impact to the integrity of the protected sites with
    regard to recreational impacts.
17. Therefore, as competent authority, I am satisfied that sufficient contributions are
    secured which would ensure the delivery of mitigation measures to satisfactorily
    address the likely harm which would be caused by the development and ensure
    the proposal would not have an adverse effect on the integrity of the protected
    sites with respect to recreational impacts.
       Nutrient neutrality
18. I sought clarification over the relevant sites in relation to nutrient neutrality as this
    differed between the appellant’s Shadow Habitats Regulations Assessment and
    the Council’s decision notice. The Council subsequently confirmed that the
    inclusion of the River Wensum SAC in its decision notice was an error. The
    relevant protected sites are the Broads SAC and the Broadland Ramsar Site. The


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004780


        qualifying features are wetland supporting Red Data Book invertebrates and
        plants.
19. Evidence shows that overnight accommodation within the catchment of these sites
    could result in an increase in nutrients resulting in eutrophication which adversely
    impacts the qualifying features. Therefore, the development introducing an
    additional residential dwelling within the catchment, alone or in combination would
    result in a likely significant effect on the protected sites.
20. The appellant’s evidence sets out that the replacement of an existing septic tank
    within the appellants wider land ownership with a more efficient package treatment
    plant, along with also installing one at the appeal site would result in a nutrient
    neutral development. I have no evidence before me to reach a different conclusion
    on the assumptions, inputs and calculations of the nutrient budget set out in the
    evidence which demonstrate nutrient neutrality will be achieved.
21. The appellant has provided another UU which restricts the commencement of
    development until a mechanism is secured which demonstrably achieves nutrient
    neutrality. As competent authority, I am satisfied that this UU is also legally sound
    and binding that effectively secures the mitigation to ensure the development
    achieves nutrient neutrality and that development cannot commence until such a
    time.
22. I am satisfied that I have sufficient certainty at this PIP stage as to what the
    mitigation entails in relation to nutrient neutrality and that it would be adequately
    secured should a future TDC be granted and a planning permission be created.
23. NE has been consulted as part of my Appropriate Assessment. They set out that
    subject to the proposed mitigation being appropriately secured and capable of
    being delivered for the lifetime of the development, NE is content with the
    conclusion that nutrient neutrality can be achieved.
24. Therefore, in relation to nutrient neutrality, as competent authority I am satisfied
    that mitigation is adequately secured which would facilitate the delivery of a
    nutrient neutral development, ensuring the proposal would not have an adverse
    effect on the integrity of the protected sites.
        Conclusion
25. Based on the conclusions of my appropriate assessment, the development would
    not adversely affect the integrity of the protected sites. It therefore accords with the
    Habitats Regulations, Policy 3 of the Greater Norwich Local Plan (2024) (GNLP)
    and Policy DM1.4 of the South Norfolk Local Plan Development Management
    Policies Document (2015) (SNLP). Therefore, the PIP procedure is appropriate for
    the proposal and it would not be restricted by Article 5B(1) of the Order.
26. The Council has referred to two PIP appeals7 where the Inspectors found the
    respective developments would result in harm to the protected sites. However, in
    these cases there was either no mitigation proposed or the submitted unilateral
    undertaking was deficient, so these cases are not directly comparable to the
    appeal proposal before me.



7
    PINS refs APP/K2610/W/24/3357681 & APP/K2610/W/21/3285244


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decision 6004780


Main Issues
27. The appeal arose from the procedural matter which I have addressed above as to
    whether Article 5B(1) of the Order prohibited PIP from being given. However, the
    Council confirmed in its statement of case that it did not accept that the scheme
    was otherwise acceptable. Accordingly, the parties were asked to provide
    comments on the substantive matters relating to the location, land use and amount
    of development. I have taken these comments into account in the determination of
    the appeal, and on this basis, I consider the main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area; and
           •    whether the site is suitable for the proposed development, having regard to
                local planning policy for the location of housing and accessibility to services
                and facilities.
Reasons
Character and appearance
28. The evidence shows that the site is situated within the Tas Tributary Farmland
    Landscape Character Area, which is characterised by the open, predominantly
    agricultural landscape with a dispersed settlement pattern. I observed on my visit
    the area is distinctly rural and verdant. Local development is focused along
    Alburgh Road, with one side of the road demonstrating a linear and regular pattern
    and the other, which includes the appeal site, a lower density and more sporadic
    layout with considerable areas of green space. Together this forms a small cluster
    of rural development known as Hempnall Green.
29. The appeal site comprises an open field bound with established vegetation and an
    existing gated access. It therefore features as a small part of the open low-density
    countryside around the Hempnall Green cluster of rural housing.
30. Whilst the appeal proposal would introduce built form to and would domesticate
    the appeal site, it would nevertheless be of a small scale which would be in
    keeping with the low-density pattern of development. The long open green edge of
    Hempnall Green along Alburgh Road would be retained and the proposed dwelling
    would integrate into the wider pattern of rural housing. The proposal for a single
    dwelling would in principle be proportionate to its plot and commensurate with the
    surrounding development. It therefore would not undermine the overall rural and
    open character and appearance of the area.
31. As such, I conclude that whilst the principle of a single residential dwelling would
    result in a change to the appeal site, it would not result in any harm to it and the
    proposal would be in keeping with the character and appearance of the area. It
    would therefore comply with Policies DM1.4 and DM4.5 of the SNLP. These
    policies, amongst other matters, seek to ensure development respects and
    conserves the landscape character of its immediate and wider environment and
    ensures that proposals are refused that would cause significant adverse impact on
    the distinctive landscape characteristics of an area.
Location and accessibility
32. Alburgh Road is an unlit countryside road which does not feature a pedestrian
    footpath. The evidence shows that the village of Hempnall is situated

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
Appeal Decision 6004780


       approximately 1.6km away from the appeal site. To reach the village, future
       occupiers would be required to travel along Alburgh Road and either utilise the
       network of public rights of way situated off Alburgh Road or continue along it and
       use Bungay Road to reach the village.
33. Whilst future occupiers would be required to travel along countryside roads, they
    feature an even tarmac surface with extensive views down these predominantly
    straight roads. Due to the characteristics of the roads and distance to Hempnall
    village, future occupiers would have a convenient, clear, and comfortable cycle
    route to the village to utilise a range of facilities provided by the settlement which
    includes a store and post office, primary school, GP practice, village hall and
    playing fields.
34. In addition, as part of the development, the appellant sets out that they intend to
    deliver a new footway along the south side of Alburgh Road running between the
    appeal site and the junction with Lundy Green, where at this crossroads location
    lies a bus stop and public house. Full details of this footway would be required to
    come forward as part of the TDC application and I have no evidence before me to
    suggest that this could not be delivered in principle. Future occupiers would
    therefore have, in principle, convenient access to a bus stop. The evidence before
    me shows that the bus route provides connections to Long Stratton and Norwich,
    both large settlements with a considerable range of facilities.
35. There is sufficient evidence before me to demonstrate that, in principle, future
    occupiers would have alternatives to the private vehicle to access services and
    facilities. Therefore, insofar as it relates to the environmental element of
    sustainable development the proposal would comply with Policy DM 1.3 of the
    SNLP in this regard.
36. In relation to the Council’s spatial policies to directing development across the
    district, Policy DM 1.3 of the SNLP sets out that development within the
    countryside outside of development boundaries of settlements will only be
    supported if a specific development management policy allows for such
    development or otherwise demonstrates overriding benefits in terms of the
    economic, social and environmental dimensions as set out in Policy DM1.1.
37. One such policy as referred to by the appellant is Policy 7.5 of the GNLP. This
    allows for up to three self-build and custom homes within or adjacent to
    settlements with or without a defined settlement boundary. I have not been
    provided with a definition of a settlement in relation to the development plan.
    However, I note Annex B of the Framework specifically sets out settlements do not
    include hamlets and scattered groups of houses located outside predominantly
    built-up areas.
38. As previously described, I observed that Hempnall Green appeared as a scattered
    group of houses focused along Alburgh Road. In these circumstances I do not
    consider that Hempnall Green comprises a settlement and therefore Policy 7.5
    does not apply.
39. Therefore, the location of the development outside of a settlement boundary would
    require overriding benefits in terms of economic, social and environmental
    dimensions which I address later on in my decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6004780


Other Considerations
40. The Housing and Planning Act (2016) prescribes a statutory duty for the Council to
    give enough permissions in respect of serviced plots of land to meet the demand
    for self-build and custom housebuilding arising in each base period. I have been
    provided with a number of appeal decisions by the appellant within the district
    where in these cases the Inspectors found that the Council was not meeting their
    statutory duty8. I have not been provided with any evidence to the contrary.
41. It therefore follows that, on the balance of probabilities, the Council is not meeting
    its statutory requirement to provide sufficient self-build and custom housing plots.
    As insufficient permissions have been granted by the Council to meet demand in
    accordance with the statutory duty, the self-build status of the proposed dwelling is
    a material consideration in favour of granting permission.
42. The Council has raised concerned that allowing this appeal could set a precedent.
    However, each case is determined on its own merits and on the basis of the
    evidence, particularly in relation to matters of character and appearance. As such,
    I am satisfied that my decision on this proposal, on this particular site with its
    distinct characteristics in this context would not harm the ability of the Council to
    exercise in equity their judgement on matters of character and appearance, as I
    have done in this case, in future cases.
43. Interested parties have raised concerns regarding water pressure, and the lack of
    provision of foul and waste water facilities along with concerns regarding light
    pollution. These are matters of technical detail which would be addressed in a
    future TDC application.
Planning Obligations
44. In relation to the unilateral undertaking securing contributions towards the
    GIRAMS, it is necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms,
    directly related to the development and fairly and reasonably related in scale and
    kind to the development. It therefore meets Regulation 122(2) of the Community
    Infrastructure Levy Regulations (2010). Similarly, the unilateral undertaking
    securing the development as nutrient neutral would be necessary to make the
    development acceptable in planning terms, relevant and reasonable along with
    being sufficiently precise to make the obligations capable of being complied with
    and enforced. It would therefore meet Policy DM6 of the Framework.
45. In the case of the self-build UU this would be necessary, relevant and reasonable
    to ensure the appeal proposal is delivered as a self-build unit. I am satisfied that
    the UU has been drafted sufficiently precisely to make the obligations be capable
    of being complied with and enforced. It therefore meets the tests as set out in
    Policy DM6 of the Framework.
Conditions
46. Whilst the Council has provided a list of suggested conditions, I have not imposed
    any as the PPG sets out that it is not possible for conditions to be attached to a
    grant of permission in principle, whose terms may only include the site location,
    type, and amount of development.


8
    PINS refs. APP/L2630/W/23/3346313 and APP/L2630/W/24/3353472.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            7
Appeal Decision 6004780


Planning Balance
47. Policy DM 1.3 of the SNLP allows for development within the countryside if it is
    demonstrated that there are overriding benefits in terms of the economic, social
    and environmental dimensions.
48. In this regard, the Council cannot demonstrate a five year housing land supply with
    the evidence showing the Council’s published position is 4.85 years. In addition,
    the Council is not meeting its duty with regard to self-build and custom housing.
    Policy HO7 of the Framework advises substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, which the appeal proposal would do so
    in light of the housing land supply position and the Council not meeting its statutory
    self-build and custom housing duty. Whilst the appeal scheme is small, it would
    positively contribute towards both supplies amounting to a considerable social
    benefit. In addition, the provision of the footway would provide some modest social
    and environmental benefits to the wider area of Hempnall Green. It would also
    lead to a small and time limited economic benefit during the construction phase, as
    well as some limited social and economic benefits resulting from future occupiers.
49. Therefore, the social, environmental and economic benefits of the proposal
    amount to overriding benefits justifying the spatial location outside of a settlement.
    As such, the proposed development complies with SNLP Policy DM1.3, and
    therefore, the development plan as a whole.
Conclusion
50. The proposed development would accord with the development plan and there are
    no material considerations that indicate that a decision should be made other than
    in accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal should
    be allowed.



C Housden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
