Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 August 2026
by E Catcheside BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6004062
Pavement o/s 100 High Street, Crawley RH10 1BZ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne (BT Telecommunications PLC) against the decision of Crawley
       Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is CR/2025/0512/FUL.
•      The development proposed is the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
       payphones.

Appeal B Ref: 6004064
Pavement o/s 100 High Street, Crawley RH10 1BZ
•      The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
       Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
       consent.
•      The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne (BT Telecommunications PLC) against the decision of Crawley
       Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is CR/2025/0511/ADV.
•      The advertisement proposed is 2no. digital 75” LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street
       Hub unit.


Decisions
1.       Appeal A is dismissed.
2.       Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.       Each of the appeals relates to the installation of a street hub unit with digital
         displays (the hub). The difference between them is that Appeal A is for planning
         permission and Appeal B is for express advertisement consent. Although I have
         considered each appeal on its own merits, I have dealt with the appeals together
         to avoid unnecessary duplication.
4.       The site lies within the setting of the Grade II* listed building known as The Old
         Punchbowl1. In my consideration of Appeal A, I have had regard to my statutory
         duty set out under Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
         Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
5.       A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
         published after the appeal was submitted. The parties were invited to comment on
         the revised Framework, and I have taken account of the comments received.
1
    List entry number 1187086

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6004062 & 6004064


Main Issues
6.     For Appeal A, the main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the
       character and appearance of the area.
7.     In respect of Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of
       Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) (the Regulations)
       require that decisions are made only in the interests of amenity and public safety,
       taking into account the provisions of the development plan, insofar as they are
       material, and any other relevant factors. The Council’s decision notice in respect of
       the advertisement consent does not explicitly refer to public safety. However,
       having regard to the evidence from both parties in respect of illumination levels, I
       consider public safety to be a pertinent matter.
8.     Therefore, for Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisement
       on amenity and public safety.
Reasons
Character, appearance, and amenity
9.     The appeal site comprises an area of footway on High Street in the busy,
       commercial centre of Crawley. There are several items of street furniture and other
       structures nearby, including the outdoor seating area, screens, and awnings
       associated with the adjacent restaurant; and the benches, bicycle stands, a bin,
       and traffic signs located close to the road. However, owing to the generous width
       of the footway, the road, and the deep grass verge opposite, there is a wide
       distance between the buildings on either side of this part of High Street, such that
       the area has a spacious character despite its town centre location.
10. The hub would be located close to the road edge, in broad alignment with the
    existing benches, bin, and bicycle stand. Thus, a good degree of uninterrupted
    footway would be retained between the commercial premises and the road.
    However, the existing roadside furniture has a subtle presence due to the low
    height, light colour, and the gaps in the metallic frames of the structures, which
    allow for visual permeability. Moreover, the modest size and narrow width of the
    traffic signs ensure they are discrete elements in the street scene. Overall, the
    existing structures allow for long views along High Street in both directions, and
    they do not detract from the open character of the street. Rather, the existing
    benches provide an opportunity for passers-by to rest and to appreciate the sense
    of openness in sideways as well as forward views of the surrounding area.
11. Although the proposed street hub would not rise above the height of the nearby
    awnings and traffic signs, it would be significantly taller than the street furniture
    located nearer to the road edge. Due to the combined effect of its height, width,
    thick profile, and its solid material, there would be a lack of visual permeability
    through the structure, and so it would therefore compromise the long views that
    can currently be gained along this side of High Street. The loss of views would be
    particularly noticeable from the benches, where sideways visibility would be
    severely impeded owing to the hub’s height and its proximity to the seats. Overall,
    therefore, the proposal would detract from the open and spacious character of this
    part of High Street.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6004062 & 6004064


12. There are other appeal decisions in the evidence2, whereby existing street
    furniture was a consideration in favour of a hub proposal. However, in those
    appeals, the dark hub materials were found to be in-keeping with the colour of the
    street furniture. In contrast, the colour of the hub on this site would fail to reflect the
    light shade of the benches, bin, and bike stands. It would, therefore, have an
    incongruent appearance, and would create visual clutter in the street scene.
13. There is very little information before me about the listed building known as The
    Old Punchbowl. Amongst other things, the list entry describes the building as a
    timber-framed hall-house with jettied ends that originates from the early 15 th
    Century. Based on the evidence, the significance of the building is derived, in part,
    from its age, architecture, and materials which reveal information about the time in
    which it was constructed. The building can be observed and appreciated from
    within its surroundings, including in long views along The Boulevard from the east
    and from High Street, including from the appeal site. Its setting therefore plays a
    part in the building’s significance. However, due to the distance between the listed
    building and the appeal site, and the intervening wide verge and road, the hub
    would not cause harm to the setting and significance of the listed building.
14. The existing telephone kiosk on The Boulevard, which is proposed for removal,
    lies within the High Street Conservation Area (HSCA). Section 72(1) of the Act
    requires me to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
    the character or appearance of the HSCA. According to the Conservation Area
    Statement (December 1998), the designated area of the HSCA developed around
    a historic intersection through farmland and subsequently a weekly market. The
    HSCA contains many historic buildings and spaces which, together, reveal
    evidence about the evolution of this trading centre over time. These features
    contribute the significance of the HSCA. Due to the small size of the kiosk and its
    relatively modern age, it plays a neutral role in the significance of the HSCA.
15. The removal of the kiosk, which is in a tired condition, would lead to a small and
    localised visual improvement to the corner of The Boulevard. However, due to the
    modest scale of the kiosk, its removal would have no overall effect on the
    significance of the HSCA. Similarly, due to the small footprint of the kiosk and its
    low height compared to that of the listed building, its removal would have no
    overall effect on the ability to appreciate The Old Punchbowl from within its setting,
    including in views along The Boulevard or from the High Street frontage. Overall,
    the proposal would preserve the significance of the designated heritage assets.
16. The appeal submission also references the removal of an existing telephone kiosk
    on Buckmans Road, which would lead to a small visual improvement to that
    residential street. However, Buckmans Road is a significant distance from High
    Street, and there is no visual connectivity between the kiosk and the appeal site.
    This limits the weight I ascribe to the benefits associated with its removal.
17. Overall, and even if I were to conclude that the kiosk removals could be secured
    as part of the appeal proposal3, the localised visual benefits associated with the
    removals would not be sufficient to overcome the harm that would be caused to
    the character, appearance, and visual amenity associated with the proposed hub.



2
    Appeal decision references APP/Z0116/W/25/3369235 and APP/Z0116/H/25/3369236, dated 04 December 2025.
3
    As was the case in appeal decision references APP/P4605/W/18/3202341 and APP/P4605/H/18/3201305, dated 10 April 2019.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decisions 6004062 & 6004064


18. I conclude that the proposal would harm the character, appearance, and amenity
    of the area. Therefore, there would be conflict with Policies CL1, CL2, and DD1 of
    the Crawley Borough Local Plan 2023-2040 (LP) which, taken together, seek to
    ensure developments do not cause unreasonable harm to the amenity of the
    surrounding area, maintain the arrangement of open spaces, and protect and
    enhance the positive aspects of the existing character. There would also be
    conflict with Policy DD6 of the LP, which resists advertisements that would have a
    detrimental impact on amenity.
Public safety
19. It is proposed that the digital displays would have a maximum night-time
    luminance level of 600cd/m2, which the appellant states would be in accordance
    with guidance from the Institution of Lighting Professionals (ILP). However, Table
    10.4 of the ILP’s Professional Lighting Guide ‘The Brightness of Illuminated
    Advertisements including Digital Displays’ sets out that the recommended
    maximum night-time permitted values of display luminance for advertisements
    including digital displays is 300cd/m2. Whilst other luminance limits are referenced
    in Table 9.1 of the guide, these relate to certain classes of advertisement for which
    deemed consent is granted, and so I am not persuaded they are directly applicable
    to the scheme. The proposed night-time luminance would, therefore, exceed the
    maximum level recommended by the ILP.
20. There are other sources of night-time illumination in proximity to the appeal site,
    including lit fascia signs, traffic signals, and light emitting through building
    windows. However, I do not have sufficient information to draw direct comparisons
    to the luminance levels proposed. Moreover, the ILP guidance is clear that the
    values indicated in Table 10.4 are maxima and that too high a luminance can
    impact the night scape unacceptably and cause distraction. The Planning Practice
    Guidance also states that the types of advertisement that may cause a danger to
    road users include illuminated signs which, because of the size or brightness,
    would result in glare and dazzle, or would distract road users, particularly in misty
    or wet weather. Taking this guidance into account and, given the size and night-
    time luminance of the proposed advertisements and the proximity of the site to the
    road, there is an absence of assurance that the advertisements would safeguard
    highway safety. Therefore, I am unable to conclude with any degree of certainty
    that the proposal would not cause harm to public safety.
21. I conclude that the proposed advertisements would cause harm to public safety, in
    conflict with Policy DD6 of the LP which resists advertisements that would have a
    detrimental impact on public safety.
Planning Balance
22. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework.
23. The proposal would support improved digital connectivity by providing a range of
    services, including free ultrafast Wi-Fi and calls, 5G capability, and USB charging.
    As such, the facility would support the Government’s aim of improving digital
    infrastructure. These benefits carry substantial weight in accordance with Policy


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6004062 & 6004064


       CO1 of the Framework which recognises the benefits of maintaining and improving
       network coverage, capacity, reliability and resilience.
24. There would be other economic, social, and environmental benefits arising from
    the scheme, including through the provision of a universally accessible call box
    which would help to meet the appellant’s obligations, environmental monitoring,
    emergency call services, wayfinding and information services, and through
    revenue associated with the advertisements. Given the small-scale of the
    proposal, these benefits carry limited weight.
25. However, Policy CO1 of the Framework states that telecommunications
    infrastructure should be sited and designed to minimise the visual impact of
    proposals, especially in situations where a new structure is proposed. I have found
    that adverse effects would arise in respect of the character and appearance of the
    area and visual amenity. Therefore, the hub would not be sited so as to minimise
    the visual impact of the new structure. There would also be conflict with Policy
    DP3 of the Framework, which expects proposals to integrate with and enhance
    their surroundings.
26. Overall, and notwithstanding the substantial weight ascribed to the improvements
    in digital connectivity, the benefits of approving the proposal in this case would be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects.
Conclusion
27. Appeal A conflicts with the development plan when read as a whole and the
    material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate a decision
    should be made otherwise than in accordance with the development plan.
    Appeal B would harm amenity and public safety.
28. For the reasons given above, Appeal A is dismissed and Appeal B is dismissed.


E Catcheside
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
