Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal A: Appeal Ref: 6004449
Pavement o/s 33 Havelock Road, Hastings TN34 1BE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
     Hastings Borough Council.
•    The application ref is HS/FA/25/00624.
•    The development proposed is the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphones.

Appeal B: Appeal Ref: 6004450
Pavement o/s 33 Havelock Road, Hastings TN34 1BE
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
     Hastings Borough Council.
•    The application ref is HS/AA/25/00625.
•    The advertisement proposed is the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphones.

Decision
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Appeal A relates to the refusal of planning permission to install a BT Street Hub
       unit, whilst Appeal B relates to the refusal of express consent to display
       advertisements on the Street Hub. I have combined the appeals into a single
       decision letter as they are intrinsically linked and raise similar issues, however I
       have considered each on their individual merits.
4.     In respect of Appeal B, the Regulations require that decisions are made only in the
       interest of amenity and public safety. In reaching my decision on Appeal B, I have
       had regard to the development plan policies cited in the evidence, but only in so
       far as these are material to amenity and public safety considerations.
5.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. Having reviewed the changes, I am satisfied that it does not affect

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004449


       the substantive matters of the appeal and that proceeding without further
       consultation with the main parties would not be prejudicial to their respective
       cases.
6.     The Council has provided drawings relating to the Hastings Town Centre Public
       Realm Improvement Project (HTCPRIP) as part of its appeal questionnaire which
       don’t appear to have been available to the appellant at the time of the application.
       As the appellant has had the chance to comment upon these plans as part of the
       appeal, I am therefore satisfied that there are no procedural or substantive
       reasons not to accept this information.
Main Issue
7.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the vitality and amenity of Hastings
       Town Centre.
Reasons
8.     The appeal site is situated within Hastings Town Centre. It comprises a small
       section of pavement in the vicinity of a bus stop. The evidence before me shows
       that the Council is in the process of delivering the HTCPRIP as part of the
       Hastings Town Deal. This involves comprehensive public realm improvements to
       the town centre. It derives support from the development plan including Policy FA2
       of the Hastings Local Plan Planning Strategy (2014) (PS) which seeks to support
       further delivery of regeneration and change in Hastings Town Centre by 2028.
9.     I have been provided plans by the Council which shows that the appeal site falls
       within part of Havelock Road which is intended to contain a landscaped rain
       garden area forming part of the wider drainage strategy of the public realm
       improvement works. Whilst at the time of my visit I did not observe that works had
       commenced near the appeal site, the evidence shows that the project is clearly at
       an advanced stage and is an important initiative in meeting the objectives of the
       PS in relation to the town centre. In these circumstances, the layout that I have
       been provided with and the overall delivery of the HTCPRIP are a material
       consideration of significant weight.
10. I have not been provided with any technical evidence showing the compatibility of
    the Street Hub with the landscaped area and the Council contends that it would
    require a redesign of the HTCPRIP layout should it be installed in the proposed
    location. I therefore, cannot conclude that the siting of the Street Hub in the
    proposed location would not undermine the delivery of the proposed drainage
    strategy of the HTCPRIP and its wider proposed function as attractive green space
    within the town centre. The proposal would therefore be to the detriment of the
    vitality and amenity of the area.
11. As a result, in relation to Appeal A the development would not support the delivery
    of regeneration and change in Hastings Town Centre and would not promote or
    encourage improvements to the public realm. As a result, the proposal would
    conflict with Policies FA2 and FA3 of the PS and LP1 of the Hastings Local Plan
    Development Management Plan (2015) (DMP).
12. With regard to Appeal B, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the amenity
    of the area. The same development plan policies as above have been considered



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004449


       as far as they are material, and in this respect, the proposal would conflict with the
       development plan.
Other Matters
13. The appellant has suggested that the Street Hub could be repositioned to avoid a
    conflict with the proposed landscaped area. However, I must determine the appeal
    based on the plans before me which show the siting would conflict with the
    proposed landscaping.
14. In relation to Appeal B, the Council’s officer report sets out that it considers that
    the proposal would not result in harm to public safety. The evidence before me and
    my observations on site do not lead me to a different conclusion to that of the
    Council on this matter.
15. The site is situated within the Hastings Town Centre Conservation Area (CA). In
    relation to Appeal A, in accordance with the statutory duty set out in Section 72(1)
    of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have paid
    special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of the CA. This duty applies to Appeal B insofar as it relates to
    amenity. The commercial town centre appearance contributes to the significance
    of the CA. Due to the proposal being sited within the context of existing modern
    street furniture the proposal would preserve the character and appearance of the
    CA. I note that the Council raised no objection to the proposal in this regard.
16. In relation to Appeal A, I am aware that the site is proximate to the Grade II listed
    buildings General Havelock Public House and the Number 1, Bank Building.
    Mindful of the statutory duty set out in s66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have had special regard to the desirability of
    preserving their settings. The site being situated within the setting of these
    buildings is a relevant consideration for amenity in Appeal B. The town centre area
    that the appeal site falls within positively contributes to the setting of these assets.
    However, similarly, due to being set within other modern street furniture and
    buildings, along with being set away from the assets, the setting of these listed
    buildings would be preserved. The Council also raised no objection on this ground
    either.
Planning Balance
17. In relation to Appeal A, the proposed development is not in accordance with the
    aforementioned policies of the PS and DMP. Annex A of the Framework sets out
    development plan policies which are materially inconsistent with national decision-
    making policies within the Framework should be given very limited weight.
18. PS Policies FA2 and FA3 and DMP Policy LP1 are consistent with section 8 of the
    Framework in seeking to ensure the vitality of town centres, in particular Policy
    TC2. On this basis the identified conflict with these policies carries significant
    weight against the development and the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan as a whole.
19. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out decisions on development proposals should
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. As the site is situated
    within Hastings, Policy S4 applies. This sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004449


       substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
       national decision-making policies in the Framework.
20. Policy CO1 of the Framework sets out substantial weight should be given to
    improving network coverage. The proposal would offer free public access to
    telephony facilities, device charging, wayfinding services and free Wi-Fi. It would
    contain an emergency button to contact emergency services and public messaging
    capabilities. Furthermore, using its sensors it can measure air quality, sound, light
    and movements. However, the proposal would be small in scale, and I do not have
    evidence before me demonstrating that there are deficiencies within the area of
    the facilities offered by the proposal. Given the small scale of the development
    these amount to limited benefits.
21. I understand that BT has a Universal Service Obligation to maintain publicly
    accessible call boxes on the street. However, it has not been demonstrated that
    this specific proposal is required in order to meet this obligation, and therefore this
    only carries limited weight.
22. It is also stated that two existing telephone kiosks would be removed 1. However,
    these are situated outside of the red line, and I have no evidence before me
    demonstrating how their removal would be secured by the appeal scheme. I
    therefore cannot afford the removal of these kiosks any positive weight.
23. Whilst the site before me is not specifically allocated or safeguarded within the
    development plan, given the evidence shows the advanced stage of the HTCPRIP
    this is a significant material consideration which would support the vitality of the
    town centre. By conflicting with the proposed landscaping, the proposal would
    undermine regeneration and change within the town centre, and therefore its
    vitality, resulting in conflict with Policy TC2 of the Framework, a matter of
    considerable weight against the proposal. Therefore, the benefits of the proposal
    are substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
       Conclusion
24. Appeal A: The proposed development would conflict with the development plan as
    a whole and there are no material considerations which indicate that the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that Appeal
    A should be dismissed.
25. Appeal B: For the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal B should be dismissed.



C Housden
INSPECTOR




1
 Pavement o/s HTH Church, Robertson Street, Hastings, TN34 1HT & Pavement adjacent Morrisons Petrol Station, Queens Road,
Hastings, TN34 2LL



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
