Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Claire Coles MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004640
Scotlands Farm, Telegraph Hill, Fernhurst, West Sussex GU29 0BN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Eames against the decision of South Downs National Park
     Authority.
•    The application Ref is SDNP/25/01131/FUL.
•    The development proposed is three bay garage and improvements to existing vehicular access.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of the appeal differs from the application form to the decision
       notice. That above has been taken from the application form, which adequately
       describes the proposal.
3.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026. I have not sought comments from the main parties in respect of
       the revisions to the Framework as I do not consider the policy emphasis regarding
       the main issue in this case to have changed.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is:
           •    The effect of the proposed access track and garage building on the
                character and appearance of the area, with specific reference to the sites
                location within the South Downs National Park (SDNP).
Reasons
5.     Scotlands Farm comprises a former farmstead which has recently been
       refurbished. To facilitate refurbishment a temporary access track was constructed
       under Schedule 2 Part 4 Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development)(England) Order 2015.
6.     The site is surrounded by dense woodland to the west and south, with more open
       views available of the site from the north and north-east, where the Serpent Trail
       Public Right of Way leads from east to west. The site lies within the SDNP and is
       approached via Scotland Lane, which branches onto Kings Drive at the entrance
       to King Edwards VII Hospital redevelopment.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004640


Access Track
7.     Policy N4 of the Framework requires development proposals within protected
       landscapes to be limited in scale and extent and sensitively located and designed
       to avoid harm to the statutory purposes and special qualities of the protected
       landscape. Substantial weight should be placed on the importance of conserving
       and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas, and to conserving and
       enhancing wildlife and cultural heritage in National Parks (NP).
8.     The primary purpose of National Landscapes is to conserve and enhance natural
       beauty. The Levelling-Up and Regeneration Act (LURA) 2023 creates a duty on
       relevant authorities to seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the
       natural beauty of the area.
9.     Policy SD1 of the South Downs National Park Local Plan (SDLP) refers to the
       presumption in favour of sustainable development and to the conservation of the
       landscape, natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the NP. Policies SD4
       and SD5 of the SDLP require development to respond to and be informed by
       landscape character, adopt a landscape led approach, respect the local character
       and utilise appropriate architectural design including appropriate materials.
10. Policy SD7 of the SDLP permits development proposals where they conserve and
    enhance relative tranquillity including the direct impact of the proposal caused by
    changes in the visual and aural environment and indirect impacts such as vehicle
    movements.
11. The appeal site is located within Landscape Character Area (LCA) O1 Greensands
    Hills: Blackdown to Petworth Greensand Hills (Appendix O2 of the South Downs:
    Landscape Character Assessment 2020). Key landscape characteristics relevant
    to the appeal site are prominent hills formed from sandstones of the Lower
    Greensand group, rich biodiversity, extensive network of public rights of ways,
    significant amount of woodland cover and isolated farmsteads. Together these
    landscape characteristics contribute to the rural, tranquil character of the area. The
    land immediately surrounding the appeal site exhibits many of the landscape
    characteristics which define this National Landscape.
12. Landscape harms arising from the proposal would be significant. The appellant’s
    case rests on two limbs. The first, that the route of the track is consistent with that
    of a historic track which has served the farmstead for around 35 years is not born
    out by the evidence before me. Photographic evidence and historic mapping is
    inconclusive. I do not accept that the creation of this track would restore historic
    legibility.
13. The second limb identifies the proposed track is effectively the same as that
    constructed under permitted development. Whilst the road may have benefitted
    from this provision it only lasts for the duration of the construction period, and the
    provision is explicitly worded to prevent a precedent for permanent development.
    Its proposed resurfacing in materials sympathetic to its surroundings does not
    overcome the significant intrusion that this road makes into the landscape.
14. There are too many inconsistencies in the evidence provided to convince me that
    there has been an established access to the site from the southeast of the scale
    and permanence of the proposal for at least the past ten years to make the
    development lawful.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004640


15. The construction access track extends through an area which was previously
    undeveloped and has resulted in the loss of areas of woodland and introduced
    vehicular movements on a scale out of character with this enclosed and wooded
    area.
16. Views of the access track would be experienced from the entrance from Scotland
    Lane/Telegraph Hill and common land, although it is noted that aerial views are
    not directly representative of views experienced from the ground.
17. The proposed access track would also impact the tranquillity of the environment by
    creating a permanent vehicular access through an otherwise relatively undisturbed
    area. The creation of the construction track has already caused the loss of trees
    surrounding the access and introduced vehicular movements into an area where it
    would appear movements were limited. As a result, the proposed development
    would not conserve or enhance the landscape within which it sits.
18. The use of Fittleworth stone and the suggested design which includes a central
    grassed strip would be insufficient to mitigate for the harms arising from the
    scheme.
19. I have identified substantial harm to the character and appearance of the area
    from the proposal. The appellant highlights the benefits the proposed additional
    planting would bring to achieve Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) and that the proposed
    access would remove the need for an existing access through the Site of Scientific
    Interest (SSSI) from the west. However, whilst these would be benefits, the access
    through the SSSI is existing and no further harm would be caused to the SSSI
    from the proposal, whereas the proposed development would cause additional
    harm to the NP.
20. In conclusion, the proposed development to the access track would have a
    significant effect on the character, appearance and tranquillity of the SDNP and
    would not comply with policies SD1, SD4, SD5, SD7, SD11 of the SDLP, the
    Framework or further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty
    of the area.
21. Policy SD31 of the SDLP relates to new extensions and outbuildings and is
    therefore not considered relevant to the consideration of an access track on the
    site.
Garage
22. The proposed garage would be located in close proximity to the existing
    outbuildings on site and would be designed and constructed in materials reflective
    of the rural surroundings. Whilst the proposed garaging would sit outside the
    grouping of farm buildings on the site, the garaging would still relate to the existing
    outbuildings and would not significantly spread the extent of built development on
    the site. The scale of the garaging would appear subordinate to the main threshing
    barn and would sit within the established scale range of the outbuildings on the
    site. The garaging would be built into the landscape at a slightly lower ground
    level than the surrounding outbuildings and largely screened from wider public
    views due to woodland to the west and south and the existing farmstead buildings.
23. The proposal includes swapping land within the residential curtilage for land
    outside the residential curtilage to allow for the erection of the garage within the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004640


       residential curtilage. I have not been provided with a mechanism to secure the
       proposed land swap and accordingly this has only been given limited weight. I do
       not consider a condition to be an appropriate method of securing the land swap as
       the appellant would be required to surrender land, whereas a planning obligation
       would entail the appellant offering to give up the land. I have also not been
       provided with any discussion regarding how the appellant would be prevented from
       using the land currently in the residential curtilage as garden land which casts
       doubt on the enforceability of any condition.
24. In conclusion, the proposed garage would have no significant effect on the SDNP
    and would comply with policies SD1, SD4, SD5, SD12 and SD31 of the SDLP, the
    Framework and would further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural
    beauty of the area. However, I have not been provided with a mechanism to
    secure the swapping of the residential land and am not convinced this could
    reasonably be dealt with by condition. In the absence of a mechanism for securing
    the land swap the proposed garage would fall outside the residential curtilage.
Other Matters
25. Third party representations have been received relating to the perceived creation
    of an unlawful access and to the use of inappropriate materials such as tarmac in
    a sensitive location resulting in visual harm. Whilst I note the comments, the
    access track as currently laid was used as a construction access allowed as
    permitted development. The appeal scheme differs in the use of materials more
    sympathetic to its surroundings.
26. Whilst the loss of trees on the site may be regrettable, there is nothing to stop the
    appellant removing trees on his own land. I note, however, that trees have been
    removed on land outside the appellant’s ownership, however this is a civil matter.
    Despite this, the appellant has confirmed that no further trees need to be removed
    to allow for access to the site.
27. I have been directed towards the Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) calculations. The
    calculations are disputed as they do not appear to have been based on the
    baseline habitat prior to the access road being constructed under permitted
    development. As I have not found the proposed development overall to be
    acceptable, I have not considered the baseline calculations for BNG further in my
    decision.
28. It has been brought to my attention that there is an inactive reservoir close to the
    access and concern has been raised about the impact of the access on the
    reservoir. I have not been provided with substantive evidence that the access
    poses a real risk to the reservoir.
29. The proposal would improve accessibility to the site and this may generally help
    people with impaired mobility consistent with the Public Sector Equalities Duty.
    However, there is no evidence before me that anyone with such an impairment
    lives at the property or if they did, would have no other access options. When
    considered in the round, this does not outweigh the harm I have identified to the
    character and appearance of the site.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6004640


Conclusion
30. The proposal conflicts with the development plan when read as a whole and the
    material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it.




Claire Coles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
