Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004691
Land South of Woodview House, Perry Hill, Cliffe Woods ME3 7TX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Peter Lowe against the decision of Medway Council.
•    The application ref is MC/25/1361.
•    The development proposed is permission in principle for the construction of a minimum of one and a
     maximum of three self-build residential units.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing
       led development. The permission in principle consent route has two stages: the
       first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in
       principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the detailed
       development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these two
       stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. Accordingly, I sought the views of the parties regarding the
       implications of the new Framework on the appeal. I have taken these submissions
       into account in reaching my decision.
5.     The Council’s emerging plan has been referred to within the evidence, with the
       Council confirming it has completed the public consultation stages. However, it is
       at an early stage and I have no evidence before me regarding its examination,
       such as whether any interim findings have been made, if there have been any
       main modifications and subsequent consultations upon them or if the examining
       Inspectors have submitted their report. Given the lack of certainty over the final
       form of the policies in the emerging plan, I can only afford it very limited weight in
       accordance with Policy DM4 of the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004691


Main Issue
6.      The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
        the area.
Reasons
7.      The appeal site is situated outside of a defined settlement and within the
        countryside. The area features extensive open green fields with pleasant long-
        range views across them. Within the countryside, past the appeal site
        development is limited to countryside roads and sporadic low-density small
        clusters of buildings. Looking southwards from the appeal site lies the settlement
        of Cliffe Woods which provides a clear visual break to the rolling rural fields.
        Overall, there is a distinctive rural and open identity to the countryside.
8.      The appeal site comprises a green field with an open frontage onto Perry Hill, a
        single carriage countryside road. The site appears as part of the extensive network
        of rolling open fields, and its verdant and undeveloped nature positively contributes
        towards the rural and open landscape.
9.      The introduction of a residential development would result in a detrimental
        domestication of the appeal site where its distinct open, rural and undeveloped
        nature which contributes positively to the character and appearance of the area
        would be lost. Whilst the countryside features small individual clusters of
        development, the proposal would result in the encroachment of development along
        Perry Hill towards Cliffe Woods, diminishing the clearly perceptible undeveloped
        open gap between the rural development within the countryside, including the
        adjacent property Woodview house, and the edge of Cliffe Woods. Therefore, the
        existence of other clusters of development within the wider countryside would not
        justify the location of the appeal proposal which harshly contrasts with the open
        fields bounding Cliffe Woods.
10. In addition, the proposal would develop part of the rural space between Cliffe
    Woods and Cliffe. This would result in physical and visual coalescence between
    the settlements. However, given the small scale of the proposal it would only be a
    limited effect in this regard.
11. I understand that a number of previous appeals within the wider blue line area
    have been dismissed at appeal1. Unlike the scheme before me, these schemes
    fronted onto Merryboys Road from the north. Nevertheless, the respective
    Inspectors in these cases raised concerns regarding the effect on the character
    and appearance of the area in dismissing the appeals. For the reasons given, the
    appeal proposal fronting onto Perry Hill would not overcome these concerns.
12. Therefore, whilst the overall design of the development would be determined at the
    TDC stage, I conclude that a residential development of one to three dwellings at
    the location of the appeal site would, in principle, result in significant harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. The development would therefore conflict
    with Policies S1, S2, BNE1, BNE25(i) and BNE47 of the Medway Local Plan
    (2003) (LP) and Policy SUSDEV 1 of the Cliffe and Cliffe Woods Neighbourhood
    Plan (2023) (NP). These policies, amongst other matters seek to ensure
    development respects the visual amenity of the surrounding area, maintains and

1
    APP/A2280/W/20/3245079, APP/A2280/W/21/3285742 & APP/A2280/W/21/3288801


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
Appeal Decision 6004691


         improves environmental quality and wherever possible enhances the character,
         amenity and functioning of the countryside. In addition, where a development is
         served by a rural lane development should ensure that there is no adverse effect
         upon the value of the lane in terms of its landscape and amenity and to not permit
         development proposals that would result in the visual or physical merging of Cliffe
         and Cliffe Woods.
13. The Council has referred to Policy H11 of the LP in its associated reason for
    refusal. However, I do not consider this policy to be directly relevant to the main
    issue of character and appearance as this policy relates to the rural settlement
    spatial strategy. The Council has confirmed that it considers this policy to be
    inconsistent with the Framework so would carry very limited weight in any case2.
Other Considerations
14. Policy S5 of the Framework sets out that only certain forms of development, as set
    out in the defined list of the policy should be approved outside settlements. In
    particular paragraph 1(j)(i) of Policy S5 identifies development that would benefit
    from Policy S5 includes that which would address an evidenced unmet need and
    where the development would be physically well-related to an existing settlement
    and be of a scale which can be accommodated taking into account the existing or
    proposed availability of infrastructure.
15. The evidence before me demonstrates that the Council cannot demonstrate a five-
    year housing land supply, with the evidence confirming a position of 3.1 years. In
    addition, the Council only achieved 60% in the most recent Housing Delivery Test
    results. As such, the first part of paragraph (j) is met. However, as described, the
    appeal proposal is set away from the defined edge of Cliffe Woods which is
    visually contained to the other side of Merryboys Road. The development would
    visually appear away from the settlement and as part of the countryside with an
    access from Perry Hill, a distinctly rural road. The development would therefore not
    appear physically well-related to Cliffe Woods and as such would not meet
    paragraph 1(j)(i) of Policy S5.
16. The appeal site falls within the zone of influence for a designated habitats site. As
    the competent authority, had I had been minded to allow the appeal following a
    consideration of the main issue, it would have been necessary to undertake an
    appropriate assessment. However, as I am dismissing the appeal for other
    reasons, it is not necessary as the Habitats Regulations indicate that an
    Appropriate Assessment is only required when the competent authority is minded
    to grant consent. I therefore do not need to consider this matter further as it does
    not impact the outcome of the appeal.
17. The Housing and Planning Act (2016) prescribes a statutory duty for the Council to
    give enough permissions in respect of serviced plots of land to meet the demand
    for self-build and custom housebuilding arising in each base period. The parties
    agree that the Council is failing to meet its statutory duty to give enough
    permissions of serviced plots of land. The evidence of the appellant sets out that
    the shortfall is between 93 – 109 plots. The Council has not contested these
    figures, and I see no reason to reach a different conclusion. Given the narrow
    range in the shortfall, it is not determinative for me to reach a conclusion on the
    specific number of plots. As insufficient permissions have been granted by the
2
    Annex A of the Framework


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004691


       Council to meet demand in accordance with the statutory duty, this is a material
       consideration in favour of granting permission.
18. My attention has been drawn to a historic appeal at the site for three stable
    buildings which was allowed at appeal3. However, this previous appeal for single
    storey stable buildings, which the previous Inspector noted had no associated hard
    standing, would not be comparable in terns to its effect on the character and
    appearance of the area to a residential development of one to three dwellings and
    the associated paraphernalia.
19. A number of allowed appeal decisions have been referred to by the appellant
    relating to schemes they consider to be comparable to the appeal proposal4,
    including appeals for self-build housing outside of settlements. However, these
    examples are situated within different physical context to the appeal site where I
    have identified specific in principle harm owing to the specific location of the site.
    In addition, as addressed above, the provision of the units as self-build is a matter
    in favour of granting permission which I account for in my balance below.
20. Major development schemes approved by the Council around Cliffe Woods have
    also been referred to by the appellant5. However, the evidence shows that these
    are also not directly comparable owing to the differing scales of the proposals. The
    evidence also demonstrates that these developments are also not within the
    relative proximity of the appeal site and are set closer to the existing boundary of
    Cliffe Woods so are also not directly comparable to the appeal proposal in this
    regard. Each development should be assessed on its individual merits which I
    have done so, and the existence of these appeal proposals and planning
    permissions does not mitigate or otherwise justify the harms that I have identified.
21. I note that no objections have been received from neighbours. However, the lack
    of objections does not equate to a lack of harm.
Planning Obligation
22. A unilateral undertaking (UU) has been submitted which restricts the
    commencement of development, following the granting of TDC, until details have
    been submitted to the Council demonstrating how the proposal will be delivered as
    self-build housing. This would be necessary, relevant and reasonable to ensure
    the appeal proposal is indeed delivered as a self-build scheme. I am satisfied that
    the UU has been drafted sufficiently precisely to make the obligations capable of
    being complied with and enforced. It therefore meets the tests as set out in Policy
    DM6 of the Framework. I can therefore place significant weight on the obligation.
Planning Balance
23. The proposed development is not in accordance with the aforementioned policies
    of the LP and NP. Annex A of the Framework sets out development plan policies
    which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies of the
    Framework should be given very limited weight.
24. In relation to matters of character and appearance, LP Policies S1, S2, BNE1,
    BNE25 criteria (i) and BNE47 and NP Policy SUSDEV1 are broadly consistent with

3
  APP/A2280/A/08/2090410
4
  APP/A2280/W/21/3266477, APP/R1845/W/21/3284761, APP/T0355/W/22/3309281, APP/T0355/W/23/3314990
5
  LPA refs MC/23/0531, MC/21/1694 and MC/24/0279


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
Appeal Decision 6004691


        sections 14 and 19 of the Framework, in particular Framework Policy DP3 which
        seeks to ensure development proposals respond to their context so that they
        integrate with and enhance their surroundings and Policy N2 which seeks for
        proposals to contribute positively to the natural environment by considering the
        landscape character and the natural beauty of the countryside, and identify
        opportunities for those qualities to be conserved or enhanced. On this basis the
        conflict with these policies carries significant weight against the development and
        the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole.
25. It has been brought to my attention that LP Policy BNE25 was found to be
    inconsistent with the Framework by the Inspector in a previous appeal6. However,
    in this case Policy BNE25 was being applied in relation to the location of the
    development outside of a settlement boundary and the spatial approach of the
    development plan, rather than matters relating to character and appearance as is
    the case for this appeal where I have found criteria (i) of the policy to be consistent
    with the Framework in this regard.
26. The proposal would not meet any of the categories set out in Policy S5 of the
    Framework. Paragraph 4 advises that such development should only be approved
    in exceptional circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would
    substantially outweigh the adverse effects, including to the character of the
    countryside.
27. The proposal would provide one to three self-build dwellings. Policy HO7 sets out
    that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which
    will contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community, which the scheme would do. It would also lead to a small and time
    limited economic benefit during the construction phase, as well as some limited
    social and economic benefits resulting from future occupiers.
28. However, the proposal results in significant harm to the character and appearance
    of the area. This would result in conflicts with Policy DP3 and N2 of the
    Framework. Of particular note is paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 which advises that
    development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict
    with paragraph 1 of the policy, which the development would do so as it would not
    integrate with and enhance its surroundings.
29. Whilst the provision of one to three self-build dwellings would provide important
    benefits, particularly given the Council’s housing land supply position, Housing
    Delivery Test result and it not meeting its self-build and custom housing duty,
    these benefits would not substantially outweigh the significant adverse effects to
    the character and appearance of the area brought by the development.
    Exceptional circumstances as required by paragraph 4 of Policy S5 do not exist.
Conclusion
30. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.

C Housden
INSPECTOR

6
    APP/A2280/W/21/3288801


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
