Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 May 2026
by E Fawcett BA (Jt Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004752
10 Dew Lane, Ormesby TS7 9AR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Malik against the decision of Redcar and Cleveland Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is R/2025/0238/VC.
•    The application sought planning permission for two storey detached dwelling including associated
     access and relocation of existing garage for 10 Dew Lane (resubmission) without complying with a
     condition attached to planning permission Ref R/2021/0639/RS, dated 17 March 2022.
•    The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby permitted shall be
     carried out in accordance with the following approved plans:
     - Location plan received by the Local Planning Authority on 26/07/2021
     - Proposed site plan - AMENDED 17/02/2022 received by the Local Planning Authority on
     17/02/2022
     - Proposed plans and elevations - proposed garage amended 21/02/2022 received by the Local
     Planning Authority on 21/02/2022
     - Location of trees plan received by the Local Planning Authority on 17/02/2022
     - Proposed elevations received by the Local Planning Authority on (date not entered)
     - Proposed floor plans received by the Local Planning Authority on 26/07/2021
•    The reason given for the condition is: To accord with the terms of the planning application.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issues
2.    Planning permission was granted in 2022 for a 2-storey detached dwelling with an
      associated access, including the relocation of an existing garage (the original
      permission). The application form indicates that the development has commenced
      but is not complete and I observed this to be the case during my site visit. The
      initial works, in respect of the dwelling, do not correspond to the approved plans
      (condition 2 of the original permission) and the appellant now wishes to amend the
      approved plans.
3.    The site is located within 6 kilometres of the Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast
      Special Protection Area (the SPA) and Ramsar site. These are afforded protection
      under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 as amended
      (the Habitats Regulations). Although not forming part of the Council’s reason for
      refusal, as an application pursuant to Section 73 of the Town and Country
      Planning Act (the Act) would result in the grant of a new planning permission, it is
      incumbent upon me as the competent authority to consider whether the proposal
      would be likely to have a significant effect on the integrity of the SPA and Ramsar

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004752


      site. As the main parties have been afforded the opportunity to make
      representations on this matter, neither party would be prejudiced by my
      consideration of the effect of the proposal on the SPA and Ramsar site in the
      determination of this appeal.
4.    The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. There are no substantive changes in respect
      of the main issues and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
      consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework. References hereafter are to
      the August 2026 version.
5.    The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
           •   the integrity of the SPA and Ramsar Site with regard to nutrient neutrality;
           •   the integrity of the SPA and Ramsar Site with regard to recreational use;
               and
           •   the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring residential properties
               with regard to privacy, daylight, sunlight and noise.
Reasons
Integrity of the SPA and Ramsar Site with Regard to Nutrient Neutrality
6.    The Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast SPA and Ramsar site consist of a complex
      of discrete coastal and wetland habitats centred on the Tees estuary. The habitats
      provide feeding and roosting opportunities for large numbers of waterbirds, which
      includes Little Tern and Sandwich Tern, wintering Red Knot and Redshank and an
      assemblage of over 20,000 wintering waterbirds. The maintenance and restoration
      of these habitats and species is the core conservation objective for the SPA and
      Ramsar site.
7.    One of the main issues preventing this objective from being met, relates to the
      increase in pollutants and nutrients such as nitrates, which affect water quality and
      threaten the ecosystem of the coastal and wetland habitats. As the appeal site lies
      within the catchment for the SPA and Ramsar site, proposals resulting in an
      increase in the number of people staying overnight would also increase the
      amount of wastewater discharged. This has the potential to harm the habitats
      through increased nutrient inputs. It is therefore likely that the proposal, taken both
      in isolation and cumulatively, would have a significant adverse effect on the
      integrity of the SPA and Ramsar site.
8.    In these circumstances, the Habitats Regulations require that an Appropriate
      Assessment (AA) is undertaken. Planning permission may only be granted where
      it can be ascertained that the proposal will not adversely affect the integrity of the
      SPA and Ramsar site. In reaching that conclusion, consideration may be given to
      mitigation measures secured through conditions or other restrictions.
9.    The potential effects of nutrient enrichment on the qualifying features of the SPA
      and Ramsar site were not assessed when the original permission was granted.
      This issue was identified by Natural England during the consultation undertaken as
      part of the current appeal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6004752


10. Natural England has advised that a nutrient mitigation strategy should be provided,
    incorporating details of the proposed mitigation measures, their long-term
    management and monitoring arrangements, and the means by which they would
    be secured and funded in perpetuity. No such mitigation strategy has been
    provided by the appellant. Consequently, I cannot ascertain beyond reasonable
    scientific doubt that the proposal would not adversely affect the integrity of the
    SPA and Ramsar site, either alone or in combination with other plans or projects.
11. Having regard to the nature of the proposal, which would provide a single dwelling,
    and the modest scale of the development, there are no imperative reasons of
    overriding public interest which would justify granting permission. Consequently,
    the requirements of the Habitats Regulations would not be met.
12. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would have an adverse effect
    on the integrity of the Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast SPA and Ramsar Site. It
    would therefore conflict with the requirements of the Habitats Regulations in
    addition to Policy N4 of the Redcar and Cleveland Local Plan (2018)
    (the Local Plan), which prioritises the protection of important nature conservation
    sites, including the Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast SPA and Ramsar site,
    ensuring that proposals do not result in adverse effects on their integrity.
Integrity of the SPA and Ramsar Site with Regard to Recreational Use
13. Increased pressure to access the SPA and Ramsar site also has the potential to
    affect the special conservation interest and prevent the core conservation objective
    being met. The consequence of human disturbance, including dog walking, can be
    increased bird mortality, or a reduction in the amount of energy a bird has to fly
    back to its breeding grounds, through harm to their habitats and food source. This
    has the potential to lead to a reduction in the population and/or the distribution
    patterns of species associated with the SPA and Ramsar site.
14. As the proposal would lead to an increase in people living in the area, it follows
    that there would be an increase in the number of visitors accessing the SPA and
    Ramsar site for recreational purposes. When considered alone or in combination
    with other plans or projects, it would have the potential to result in likely significant
    effects on the SPA and Ramsar Site. Consequently, as the competent authority, it
    is necessary for me to undertake an AA.
15. Evidence has been provided to show that the appellant made a financial
    contribution of £200 to the Council towards the strategic mitigation measures
    identified in the Teesmouth and Cleveland Coast SPA Recreation Management
    Plan (Management Plan), when the original permission was granted. Although this
    contribution was not secured by a planning obligation, I am satisfied that it was
    paid to the Council for that purpose and there is no evidence before me to suggest
    that it would not be used in this way. Natural England has confirmed that the
    mitigation in the Management Plan is sufficient to avoid an adverse impact to the
    integrity of the designated sites arising from recreational disturbance, and I see no
    reason to reach a different conclusion.
16. I therefore conclude that, subject to mitigation, the proposed development would
    not adversely affect the integrity of the SPA and Ramsar site and accords with
    Policy N4 of the Local Plan in this respect.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6004752


Living Conditions
17. The appeal site comprises part of the rear garden of 10 Dew Lane and shares
    boundaries with a number of residential properties on Cleveland Close and
    Orchard Way. The proposal would reposition the dwelling approved by the original
    permission approximately 4 metres to the west.
18. Nonetheless, the proposed dwelling would be located a similar distance from the
    boundary with 11 Cleveland Close (No 11) to that approved by the original
    permission, with just 1 of the 2 dormer windows in the side elevation directly
    oriented towards No 11. The proposal would be separated by around 21 metres
    between the dormer window and the windows in the rear wall of No 11, thereby
    maintaining an adequate level of privacy for the occupants of No 11. This
    separation, and the proposed dwelling’s position to the north of No 11, would also
    ensure that the proposal would not result in a loss of daylight or sunlight to the
    property.
19. The proposed dwelling would be situated directly to the rear of the dwelling at
    15 Cleveland Close (No 15), which is located slightly closer to the boundary with
    the appeal property than the dwelling at No 11. The Council’s Design of
    Residential Areas SPD (2011) sets out that the minimum separation distance
    usually required is 21 metres between the fronts and/or backs of dwellings and 13
    metres from the rear or front wall to the side wall of an adjacent property. As the
    side wall of the proposed dwelling would face the rear wall of this neighbouring
    property, it would not conflict with the recommended distances.
20.   Nevertheless, the position of a side dormer window would result in direct views,
      which could lead to a loss of privacy of the neighbouring occupiers. The appellant
      has confirmed that this window could be fitted with obscure glazing, and a large
      window in the front wall would ensure that the bedroom received sufficient light
      and outlook. This could be secured by condition to ensure that the window was
      fitted with fixed obscure glazing, which could be enforced by the Council.
      Consequently, the use of the obscure glazing would ensure that the privacy of the
      occupiers of No 15 was adequately safeguarded.
21.   Towards the northern boundary of the site, the proposed dwelling would
      incorporate a first-floor dormer window facing west in the front elevation. The
      revised position of the dwelling would result in this window being closer to the
      boundary with 17A Orchard Way (No 17A). Whilst there are no windows in the
      main side wall of No 17A, a ground-floor window faces into the property’s garden
      and towards the proposed dwelling. However, the proposed dormer window would
      not face directly towards this window or the garden at No 17A. Consequently, the
      offset relationship means that direct views into the ground floor window and the
      garden would be restricted, and the level of privacy experienced by the occupiers
      of this neighbouring property would be adequate within this type of residential
      environment.
22. The setback position of the proposed dwelling and the separation provided by the
    garden of 19 Orchard Way (No 19) would ensure that an appropriate level of
    natural light would still be able to enter the internal spaces at this property,
    preventing them becoming dark and unwelcoming. The proposed dormer window
    in the front elevation would also facilitate views into the rear garden of No 19.
    However, given the length of No 19’s rear garden, and the comparatively small


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6004752


      area visible from the proposed dwelling, adequate levels of privacy would be
      maintained for the occupiers of No 19 when using their garden.
23. The proposed use would remain residential within an established residential area.
    Any noise generated by future occupants would therefore be typical of the locality
    and would not be likely to harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
    Whilst construction activities would likely give rise to some temporary disturbance,
    this would be limited in duration and could be appropriately controlled through a
    condition restricting construction hours, were I to allow this appeal.
24. Taking the above into account, I conclude that the proposed development would
    not harm the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring residential
    properties with regard to privacy, daylight, sunlight and noise. Accordingly, the
    development would comply with Local Plan Policy SD4, which seeks to ensure,
    amongst other matters, that development would not have a significant adverse
    impact on the amenities (living conditions) of occupiers of nearby land and
    buildings.
Other Considerations
25. The proposal would deliver a new dwelling within an accessible location and would
    make a small contribution towards housing supply in the area. There would be
    some economic benefits during construction, however these would be short term.
    Further economic benefits would also arise from additional spending in the area by
    future occupants of the dwelling, although the economic support to the area arising
    from the appeal proposal would be relatively small given the scale of the
    development.
26. Planning permission exists for a dwelling at the appeal site, and the proposal
    would neither increase the number of dwellings nor the scale of the development.
    Consequently, the level of wastewater discharge generated by the proposal is
    unlikely to be greater than that associated with the original permission. I accept
    that this ‘fall-back’ scheme could be delivered and I afford this significant weight.
    However, notwithstanding this position, the application of the Habitat Regulations
    indicates that the proposed development must not be permitted, and I must adopt
    a precautionary approach in respect of this matter.
27. The lack of objections from the Council’s highways, environmental protection or
    arboricultural officers does not justify the grant of planning permission.
28. Interested parties have queried whether an application under Section 73 of the Act
    was the appropriate mechanism to consider the changes to the original
    permission. Although the proposal would reposition the dwelling, it would still fall
    within the scope of Section 73 of the Act as it does not limit alterations to minor
    amendments where the description of development has not changed. Whilst
    concerns have also been raised regarding the accuracy of the plans in respect of
    the works undertaken at the site, the appeal has been determined based on the
    submitted plans.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
29. I have found that the proposed development would not harm the living conditions
    of the occupiers of neighbouring residential properties and, subject to mitigation,
    would not adversely affect the integrity of the SPA and Ramsar Site with regard to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6004752


      recreational use. However, I cannot ascertain beyond reasonable scientific doubt
      that the proposed development would not adversely affect the integrity of the SPA
      and Ramsar site, in respect to nutrient neutrality. Consequently, the proposed
      development conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole.
30. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. Policy HO7 gives substantial
    weight to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting
    evidenced accommodation needs of the community. However, there is no
    substantive evidence before me which identifies such a specific need for the type
    of accommodation proposed. Nevertheless, the proposed development would add
    generally to the overall supply of homes in line with the aims of the Framework,
    and I therefore afford this benefit moderate weight given its small scale. The
    economic benefits identified would be small and therefore attract a
    correspondingly small amount of weight.
31. However, in providing an additional dwelling, the proposed development would
    adversely affect the integrity of the SPA and Ramsar site. In such circumstances,
    Policy N6 of the Framework indicates that proposals should be refused. I therefore
    find the benefits of the proposed development would be substantially outweighed
    by its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    of the Framework. Consequently, Policy S4 of the Framework does not point to
    permission being granted in this instance.
32. There are no material considerations, including the Framework, to suggest the
    decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
    Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to all other relevant matters,
    the appeal should be dismissed.

E Fawcett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
