Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by E Worley BA (Hons) Dip EP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004446
Land at Rutt Lane, Ivybridge PL21 0ZB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Aldi Stores Limited against the decision of South Hams District Council.
•   The application Ref is 2363/24/FUL.
•   The development proposed is a new retail food store (Use Class E) together with associated works
    including the provision of parking and servicing area, access works and landscaping.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a new retail food
   store (Use Class E) together with associated works including the provision of
   parking and servicing area, access works and landscaping at Land at Rutt Lane,
   Ivybridge PL21 0ZB in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   2363/24/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description in the banner heading and decision above is taken from the
   application form, however I have omitted the superfluous words that are not acts of
   development.
3. A range of updated plans and additional supporting information was submitted as
   part of the appeal. As this does not materially alter the appeal proposal; I have
   taken these into consideration in determining the appeal.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
   the occupiers of neighbouring properties in Elm Park, having particular regard to
   outlook.
Reasons
5. The appeal site comprises a parcel of undeveloped grassland, with mature trees
   and hedge planting along the eastern and southern boundaries and a central row of
   mature trees. Ground levels rise across the site by approximately 8m from the
   south west to the north east corner. The site is bounded by Exeter Road and Rutt
   Lane on 2 sides, with new residential development situated to the north and west.
   Dwellings on the opposite side of Hazel Lane, are orientated to face towards the
   appeal site, separated from it by the intervening road, whereas the rear and side
   boundaries of those in Elm Park, which include 19 Hazel Lane, which lies at the
   entrance to the cul-de-sac, abut the appeal site.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004446


6. Permission is sought for the construction of a food store and associated
   development including car parking and service areas, access to which would be
   from Rutt Lane. The proposed building would be single storey, with a monopitch
   roof to the main part of the building and a flat roof section to the rear. The rear
   elevation of the building, which would be approximately 60m in length and 3.6m in
   height, would run parallel with the site boundary, set in a short distance from it. A
   delivery bay and plant compound to the north of the store would be enclosed by a
   3m timber acoustic fence, with parking to the front and side of the building. Due to
   the existing site levels, the proposal includes cut and fill across the site to level the
   land.
7. The Council’s refusal reason refers to the effect of the proposal upon the living
   conditions of the occupiers of the properties in Elm Park, having regard to outlook,
   given the scale and siting of the proposed new food store. The residential
   properties to the west of the site include newly constructed 2 storey terraced and
   semi-detached dwellings, some of which have accommodation within the roof
   space served by dormer windows. They are arranged in a staggered row, with the
   ground levels falling away from the junction of Elm Park and Hazel Lane towards
   the end of the cul-de-sac. Due to the site’s topography, and necessary levelling of
   the land, the finished floor levels of the building would be between 0.3m and 4.5m
   above the finished floor levels of the dwellings which abut the site at 19 Hazel Lane
   No. 19), which lies at the end of the row and 1-10 Elm Park. Consequently, and as
   a result of the position and overall scale of the building, including its considerable,
   bulky expanse, it would have a notable presence in views from the rear of the
   neighbouring properties to the west of the site and their gardens.
8. The dwellings located on higher ground near the entrance to Elm Park, including
   No.19 and numbers 1-3 Elm Park, benefit from a combination of factors that
   mitigate the potential impacts of the development. These include the relative
   differences in finished floor levels, and subsequent height of the building at this
   point, the siting of the proposed building offset from the side and rear elevations of
   No. 19 and 1 Elm Park, and separation distances between the proposed building
   and the neighbouring dwellings at numbers 2 and 3 Elm Park, which exceed 21m.
   As such, the proposal would not give rise to significant harm to the living conditions
   of the occupiers of these properties through loss of outlook or an increased sense
   of enclosure.
9. Although the finished floor levels of the proposed building would increase by a
   greater degree relative to that of the dwellings towards the end of the row, given the
   separation distance between the proposed building and the rear elevations of the
   dwellings at 9 and 10 Elm Park and intervening car parking area, the effects on the
   outlook of the occupiers of these properties would also be less pronounced. In
   addition, despite the proximity of the semi-detached dwellings at 11 and 12 Elm
   Park to the site boundary, they are orientated so that views towards the proposed
   development from the front elevation of these properties would be at an oblique
   angle and any effects on outlook would thus be similarly limited.
10. However, the properties which back onto the site including numbers 4-8 Elm Park
    are set back further from the highway to the front into the plots. Accordingly, they
    have rear gardens which are shorter in depth, which would result in separation
    distances of between 17.3m and 20.4m between the rear elevation of the existing
    dwellings and the proposed building. In addition to the modest length, the rear
    gardens of these properties are terraced, the upper section of which is at a higher

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004446


     level and are largely enclosed by close-boarded fencing, with a stone wall forming
     the rear boundary to the adjoining land, with the exception of 8 Elm Park, which has
     a close boarded fence in the foreground of the Devon bank wall. This arrangement
     provides a strong sense of enclosure to the rear gardens and means that the extent
     of existing outward views from the ground floor windows and lower-level sections of
     the gardens are relatively constrained. Nevertheless, due to its height, elevated
     position, and proximity to the site boundary, the upper part of the rear elevation of
     the proposed building would be likely to be readily discernible as a sizeable
     structure in views from the rear of 4-8 Elm Park, above the existing boundary
     treatment.
11. The proposal would exceed the recommended minimum distance between a
    habitable room window and blank facing wall, as set out in the Plymouth & South
    West Devon Joint Local Plan 2014-2034 Supplementary Planning Document,
    adopted July 2020 (SPD)1. Even if the advice in the SPD is not strictly applicable
    to this type of development, it nonetheless provides some useful guidance. While I
    appreciate the commercial scale of the proposed development, given the narrow
    width of the rear gardens, the proposed building would not generally be perceived
    in its entirety, from most viewpoints. Consequently, the resulting relationship would
    not be wholly unlike that often experienced between neighbouring residential
    properties, having regard to the height of the built form and separation distances.
    Furthermore, views from upper floors would be less constrained.
12. As well as the feature cladding in graduated green tones to the rear elevation of the
    building, the intervening space between it and the rear boundaries of the properties
    would include an embankment with a landscape buffer comprising a grassed strip,
    planting of varied heights and spacing, so as not to appear unduly dominant itself,
    and timber fencing to the foreground of the building. Together, these elements
    would create a layered buffer that would help to break up the perceived mass of the
    building and soften its appearance.
13. As such, although the development would introduce considerable built form, it
    would not appear as an excessively dominant feature so as to have an unduly
    overbearing presence. Consequently, subject to the mitigation measures proposed,
    it would not result in a materially harmful impact on the outlook or an unacceptable
    sense of enclosure to the occupiers of the properties at 4-8 Elm Park as a result of
    its height, length or ground level.
14. Concern is also expressed by interested parties regarding the effect of the
    development upon the living conditions of the occupiers of the adjoining properties
    in Elm Park with particular regard to light and privacy. The appellants Daylight and
    Sunlight Effects Report2 concludes that the proposal would satisfy BRE guidelines3
    and the occupiers of the neighbouring properties would not experience a material
    loss of light or sunlight to windows in their properties or gardens. In the absence of
    any clear counter evidence to contradict these findings, I have no reason conclude
    otherwise.
15. The proposed rear elevation of the building does not include any openings above
    ground floor level. Furthermore, the proposed 1.8m high timber close boarded
    fence to the side boundary, a short distance from the rear wall of the building and

1
  Appendix 1: Residential extensions and alterations
2
  Daylight and Sunlight Effects Report (Neighbouring Properties) by Delva Patman Redler LLP dated 9 July 2024
3
  BRE Report 209, ‘Site Layout Planning for Daylight and Sunlight: A guide to good practice’ (2022)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6004446


        car parking spaces, would ensure there would be no direct overlooking towards the
        adjacent properties in Elm Park from activity which may take place on these parts
        of the site. In addition, due to the position, layout and size of the proposed
        development, it would not have any tangible effects upon the outlook, light or
        privacy of the occupiers of properties on the opposite side of Hazel Lane, which
        look towards the appeal site.
16. Subject to the imposition of planning conditions regarding the operating times of the
    food store and to secure an appropriate lighting scheme of the site, the Council
    raises no objection to the proposal in terms of nuisance in these regards. Based on
    the evidence before me, including the findings of the appellant’s Environmental
    Noise Assessment4, I have no reason to reach a different view. Nor is there any
    compelling evidence that the proposal would lead to unacceptable effects in terms
    of odours, air quality or pollution. While the construction process is likely to be
    disruptive it would be relatively short-term and is not a reason to withhold
    permission. Moreover, any noise and other nuisance during this period can be
    mitigated to a degree through a condition to secure a Construction Management
    Plan.
17. Concern has been raised by interested parties regarding the potential increase in
    anti-social behaviour, including littering and vandalism, and crime and disorder
    associated with the proposed development, and subsequent effects this may have
    upon the wellbeing of residents. I note that the Council do not raise an objection on
    these grounds and that the measures set out in the appellant’s Secure by Design
    Strategy are supported by the Designing Out Crime Officer. Consequently, there is
    no particular evidence before me to demonstrate that anti-social behaviour and
    crime, which are ultimately a matter for the relevant authorities in specific
    instances, would be attributed to the proposed development or that the proposed
    retail store would give rise to significant harm in these regards.
18. In light of the foregoing considerations, the proposed development would not harm
    the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties in Elm Park, having
    particular regard to outlook. Accordingly, it would not conflict with the aims of Policy
    DEV1 of the Plymouth & South West Devon Joint Local Plan 2014-2034, adopted
    March 2019 (JLP), in so far as it requires development proposals to safeguard the
    health and the amenity of local communities, by, among other things, ensuring that
    new development provides for satisfactory outlook for existing residents.
Other Matters
19. The Council is satisfied that there are no sequentially preferable suitable or
    available sites and that the proposal would not have an adverse impact on the
    vitality and viability of Ivybridge, as demonstrated by the appellant’s Retail Impact
    Assessment and Sequential Tests. In addition, the proposal would reflect the
    expectations set out in Policy TTV6 of the JLP in relation to the delivery of local
    convenience retailing facilities on land to the east of Ivybridge. Based on the
    evidence before me, I have no reason to reach a different view.
20. While I appreciate there is existing food shopping provision in the area, the
    proposal would nonetheless offer benefits in terms of increased choice,
    convenience and accessibility. It would also provide economic benefits through the


4
    Environmental Noise Assessment of a proposed Aldi store, by Sharpes Redmore dated May 2024


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decision 6004446


     creation of additional job opportunities, including part time and flexible posts, both
     during the construction phase and post completion.
21. Concern is expressed regarding highway safety due to increased traffic generation
    from the proposed development, including customers and delivery vehicles,
    together with construction traffic. However, the Highway Authority has raised no
    objection to the proposal having regard to the capacity of the surrounding highway
    network and highway safety, subject to the provision of off-site highway
    improvement works, including a toucan crossing and bus stops with shelters on
    Exeter Road, to be secured through a section 278 agreement, and financial
    contributions towards a local cycle route and traffic regulation orders secured via a
    completed planning obligation. Such works would ensure the safe flow of traffic and
    that the food store would be accessible to all users. Thus, while I am mindful of
    concern expressed by residents, particularly during busy periods at school times
    and when rugby games are taking place, I have not been presented with any
    compelling evidence to draw me to reach an alternative conclusion.
22. Providing the development is carried out in accordance with the recommendations
    set out in the appellant’s Ecological Impact Assessment (EIA) and subject to the
    implementation of a sensitive lighting scheme and suitable replacement planting,
    any potential effects upon wildlife and biodiversity, including protected species,
    would be suitably mitigated. The proposal would also provide 10% biodiversity net
    gain, as required by the statutory pre-commencement biodiversity gain condition,
    through the purchase of off-site habitat units. There is no substantive evidence to
    contradict the contents of the EIA, and these matters can be dealt with by planning
    conditions.
23. In addition, the Council’s submissions indicate that, although the appeal site is
    within 10kms of the Dartmoor and Plymouth Sound and Estuaries Special Areas of
    Conservation, subject to a Construction Management Plan, and having regard to
    the scale of the development, no adverse impacts would occur to these designated
    sites. Furthermore, while the site is within the Impact Risk Zone of the South
    Dartmoor SSSI, it does not meet any criteria that could cause potential harm to the
    site.
24. I have considered concerns regarding the potential for the development to
    contribute to an urban heat island effect due to the absence of shade including tree
    cover. However, no substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that
    the development would result in significant adverse effects in this regard.
    Consequently, I afford this concern limited weight in my assessment.
25. While the site falls within the Ivybridge Critical Drainage Area, the Lead Local Flood
    Authority indicate that, subject to a detailed surface water drainage strategy, which
    has been agreed in principle, the proposal would not exacerbate flooding in the
    area.
26. The proposal would inevitably alter the currently undeveloped nature of the site.
    However, given the site context, comprising the adjoining residential development,
    together with the overall height and scale of the development, including the use of
    sympathetic materials, and having regard to the proposed use of the site as a
    neighbourhood centre as shown indicatively on the Masterplan submitted as part of
    the outline application, it is considered that the proposal would not have an adverse
    effect on the character and appearance of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6004446


27. In addition, the development would appear as part of the established built-up area
    of Ivybridge in views from the Dartmoor National Park (NP). Thus, it would not
    appear incongruous or give rise to any tangible harm to the setting of the NP and
    would be consistent with the duty to further the purpose of conserving and
    enhancing the natural beauty of the NP.
28. It is a long-established principle that the planning system does not exist to protect
    private interests such as the value of land and property. In addition. any effects the
    proposed development may have in relation to estate management fees paid by
    local residents is a civil matter between the parties, to be resolved outside of the
    appeal process.
Conditions
29. The conditions set out in the accompanying schedule are based on those
    suggested by the Council, should the appeal be allowed. Where I agree the
    conditions are necessary, I have amended the wording, in the interests of precision
    and clarity, and to comply with advice in the Planning Practice Guidance. In
    addition to the standard condition relating to the commencement of the
    development, I have imposed a condition specifying the relevant drawings, in the
    interests of clarity.
30. Conditions are necessary to agree a Construction and Environmental Management
    Plan (CEMP) and Landscape and Ecological Management Plan (LEMP), to protect
    existing wildlife and ensure the appropriate on-going maintenance and
    management of landscaping and ecological features at the site. The condition
    pertaining to a CEMP is a pre-commencement condition to ensure appropriate
    measures are in place to protect wildlife from the outset of the development,
    including clearance work. While I am mindful that a Habitat Management and
    Maintenance Plan would be required to satisfy the statutory biodiversity net gain
    conditions, I cannot be certain this would include all areas of landscaping of the
    site. Moreover, in the absence of a LEMP, the suggested landscaping condition
    would not safeguard the planting in the long term.
31. A condition is necessary to secure a scheme for the management of surface water,
    to ensure that the development would not increase flood risk elsewhere. This is a
    pre-commencement condition as surface water drainage is an integral part of the
    development that may affect how it is constructed.
32. In the interests of public health and the living conditions of the occupiers of the
    surrounding properties, conditions to agree details of a remediation scheme to
    address any unexpected contamination, and to restrict delivery times, opening
    hours, noise and lighting are necessary. A Construction Management Plan is
    required to safeguard the living conditions of local residents and to prevent adverse
    impacts on the local road network during the construction phase. This is a pre-
    commencement condition so as to ensure measures are in place upon the
    commencement of the construction of the development.
33. Conditions to secure the provision of the access and parking facilities as shown on
    the approved plans, together with a review of street lighting along Rutt Lane,
    including any improvement works which may be required, are necessary in the
    interests of highway safety. I have not been provided with any compelling reason
    why the condition pertaining to works to the street lighting on Rutt Lane is required
    to be a pre-commencement condition, I have therefore amended the suggested

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6004446


     wording accordingly. For the same reason, I have imposed a condition to require
     the carrying out of off-site highway improvement works, in accordance with details
     to be submitted and agreed by the Council. As drafted, the Council’s suggested
     condition included a trigger linked to the provision of works outside the application
     site boundary. As this is beyond the scope of the permission, I have amended the
     wording to require the implementation of off-site works prior to the first operation of
     the food store, the precise details of which are to be agreed by the parties when the
     condition is discharged.
34. A condition is necessary to require the operation of the development in accordance
    with the Travel Plan, to encourage transport by means other than the private car. In
    the interests of the character and appearance of the area and the living conditions
    of the occupiers of the neighbouring properties, conditions are imposed to secure
    the soft landscaping of the site and to details of the materials to be used. To
    safeguard the existing trees to be retained a condition is necessary to agree an
    arboricultural method statement and tree protection plan. A condition to ensure the
    implementation carbon reduction measures, is necessary in accordance with the
    aims of Policy DEV32 of the JLP.
Conclusion
35. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

E Worley
INSPECTOR
SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
   of this decision.
2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with drawing
   nos:
     Site Location Plan dwg. no. 1000 Rev P03
     Proposed Site Plan dwg. no. 1300 Rev P13
     Proposed Hard Landscaping Materials dwg. no. 1310 Rev P06
     Proposed Boundary Treatment dwg no. 1320 P06
     Proposed Floor Plan dwg. no. 1350 Rev P04
     Proposed Roof Plan dwg. No. 1360 Rev P03
     Proposed Building Elevations dwg. no. 1400 Rev P06
     Proposed Contextual Elevations dwg. no. 1405 P09
     Proposed Contextual Elevations dwg. no. 1406 Rev P03
     Proposed Building Sections dwg. no. 1410 Rev P04
     Proposed Site Sections Sheet 1 dwg. no. 1415 Rev P05
     Proposed Site Sections Sheet 2 dwg. no. 1416 Rev P06
     Proposed Site Sections Sheet 3 dwg. no. 1417 Rev P06
     Proposed Site Sections Sheet 4 dwg. no. 1418 Rev P04
     Proposed Site Sections Sheet 2 dwg. no. 1419 Rev P05
     Proposed External Plant Sections dwg. no. 1420 Rev P03
     Proposed Building Materials dwg. no. 1700 Rev P03
     Hard Landscaping Materials dwg. no. 1701 Rev P01
     Proposed Street Furniture dwg. no. 1702 Rev P02

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6004446


     Proposed Boundary Treatment dwg. no. 1703 Rev P02
     EVCP Parking Space Detail dwg. no. AD5950 Rev P01

3) No development, including any vegetative clearance or groundworks, shall be
   carried out unless it is in accordance with a Construction and Ecological
   Management Plan (CEMP) that has been submitted to and agreed in writing by the
   local planning authority. The CEMP shall be generally in accordance with the
   measures set out within the Ecological Impact Assessment (dated July 2024) and
   Addendum (dated December 2024) by Tyler Grange and shall include details of:

     • how works will be carried out so as to minimise the impact on wildlife
       using the site, including but not limited to, reptiles, hedgehogs, bats and
       birds.

     • how trees will be inspected for the presence of bats, and the steps that
       will be taken in the event that bats are found, including the provision for
       bats boxes needed to accommodate discovered bats.

     • training and induction for construction operatives to be carried out by a
       suitably qualified ecologist to make them aware of working practises to
       avoid harming wildlife, particularly bats.

     • details of any translocation programmes necessary to move wildlife
       discovered at the site, including hedgehogs and reptiles.

     • how the CEMP will be monitored, including provision for reporting its
       effectiveness.

     The measures in the approved CEMP shall be adhered to throughout the duration
     of the construction phase.

4) Prior to the first use of the food store hereby approved, a Landscape and
   Ecological Management Plan (LEMP) for the landscaped parts of the site shall be
   submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
   landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the approved LEMP thereafter
   in perpetuity.

5) Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved a surface
   water drainage scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
   planning authority. The scheme shall be generally in accordance with the Drainage
   Strategy and Flood Risk Assessment Ref.13281w0003e dated April 2025 by
   Craddys and shall include measures to prevent the run-off of surface water onto the
   highway. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
   surface water drainage scheme, which shall be managed and maintained
   thereafter.

6) Any contamination that is found during the construction of the development hereby
   permitted that was not previously identified shall be reported immediately to the
   local planning authority. Development on the part of the site affected shall be
   suspended until a risk assessment has been carried out and submitted to and
   approved in writing by the local planning authority. Where unacceptable risks are


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6004446


     found, the development on the affected part of the site shall not resume or continue
     until remediation and verification schemes have been carried out in accordance
     with details that shall first have been submitted to and approved in writing by the
     local planning authority.

7) Deliveries shall be taken at or despatched from the site only between 0700 and
   2300.

8) The retail store hereby approved shall only be open to the public between the
   hours of 0800 - 2200 Mondays - Saturdays and between the hours of 1000 - 1600
   on Sundays and Bank Holidays.

9) The noise rating level of any external plant installed and operated on the site
   shall not exceed 36dBa at the facade of the nearest noise sensitive dwellings
   between the hours of 2300 - 0700 and shall not exceed 40dBa at all other times. All
   measurements shall be made in accordance with BS4142:2014+A1(2019).

10) Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved a Construction
    Management Plan (CMP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
    planning authority. The approved CMP shall be adhered to throughout the
    construction period for the development.

11) Unless otherwise agreed by the discharge of other conditions attached to this
    permission, no external lighting other than that shown on the External Lighting
    Scheme ref. P186-1120-B shall be provided within the site.

12) No part of the development hereby approved shall be brought into its intended
    use until the access, parking facilities, cycle parking, commercial vehicle
    loading/unloading area, visibility splays, turning areas and access/parking
    drainage have been provided as shown on the approved plans and/or as agreed by
    other condition(s) attached to this permission. Thereafter these areas shall be
    retained for such purposes only.

13) Prior to the first use of the food store, a review of street lighting on Rutt Lane and a
    scheme to carry out any necessary tree pruning shall be submitted to and agreed in
    writing by the local planning authority. The approved works therein shall be carried
    out prior to the first use of the food store.

14) The retail store hereby approved shall operate in accordance with the measures
    and recommendations set out in the Travel Plan, Rev 1, by Entran, dated June
    2024.

15) Prior to the first use of the food store hereby approved, a scheme of off-site
    highway improvement works, as shown indicatively on drawings 3281-CDY-XX-XX-
    D-H-0012 Rev P05 and 13281-3281-CDY-XX-XX-D-H-0011 Rev P05, shall be
    submitted to approved in writing by the local planning authority. The works shall be
    implemented in accordance with the approved details prior to the first use of the
    food store.

16) All planting, seeding or turfing shown on the Detailed Soft Landscape Proposals
    Sheets 1-3dwg no. ref. 16067_P04 Rev F shall be carried out no later than the first


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6004446


     planting and seeding seasons following the first use of the food store. The
     trees/plants shall be protected and maintained; and any trees or plants which within
     a period of 5 years from the completion of the development die, are removed or
     become seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the next planting
     season with others of similar size and species. The landscape planting shall be
     maintained in accordance with the LEMP to be agreed through the discharge of
     condition 4.

17) Prior to the commencement of any construction activity on site, a scheme for the
    protection of the retained trees (the tree protection plan) and the appropriate
    working methods (the arboricultural method statement) in accordance with
    paragraphs 5.5 and 6.1 of British Standard BS 5837: Trees in relation to design,
    demolition and construction - Recommendations (or in an equivalent British
    Standard if replaced) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
    planning authority. The scheme for the protection of retained trees and hedges
    shall be carried out as approved.

18) Prior to the first use of the food store hereby approved, the carbon reduction
    measures set out in the Carbon Reduction and Energy Statement Rev 2 by Sol
    Environment, dated 19 June 2024, shall be fully implemented and operational, and
    shall remain operational for the lifetime of the development.

19) No development above ground level shall take place until details of the following
    have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority:

     a) materials (including the provision of samples where appropriate) to be used
        for all external walls and roofs of the building;
     b) details of the design, materials and external finish for all external doors and
        windows; and
     c) details of all hard surfacing and boundary treatments.

     The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
     details/samples and retained as such thereafter in perpetuity.


                                           ******end of conditions******




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            10
