Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal A: Appeal Ref: 6004363
Opposite 67 Sandgate Road, Folkestone CT20 1RY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Simon Warner of BT Telecommunications plc against the decision of
     Folkestone and Hythe District Council.
•    The application ref is 25/1919/FH.
•    The development proposed is proposed installation of 1no. new BT Street Hub, incorporating 2no.
     digital 75" LCD advert screens, and associated BT Phone Kiosk removals.

Appeal B: Appeal Ref: 6004364
Opposite 67 Sandgate Road, Folkestone CT20 1RY
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Simon Warner of BT Telecommunications plc against the decision of
     Folkestone and Hythe District Council.
•    The application ref is 25/1962/FH.
•    The advertisement proposed is proposed installation of 1no. new BT Street Hub, incorporating 2no.
     digital 75" LCD advert screens, and associated BT Phone Kiosk removals.

Decision
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
3.     Appeal A relates to the refusal of planning permission to install a BT Street Hub,
       whilst Appeal B relates to the refusal of express consent to display advertisements
       on the Street Hub. I have combined the appeals into a single decision letter as
       they are intrinsically linked and raise similar issues, however I have considered
       each on their individual merits.
4.     In respect of Appeal B, the Regulations require that decisions are made only in the
       interest of amenity and public safety. In reaching my decision on Appeal B, I have
       had regard to the development plan policies cited in the evidence, but only in so
       far as these are material to amenity and public safety considerations.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004363 & 6004364


5.     At the time of my visit, the phone kiosk situated within the site had been removed.
       Notwithstanding, I have assessed the proposal on the basis of the plans before
       me.
6.     I have taken the site address from the appellant’s appeal form as the application
       form only contained coordinates.
7.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. Accordingly, I sought the views of the parties on the implications of
       the new Framework on the appeal.
Main Issue
8.     The main issue is the effect of the proposals on amenity, character and
       appearance with particular regard to the setting of the Folkestone Leas and Bayle
       Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons
9.     The appeal site is situated outside of but in close proximity to and within the setting
       of the CA. Policy HE6 paragraph 1 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) identifies that when considering the potential effect of a development
       proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
       should be given to the asset’s conservation.
10. The significance of the CA lies in its historical and architectural interests as an
    ancient town which has expanded over time into a seaside resort. Its historic
    pattern and growth over time are perceptible within the layout of the buildings
    contributing to the interest of the CA.
11. The appeal site relates to a pedestrianised section of pavement situated on
    Sandgate Road, just off a crossroad with Bouverie Place and West Terrace and
    set within the town centre area of Folkestone. The immediate area contains a
    variety of lightweight street furniture including lamp posts, benches, traffic lights
    and an information board. In addition, a range of shops are set along Sandgate
    Road with varied commercial frontages, which are in some cases contain
    illuminated elements. Whilst I understand from the evidence that previously a
    telephone box was present within the site, at the time of my visit it had been
    removed. Presently therefore, the site visually appears as part of the wider
    unimposing established footway within the central Folkestone area. As such,
    overall, the site has a neutral contribution to the surroundings in which the CA is
    experienced.
12. The development would introduce a Street Hub with a digital advertising display
    set within the existing pedestrian footpath. Whilst it has a relatively small footprint,
    due to the proposed height, solid composition along with its large duel facing
    displays, the proposal would appear notably prominent and intrusive within the
    streetscene than the other nearby furniture resulting in harm to the character and
    appearance of the area. In addition, the location of the structure at the crossroads
    would mean the harm would be perceptible from longer range views along
    Bouverie Place, West Terrace and Sandgate Road, including from the CA. While
    conditions could be used to control the level of luminance of the digital displays,
    this would not mitigate the prominence of the screens themselves owing to the
    overall size of the structure and location within the streetscene.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004363 & 6004364


13. Although the area features commercial signage, the appeal proposal would appear
    in isolation, where its prominent stature and siting would appear distinctly harmful
    compared to other advertisements and shop fronts within the area.
14. Whilst the appeal site previously contained a phone box, the Street Hub would
    appear materially different within the streetscene owing to its increased height,
    lack of opacity and large displays. Therefore, the removal of the phone box does
    not justify the introduction of the Street Hub within this location.
15. As a result, the appeal proposal would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area. It would introduce a feature within the setting of the CA
    which would visually intrude into views of the CA’s perceptible historic layout,
    resulting in harm to the surroundings in which it is experienced. Modest harm to
    the significance of the CA through its setting would therefore arise.
Public benefits
16. Policy HE6 paragraph 4 of the Framework sets out that where a development
    proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on
    the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits
    resulting from the proposal.
17. The proposal would offer free public access to mobile telecommunications
    services, localised small cell 5G coverage, wayfinding services, Wi-Fi and facilities
    to contact emergency services. Policy CO1 of the Framework sets out substantial
    weight should be given to maintaining or improving network coverage. However,
    the proposal would be small in scale, and I do not have evidence before me
    demonstrating that there are deficiencies within the area of the facilities offered by
    the proposal. In these circumstances and due to the limited scale of the
    development this amounts to a small benefit.
18. I understand that BT has a Universal Service Obligation to maintain publicly
    accessible call boxes on the street. In addition, the removal of the previously
    present telephone kiosk would amount to a small benefit to the character and
    appearance of the area given the evidence shows that it was in a poor condition.
    However, in both cases it has not been demonstrated this obligation and the
    removal of the phone box can only be met through this specific proposal within this
    prominent location. As such, this therefore carries limited weight.
19. Policy HE4 paragraph 2 of the Framework identifies that any harm to the
    significance of a designated heritage asset should have a clear and convincing
    justification. In this case, the public benefits are insufficient to provide such
    justification and outweigh the identified harm to the significance of the CA through
    its setting.
20. In relation to Appeal A, the proposal would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area and including to the setting of the CA. The proposal would
    therefore conflict with Policy HB1 and RL9 of the Folkestone & Hythe District
    Places and Policies Local Plan (2020) (LP). These policies, amongst other
    matters, seek to ensure that development proposals make a positive contribution
    to its location and surroundings, enhancing integration while also respecting
    existing buildings and land uses, particularly with regard to layout to ensure all
    proposals create places of character, whilst also ensuring advertisements are not


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004363 & 6004364


        overly visually prominent in the streetscene and are sensitively designed and
        located having regard to the general characteristics of the locality.
21. Whilst the Council has referred to Policy RL2 in its associated reason for refusal,
    this policy relates to vitality and viability of the town centre so is not directly
    relevant to matters of character and appearance, including the effect on the CA. I
    therefore do not find conflict with this policy.
22. With regard to Appeal B, the proposal would have an unacceptable effect on
    amenity. The same development plan policies as above have been considered as
    far as they are material, and in this respect, the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan.
Other Matters
23. In relation to Appeal B, the Council’s officer report sets out that it considers that
    the proposal would not result in harm to public safety. The evidence before me and
    my observations on site do not lead me to a different conclusion to that of the
    Council on this matter.
24. The appellant has referred to a number of appeal decisions that they consider are
    similar to the proposal before me1, particularly in the approach to similar
    developments in the context of heritage assets. However, I do not have all the
    evidence of these cases before me, and it is not shown that their individual
    circumstances are directly comparable to the appeal. I can therefore only give
    these decisions limited weight. In any case, each proposal should be considered
    on its individual merits which I have done so.
Planning Balance
25. In relation to Appeal A, the proposed development is not in accordance with the
    aforementioned policies of the LP. Annex A of the Framework sets out
    development plan policies which are materially inconsistent with national decision-
    making policies in this Framework should be given very limited weight.
26. LP Policies HB1 and RL9 are consistent with section 14 of the Framework in
    seeking to achieve well-design places, in particular Policy DP3. On this basis the
    identified conflict with these policies carries significant weight against the
    development and the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a
    whole.
27. The proposal comprises a development within a settlement. Policy S4 sets out that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved, unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Paragraph 2 identifies that the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include
    proposals that fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.
28. In this regard, paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 of the Framework states development
    proposals should be refused if they conflict with paragraphs 1 and 2 of the policy

1
    APP/Z4310/W/18/3205104 & APP/Z4310/W/18/3205102, APP/P4605/W/22/3311745 & APP/P4605/H/22/3311746.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decision 6004363 & 6004364


       without clear justification. For the reasons that I have given, the proposal would not
       positively respond to its context, including the history and character of its
       surroundings, so it integrates with and enhances its surroundings, including the
       integration of heritage assets. The proposal would therefore conflict with
       paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 which is a decision-making policy that states the
       development proposal should be refused in such a circumstance where conflict
       with it arises. Based on my findings, there are no clear justifications for the harm.
       The benefits of approving the development are therefore substantially outweighed
       by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
29. Appeal A: The proposed development would conflict with the development plan as
    a whole and there are no material considerations which indicate that the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that Appeal
    A should be dismissed.
30. Appeal B: For the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal B should be dismissed.



C Housden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
