Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by Samuel Watson BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21ST August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6004392
87-89 Golders Green Road, Golders Green, London NW11 8EN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Jewish Care against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Barnet.
•    The application Ref is 25/4769/FUL.
•    The development proposed is Installation and upgrading of kitchen extract (including noise
     attenuation), fridge condensers and air conditioning condensers.

Appeal B Ref: 6004393
87-89 Golders Green Road, Golders Green, London NW11 8EN
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Jewish Care against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Barnet.
•    The application Ref is 25/4770/LBC.
•    The works proposed are Installation and upgrading of kitchen extract (including noise attenuation),
•    fridge condensers and air conditioning condensers.


Decision
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     As the appeal relates to a listed building consent, I have taken sections 16(2),
       66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (the Act) into account.
4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026. I have determined the appeal in the context of the revised
       Framework.
Main Issue
5.     87-89 Golders Green Road is part of a terrace that makes up a Grade II listed
       building1. The building is also within the Golders Green Conservation Area.
1
The Promenade (1061366)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004392


       Consequently, the main issue is the effect of the proposal on the special
       architectural and historic interest of the listed building, and its significance as a
       designated heritage asset.
Reasons
6.     The Promenade is a long and curving parade divided into three distinct elements.
       It is three storeys in height but with some accommodation within the attic. The
       parade is in the English Renaissance style and was built to accommodate
       commercial units on the ground floor and flats on the upper floors, this has
       continued until the present day. The appeal covers Nos 87 and 89 which sit either
       side of a stone archway which serves steps up to the first floor of the rear of the
       parade. At the rear of the parade the sense of continuity and plan falls away
       somewhat with the building being more utilitarian and having been extended or
       otherwise altered to meet the needs of the different units. I find the significance of
       this listed building largely arises from its age, the façade along Golders Green
       Road, and the extent to which the building’s historic form and uses are legible at
       the front and rear.
7.     The Promenade, and therefore also the appeal site, sits fairly centrally within the
       Golders Green Conservation Area (the CA). This is primarily focused upon
       Golders Green Road with off-shoots to accommodate some adjoining roads and
       railway infrastructure. It is a largely mixed use area comprising commercial uses
       on the ground floor with residential accommodation above. The long curving
       terraces are an important feature and form a defining part of Character Area 3 of
       the CA, within which the site sits. However, also of note is Accommodation Road
       to the rear of the appeal site. In contrast to the somewhat imposing parades that
       flank either side of Golders Green Road, Accommodation Road is flanked by small
       former storage buildings and the single-storey projections at the rear of the
       Promenade. The significance of the CA stems in part from the age of the
       development it contains, its nature as a response to Golders Green station, and
       the legibility of its historic form and uses, including along Accommodation Road.
8.     As alluded to above, Accommodation Road, irrespective of its physical and
       functional proximity to the Promenade, is visually discrete from it. In particular, it is
       a more utilitarian road and provides for the services of the commercial and
       residential units facing Golders Green Road. In particular, I noted bins, plant and
       exhaust systems. However, and notwithstanding these elements, the street scene
       still reads as a fairly traditional one where the historic form and function of
       buildings is still legible.
9.     At the time of my site visit ducting and condenser units were already present on
       the roof. I understand that these have not received planning permission and
       therefore the scheme before me comprises not only the extension of the existing
       ducting and relocation of a condenser, but also the installation of these existing
       elements.
10. It was also clear during my site visit that the development fronting Accommodation
    Road has been altered to meet changing requirements. In particular, I understand
    the single-storey element upon which the proposal sits is an extension. Moreover,
    the storage buildings on the opposite side of the road to the appeal site appear to
    have largely been converted to commercial units. Alterations, including for plant
    and waste provision, have also been carried out to the rear of the Promenade.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004392


         These have not, individually or collectively, significantly affected the character or
         significance of the historic environment.
11. As noted above there is an external staircase that leads through the building and
    up to the first floor. This route links to a pathway at the back of the building which
    provides access to the upper floors and down to Accommodation Road. This route
    passes immediately adjacent to the flat roof at the appeal site, and its associated
    plant. The site is therefore a prominent location visible from both Accommodation
    Road and the route from it to Golders Green Road.
12. Within this prominent location the ducting and condenser units are incongruously
    modern features that jar against the traditional building and the largely sympathetic
    development within the street scene. This is exacerbated by the number of units,
    the scale of the ducting and their combined arrangement across the whole flat
    roof. The proposed addition and alterations would further increase this impact and
    so in all, the scheme would result in a visually intrusive and incongruous feature.
    This would include from Accommodation Road and the route through the building
    and along the elevated pathway. While I recognise that the scheme is on the
    service-road side of the building, and that there are other examples of plant, this
    elevation still contributes to the importance of the historic environment and these
    examples are on the whole more limited. In particular, I note that permitted by
    reference C04457G/03 but find this does not justify the proposal or the harm it
    causes to the appreciation and understanding of the listed building and the CA.
13. While there is some low fencing on the roof, this does not sufficiently screen the
    plant. Particularly, when walking along Accommodation Road or the elevated
    pathway.
14. I recognise that the listing for the Promenade does not include references to the
    rear of the building. Nevertheless, and while this element may be of less
    importance to the building’s significance, the lack of reference does not mean that
    the rear is afforded any less protection than those parts specifically referred to. I
    note the appellant’s reference to decisions by the Council to this end2.
15. Given the above, and mindful of the scale of the development, I find that a modest
    degree of harm to the significance of the designated heritage assets would occur.
    Although modest, the Framework is clear that considerable importance and weight
    should be given to any harm to a designated asset. Paragraph HE6(4) of the
    Framework advises that this harm should be weighed against the public benefits of
    the proposal.
16. The appeal site relates to a café that is run by a local charity group providing
    mental health support. The appellant submits that the café provides economic and
    social benefits to the local community and helps its vitality. Given the nature of the
    café’s work and its location within a central area of Golders Green, I consider that
    the café does provide public benefits in these regards.
17. Although this part of the listed building is already in use, I note the appellant’s
    concerns that this is solely reliant upon the appeal scheme. The appellant is
    therefore effectively suggesting that the plant secures the long-term use of the
    listed building, as well as the social and economic benefits identified above. I am
    satisfied from the information before me that it is likely that, without the ability to

2
    References: C06928S/06, C06928T/06 and 17/2621/LBC


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
Appeal Decision 6004392


       keep food cold and the café area cool, the business would not be able to operate
       in the way it does currently. However, it has not been demonstrated that the
       business would be entirely unable to operate, or provide the identified benefits,
       without the works.
18. In particular, I note that nearby commercial units were not obviously served by
    comparable plant and, it is not clear that alternative schemes have been suitably
    considered and discounted. Therefore, as the Council have suggested, there is a
    potential for an alternative scheme that retains the identified public benefits while
    also not harming the historic environment.
19. Even so, I find there to still be some risk to the public benefits currently achieved
    by the business and the long-term use of the listed building should the scheme not
    be allowed. Therefore, in all, I afford moderate weight to the public benefits this
    scheme would secure. Nevertheless, in the circumstances of this appeal, these
    public benefits do not outweigh the harm to the designated heritage assets set out
    above. The proposal therefore fails to satisfy the requirements of the Act.
20. The proposal would harm the special architectural and historic interest of the listed
    building and CA to the detriment of their significance, and no public benefits have
    been identified that outweigh this harm. The proposal therefore conflicts with
    Policies CDH01 and CDH08 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036 which, amongst
    other matters, require proposals to be of high quality design that conserves the
    historic environment and responds positively to any distinctive local character and
    design. It also conflicts with the Policy HC1 of the London Plan (the LP) which
    similarly requires proposals to conserve the historic environment but also seeks to
    improve the interpretation of assets. The proposal would also not comply with the
    Framework policies of Chapter 20 as outlined above. While the Council have also
    referred to LP Policy HC1, I do not find this to be directly relevant to the matters
    upon which this appeal turns.
Other Matters
21. I am mindful that no objections have been received from interested parties and
    civic groups. However, this lack of objections does not preclude me from finding
    harm.
Conclusion
22. The proposal would harm the significance of designated heritage assets and would
    conflict with the development plan taken as a whole. There are no material
    considerations that indicate the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, Appeals A and B are
    dismissed.

Samuel Watson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
