Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by K Lancaster BA (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16th September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6004494
49 Annand Road, Gilesgate, Durham DH1 1PW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Sugar Tree Limited against Durham County Council.
•    The application Ref is DM/25/03386/FPA.
•    The development proposed is the change of use from dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a flexible use
     permission as a HMO (Use Class C4) and a dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) under the provisions of
     Class V of Part 3 of the GPDO including single storey rear extension, cycle parking and bin storage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for the change of use from
       dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a flexible use permission as a HMO (Use Class
       C4) and a dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) under the provisions of Class V of Part 3
       of the GPDO including single storey rear extension, cycle parking and bin storage
       is refused.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
3.     The appeal was submitted following the Council’s failure to give notice of its
       decision within the prescribed period. The Council’s initial Statement of Case was
       ambiguous and so did not clearly indicate its position in relation to the appeal.
       Accordingly, pursuant to my powers under Regulation 8 of the Town and Country
       Planning (Appeals) (Written Representations Procedure) (England) Regulations
       2009, I invited further representations from the Council.
4.     The Council responded to confirm that the development would have been
       recommended for refusal, the reason given being that it would further unbalance
       the existing community and would have an unacceptable cumulative impact on the
       residential amenity of existing residents in this area from increased noise and
       disturbance contrary to Policies 16, 29 and 31 of the County Durham Plan.
5.     The appellant has raised concerns that my request for further submissions
       resulted in procedural unfairness. However, following receipt of the Council's
       response, the appellant was afforded an opportunity to comment on the additional
       information before I reached my decision. I am therefore satisfied that both parties
       have had a reasonable and fair opportunity to present their respective cases. In


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004494


       these circumstances, I find that no material prejudice has arisen, and I have taken
       all submissions into account in determining the appeal.
6.     The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
       Order 2015 ordinarily permits the change of use of a dwellinghouse (Use Class
       C3) to a small House in Multiple Occupation (Use Class C4). However, the Council
       confirmed an Article 4 Direction, which came into effect on 17 September 2016,
       removing these permitted development rights. As such, express planning
       permission is required for the proposed use as a Class C4 HMO, and the proposal
       falls to be assessed against the relevant provisions of the development plan and
       other material considerations.
Main Issues
7.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the maintenance of a mixed and
       balanced communities and the living conditions of existing residents.
Reasons
8.     The appeal site comprises a two-storey, three-bedroom, mid terraced house. The
       property has a small front garden, with a larger rear garden. The surrounding area
       is predominantly residential in character.
9.     The proposal seeks approval for the flexible use of the property as a
       dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) and small house in multiple occupation (HMO) (Use
       Class C4) for student accommodation. The ground floor of the property will be
       reconfigured and extended to provide an open plan kitchen/living/dining room and
       two bedrooms. The first-floor layout will accommodate two bedrooms, a study and
       a bathroom. It also includes a single storey rear extension.
10. Whilst the proposal seeks a flexible C3/C4 permission under Class V of the Town
    and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order. However, the
    property already benefits from a lawful C3 dwellinghouse use. Accordingly, the
    effect of the proposal is to introduce the ability for the property to be occupied as a
    Class C4 HMO, and it is that element of the proposal that falls to be assessed
    against Policy 16 of the County Durham Plan, adopted 2020 (the CDP).
11. Policy 16(3) of the CDP seeks to promote, create and preserve inclusive, mixed
    and balanced communities. To achieve this, the policy sets out a number of criteria
    which proposals will be assessed against.
12. In respect of Policy 16(3)(a), it states that proposals will be resisted if, including the
    proposed development, more than 10% of the total number of residential units
    within 100 metres of the application sire are exempt from council tax charges
    (Class N Student Exemption). Policy 16(b) of the CDP, states that it resists
    proposals if there are existing unimplemented permissions for HMOs within 100
    metres of the application site, which in combination with the existing number of
    Class N Student exempt units would exceed 10% of total properties within 100
    metres of the application site.
13. Policy 16(3)(c) of the CDP states that proposals will be resisted if less than 10% of
    the total residential units within 100 metres are exempt council tax (Class N) but,
    the application site is in a residential area and on a street that is a primary access
    route between Purpose Built Student Accommodation and the town centre or a
    university campus. In respect of this third criteria, appeal site lies within a primarily

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004494


       residential area, however, does not lie on a street forming a primary access route
       between PBSA and the City Centre or a university campus. Accordingly, there is
       no conflict with this part of the policy.
14. The initial evidence provided by the Council and relied upon by the appellant
    stated that the that the total number of student exempt residential properties,
    together with unimplemented permissions would be approximately 6.3%. This was
    based on data available in December 2025. However, updated data made
    available in April 2026 and provided by the Council indicates that the total number
    of student exempt residential properties, together with unimplemented permissions
    would be approximately 10.4%.
15. The Council's evidence regarding the concentration of student accommodation is
    derived from council tax exemption records for student-occupied properties. These
    records are updated twice yearly and therefore provide a regularly reviewed
    snapshot of student occupation across the area. As this is the most recent
    evidence available to me, I consider it appropriate to afford it significant weight in
    determining whether the proposal would exceed the relevant policy threshold. On
    this basis the 10% threshold would be exceeded and there would be conflict with
    this part of the policy.
16. I have had to regard to the proposed flexible use of the property. However, it is
    noted that, if occupied as a House in Multiple Occupation (HMO), the property
    would nevertheless result in the proportion of student accommodation within a
    100-metre radius exceeding the Council's adopted threshold of 10%.
17. Whilst I acknowledge that the exceedance is modest, the supporting text to Policy
    16 notes that the criteria in Part 3 are based on a ‘tipping point’, beyond which
    there is an imbalance between HMOs occupied by students, and homes occupied
    by other non-student residents. Therefore, to permit further development once that
    threshold has already been exceeded would undermine the effectiveness and
    purpose of the policy. I therefore attach significant weight to the conflict with Policy
    16 of the CDP.
18. I have taken account of the appellant's submissions that the proposal would
    incorporate soundproofing measures to the party wall and would be operated by
    an experienced student accommodation management company in accordance
    with a management plan. These measures would assist in mitigating some of the
    effects associated with occupation of the property as a student HMO and weigh in
    favour of the proposal. I have also had regard to appeal decisions submitted by the
    appellant in which Inspectors concluded that adverse effects arising from student
    HMO occupation were not a predictable consequence of the development
    proposed. However, each case must be determined on its own merits having
    regard to its particular circumstances.
19. The proposal would result in the proportion of student-exempt properties and
    unimplemented permissions within 100 metres of the appeal site exceeding the
    10% threshold set out in Policy 16(3). As the supporting text explains, that
    threshold represents a tipping point beyond which an imbalance between student
    and non-student occupation is likely to arise. The proposal would therefore fail to
    maintain a mixed and balanced community and would undermine the objective of
    Policy 16 to preserve a diverse and inclusive residential population. I attach
    significant weight to that harm.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004494


20. In addition, the proposal would contribute to the concentration of student
    accommodation within the immediate area. Whilst I accept that the behaviour of
    future occupants cannot be predicted with certainty and that the proposed
    management arrangements and soundproofing measures would reduce some
    impacts, occupation by five unrelated individuals would be likely to generate a
    greater intensity of activity than the existing family dwelling. The associated
    comings and goings, visitors and day-to-day domestic activity would add to the
    cumulative activity already arising from the existing concentration of student
    accommodation in the area.
21. Taken together, these effects would give rise to additional noise and disturbance
    which, whilst not severe, would be perceptible to neighbouring occupiers and
    would diminish the quiet enjoyment of neighbouring homes. Consequently, the
    proposal would cause moderate harm to living conditions.
22. Accordingly, the proposal would fail to maintain mixed and balanced communities
    and would harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. It therefore
    conflicts with Policies 6, 16, 29 and 31 of the CDP which, amongst other things,
    seek to maintain balanced communities and require development to minimise
    impacts on adjacent and nearby occupiers and demonstrate that there would be
    no unacceptable effects on living conditions, either individually or cumulatively.
Other Matters
23. I have had regard to the absence of harm in respect of matters such as highway
    safety, the quality of the internal living accommodation and the impact of the
    external alterations on neighbouring occupiers. However, these are neutral
    considerations which indicate the proposal is acceptable in those respects and do
    not weigh positively in favour of the development.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
24. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. In this case, the
    development would be located within a settlement, where Framework Policy S4
    indicates that development should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the Framework’s national decision-making policies.
25. The proposal would deliver additional student accommodation in a location with
    good access to a range of services and facilities. It would secure investment in the
    property, and its ongoing maintenance would be managed by an experienced
    accommodation provider in accordance with a management plan. I attach very
    modest weight to these benefits.
26. Against this, the proposal would fail to maintain mixed and balanced communities,
    and the associated cumulative effects would result in harm to the living conditions
    of neighbouring occupiers. This is contrary to the Framework’s principles for the
    creation of well-designed places by supporting healthy, mixed, vibrant and
    integrated communities, which will function well over the lifetime of the
    development, by incorporating a range of uses and tenures, employing features
    which promote social interaction, as set out in Policy DP3(2)(a) of the Framework.
    Furthermore, Policy DP3(3) of the Framework states that development proposals


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6004494


       should be refused if they conflict with these principles. Therefore, I attach
       substantial weight to this harm.
27. Taking these points together, the benefits of granting planning permission would
    be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
28. Consequently, the proposed development would conflict with the development
    plan taken as a whole, and there are no material considerations of sufficient weight
    which indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

K Lancaster
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
