Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by G Sylvester BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004873
37 Eastern Esplanade, Southend-On-Sea SS1 2ES
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Selmani against the decision of Southend-on-Sea City Council
•    The application Ref is 25/01736/FUL.
•    The development is a change to the elevation of the shop front.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The main parties were given an opportunity to comment on the relevance of the
       revised National Planning Policy Framework ("the Framework"), published in
       August 2026, to their respective cases in this appeal. The comments received
       have been taken into account in reaching a decision on the appeal. All references
       to the Framework relate the revised document.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues in this appeal are the effects of the development on:
           •    The character and appearance of the host building and area.
           •    The setting of the Eastern Esplanade Conservation Area (“the CA”).
           •    The settings of the Grade II listed buildings known as Numbers 40-45
                Eastern Esplanade.
           •    The significance of the locally listed buildings known as Numbers 46-57
                Eastern Esplanade.
Reasons
4.     The appeal relates to the shopfront of a commercial restaurant premises that
       occupies part of the ground-floor of a 3-storey building that is set amongst the long
       terrace of mixed commercial and residential buildings fronting the northern side of
       Eastern Esplanade. The as-built shopfront the subject of this appeal has already
       been constructed and appears to match that shown on the submitted drawings,
       except for the proposed solid infill panels to the doors which have yet to be
       installed. I have therefore based my assessment on those drawings and my
       observations at my site visit. The appellant’s statement contains a photograph
       shows the pre-existing shopfront that existed before the appeal development was
       carried out.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004873


5.     Eastern Esplanade is a long and wide road running broadly parallel to the
       shoreline and fronted on its northern side by an almost continuous row of
       predominantly two and three-storey buildings, mostly built to traditional
       architectural styles, and in either residential or commercial use. Those buildings,
       including the appeal site, are highly visible to pedestrians and road users, given
       the length and alignment of Eastern Esplanade.
6.     Positioned on either side of the host building’s central ground-floor entrance door,
       which serves the upper-floor flats, the appellant’s photograph shows that the pre-
       existing shopfront at the appeal property and that at Number 38 formed an almost
       matching pair of traditional shopfronts. They shared very similar timber framing
       and glazing proportions, with a strong horizontal emphasis derived from their wide
       panes of glazing and substantial stallrisers. Both incorporated decorative high-
       level curved panels on either side of the central entrance door to the flats above,
       which served to emphasise the entrance to those flats and unify the composition of
       the host building’s façade.
7.     Taking that photograph as the baseline for my assessment, it is evident that the
       pre-existing shopfront and that at Number 38 formed a closely matched pair of
       traditional shopfronts. Not only was it consistent with the traditional character of
       nearby shopfronts, but, more importantly, the pre-existing shopfront made a
       positive contribution to the symmetry and balanced composition of the host
       building's double-fronted façade. That façade is characterised by tall, curved bays
       extending across the first and second floors, separated by projecting balconies.
       The host building derived much of its architectural interest from the harmonious
       and symmetrical appearance of its façade.
8.     The framing and glazing proportions of the as-built shopfront differ markedly from
       those of Number 38. In the absence of a solid stallriser, the shopfront incorporates
       a substantial area of floor-to-ceiling glazing and displays an uncharacteristic
       vertical emphasis, accentuated by the narrow proportions of the tall bi-fold units.
       When those units are opened, the shopfront would assume an uncharacteristically
       hollow appearance that would contrast sharply with that of Number 38 and the
       other shopfronts in the same row.
9.     Together, the extensive glazing, the pronounced verticality of the framing and
       glazing proportions, and the absence of a stallriser and decorative high-level
       curved panel, combine to give the as-built shopfront an overly modern appearance
       that is at odds with the traditional character of nearby shopfronts. Moreover,
       viewed alongside the shopfront at Number 38, the as-built shopfront appears
       discordant, undermining the visual consistency and unity of the pair of shopfronts,
       and detracting from the host building’s distinctively well-balanced and symmetrical
       façade.
10. Whilst it is proposed to infill the lower sections of the shopfront with solid panels
    intended to replicate a stallriser, these would have no effect when the bi-fold units
    are in an open position. Furthermore, the submitted details indicate that the infill
    panels would be inserted within the existing door and window frames instead of
    forming an integral part of the shopfront. As such, they would lack the visual
    coherence and authentic uninterrupted appearance of a conventional solid
    stallriser. I am not satisfied on the information before me that securing alternative
    details of those infill panels by a planning condition would replicate a conventional
    solid stallriser.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004873


11. The Council objects to the use of aluminium for the as-built shopfront’s framing.
    When viewed at close range those frames exhibit a more precise, machine-made
    finish and sharper edges than the timber shopfront at Number 38, with none of its
    subtle detailing. However, when seen in the context of the varied range of
    materials used for window and door frames across the commercial properties
    within the row, those differences are, in themselves, relatively modest and
    therefore the use of aluminium is unlikely to be readily apparent to a passer-by or
    casual observer. Nonetheless, it does not alter my overall conclusion that the as-
    built shopfront harms the character and appearance of the host building and area.
12. For those reasons, I conclude on this main issue that the appeal development is
    harmful to the character and appearance of the host building and area.
    Accordingly, there is conflict with Policies CP4 and KP2 of the Southend on Sea
    Borough Council Core Strategy 2007, and Policies DM1 and DM3 of the Southend
    on Sea Borough Council Development Management Document 2015, insofar as
    they seek to ensure that development achieves a high-quality of design, and that
    alterations to a building respect the character of the site and its local context in
    terms of its architectural approach, and draws reference from, and where
    appropriate enhances, the original building.
13. The Council has not explained why the development would conflict with the
    Southend-on-Sea Design and Townscape Guide 2009, nor has it identified any
    specific guidance from the document that is relevant to its concerns. In the
    absence of such evidence, the document has no bearing on my determination of
    the appeal.
14. As the architectural design of the development has detracted from the character
    and features of the host building, it conflicts with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the
    Framework, which relates to the key principles of well-designed places.
The CA, listed buildings and locally listed buildings
15. In determining the appeal, I have had regard to my duties under sections 66(1)
    and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to
    give special regard to the desirability of preserving the settings of listed buildings
    and to preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of conservation
    areas.
16. The evidence indicates that the appeal property lies some 12 metres from the
    boundary with the CA, which encompasses the residential terrace at Numbers 40-
    57 Eastern Esplanade, together with their front and rear gardens and the highway
    footway.
17. Numbers 40-45 are Grade II listed buildings, whilst the remainder of the terrace is
    locally listed. On the evidence before me, the significance of the listed buildings is
    derived largely from their consistent and unusual domestic vernacular architecture,
    and their proximity to the shoreline. Constructed in the early to mid-nineteenth
    century, the location and architecture of the terrace are thought to reflect their
    original function as fishermen's cottages. They provide an important link to the
    Southend’s historic relationship with the fishing industry and are thought to be the
    only surviving examples of their type
18. The locally listed terrace at Numbers 46-57 is similar to the listed terrace in terms
    of its usual vernacular architecture and association with the local fishing trade. It

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004873


       therefore possesses sufficient heritage interest to be treated as a non-designated
       heritage asset.
19. The CA encompasses little more than the listed and locally listed terraces. On the
    evidence before me, including the Eastern Esplanade Conservation Area
    Appraisal the significance of the CA, insofar as it relates to this appeal, is derived
    largely from the consistency of the terrace's distinctive vernacular domestic
    architecture and its historic association with the local fishing trade.
20. In this instance I have therefore treated the setting of the CA as synonymous with
    the settings of the heritage assets at Numbers 40-57 Eastern Esplanade. Those
    settings comprise not only the land between the terrace and the shoreline, the
    openness of which contributes to the appreciation of the assets' significance,
    including their historic and functional relationship with fishing, but also the
    commercial buildings to the west, including the appeal property.
21. There is intervisibility between the as-built shopfront and those heritage assets. It
    is seen either in oblique views from the footway along the frontage of the
    residential terrace or in more distant views from the southern side of Eastern
    Esplanade, and looking along the vista that includes the commercial buildings
    extending in a long row towards the junction with Southchurch Avenue.
22. Those commercial buildings are considerably less cohesive than the residential
    terrace and are readily distinguishable from it in views along Eastern Esplanade,
    with the CA boundary marking the point of transition between them. They are
    generally larger in scale than the residential terrace and they display a
    comparatively more varied mix of traditional styles, widths, heights and materials.
23. In those views, the appeal development has not altered the scale, form or massing
    of either its host building or the commercial terrace of which it forms part, nor has it
    physically encroached upon the space between the residential terrace and the
    shoreline. Consequently, the appeal development does not detract from the
    appreciation of the residential terrace's consistent and unusual domestic
    vernacular architecture or from its historic and functional association with the
    shoreline and fishing trade.
24. For these reasons, I conclude on the second, third and fourth main issue that the
    appeal development preserves the settings of the CA and the Grade II listed
    buildings at Numbers 40-45 Eastern Esplanade, and causes no harm to the
    significance of the non-designated heritage assets at Numbers 46-57 Eastern
    Esplanade. It follows that there is no conflict with Policies CP4 and KP2 of the
    Southend on Sea Borough Council Core Strategy 2007, and Policy DM5 of the
    Southend on Sea Borough Council Development Management Document 2015,
    insofar as they seek to safeguard and enhance the historic environment.
25. For the same reasons there is no conflict with Policies HE6, HE7 and HE9 of the
    Framework insofar as they relate to designated and non-designated heritage
    assets.
Other Matters
26. Policies E2 and TC2 of the Framework state that substantial weight should be
    attached to the economic benefits of commercial development and supporting the
    overall vitality and viability of town centres. Policy S4 of the Framework states that


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6004873


       development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
       of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
       assessed against the national decision-making policies in this Framework.
27. Even if the appeal shopfront has enhanced the appeal property’s contribution to
    the economy, including the vitality and viability of the city centre, those benefits
    would be modest and they do not, in my judgement, amount to clear justification
    for the development’s harm to the character and appearance of the host building
    and area, and the resultant conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the
    Framework.
28. Accordingly, the appeal development fails to comply with Policy DP3 which is one
    of the national decision-making policies which state that development proposals
    should be refused in specific circumstances, including where there is a conflict with
    paragraph 1 of Policy DP3. Consequently, the development’s harmful effects on
    the character and appearance of the host building and area, and the resultant
    conflict with Policy DP3, amounts to the circumstances in which the benefits of
    approving the development are substantially outweighed by its adverse effects.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given above, the conflict with Policies CP4 and KP2 of the
    Southend on Sea Borough Council Core Strategy 2007, and Policies DM1 and
    DM3 of the Southend on Sea Borough Council Development Management
    Document 2015, brings the development into conflict with the development plan as
    a whole. The material considerations, including the development’s benefits and the
    provisions of the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided
    other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, I conclude that the
    development is unacceptable and the appeal should be dismissed.



G Sylvester
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
