Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by AJ Sutton BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 19 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004495
Land at Millend, Brookside Farm, North Nibley GL11 6ED
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6 Class A of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Hale against the decision of Stroud District Council.
•    The application Ref is S.25/2245/AGR.
•    The development proposed is an agricultural storage building.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made in writing by Mr Hale against Stroud District
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Background and Main Issue
3.     Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6 Class A of the Town and Country Planning
       (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended (the
       Order) permits development for the carrying out on agricultural land comprised
       in an agricultural unit of 5 hectares or more in area of amongst other things,
       (a)works for the erection, extension or alteration of a building; which are
       reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture within that unit. The
       Council states that the development would not comply with the interpretation of
       this Part of the Order, with regards agricultural land and agricultural unit. It is
       also suggested that the submitted information is insufficient to demonstrate that
       the development is reasonably necessary.
4.     Therefore, the main issue in this case is whether the proposal would be
       permitted development in the terms set out in Paragraph A (a) of Class A Part 6
       Schedule 2 of the Order.
Reasons
Whether Agricultural Land comprised in an agricultural unit of 5 hectares or more
5.     Paragraph D.1 Part 6 of the Order defines “agricultural land” as land which,
       before development permitted by this Part is carried out, is land in use for


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004495



       agriculture and which is so used for the purposes of a trade or business and
       excludes any dwellinghouse or garden. “Agricultural unit” is defined in the same
       Paragraph of the Order as agricultural land which is occupied as a unit for the
       purposes of agriculture.
6.     The appeal site is a plot on relatively flat and low-lying land, surrounded by
       fields. There are already three sizeable wood clad barn structures in this locale
       storing machinery, straw, wood and livestock. With these features along with
       hardstanding, the wider site has the appearance of a good-sized farmyard in a
       distinctly rural setting. I also saw livestock grazing in paddocks adjacent to this
       yard. Moreover, the information before me states that the appellant’s land
       holding, though relatively modest, is around 48.4 hectares.
7.     My colleague, in a previous appeal, for another proposal at the site in 2023,
       observed similar features to that described above. The Council finds that there
       are unresolved matters regarding agricultural uses at the site and asserts that
       there is unauthorised works at Brookside Farm, regarding a log business and
       storage. However, no substantial information has been advanced that the
       circumstances and uses at the appeal site and the wider farmyard have
       changed significantly since that earlier appeal decision a few years ago. In light
       of this factor and my own observations, the appeal site appears to be
       agricultural land comprised in an agricultural unit of 5 hectares or more.
Whether reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture within that unit.
8.     The proposed scheme would extend an existing barn. However, although the
       extension would be modest, the existing barn to be extended is already a
       significant size. Moreover, as set out above, there are two other large barns
       already serving this modest agricultural unit.
9.     The stated purpose of the proposed extension is for covered, secure, weather
       tight storage and handling for machinery, feed, hay/fodder and essential
       materials; this seems in keeping with activities likely to occur with land in use for
       agriculture and purposes of trade or business related to that use. But again,
       there is already considerable covered storage space for such items, used for
       the purposes of farming this land, available at the wider site.
10. I am in no doubt that the proposed extension could be used for agricultural
    purposes, but this is not the only requirement that needs to be satisfied in this
    part of the Order. The appellant may have other future farm enterprises in mind
    and incidental businesses, but this has not been clearly expressed through this
    appeal process. Moreover, it seems to me that there is a tipping point at which
    the provision of storage could be disproportionate to the scale and nature of the
    agricultural unit in question. In such instances even a modest extension could
    lead to an over capacity and would consequently not be reasonably necessary,
    unless there was evidence demonstrating that it was needed for purposes of
    agriculture in that unit.
11. The existing provision of farm buildings could negate the reasonable need for
    yet more similar buildings for a unit; unless there is information to demonstrate
    the necessity to extend what appears to be existing substantial provision for that
    agricultural unit. If this was not the case, it seems to me that this limitation would
    not be specified in the Order.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004495



12. It is asserted that there is no requirement in the Order for farmers to provide a
    near exhaustive alternative space audit if barns already exist at a site. While this
    may be so, and acknowledging the light touch intended by permitted
    development rights, the Order nonetheless sets out limitations, restrictions and
    conditions that need to be met. Establishing whether such requirements are
    satisfied may involve judgements which can only be made on the evidence
    provided.
13. The appellant’s appeal statement directs me to court judgments which are
    stated to be relevant to this case. These highlight amongst other matters, that
    the nature of the proposal and how it would serve an agricultural unit should be
    a consideration. There is also reference in the appellant’s evidence to functional
    capacity.
14. Focusing on capacity already available at this unit, the existing three barns
    appear to provide plenty of space to accommodate several pieces of large farm
    equipment, sizeable bales, fodder, animals and still have some space for
    several log piles. Regarding their functionality, they are of a height and size that
    seem capable of allowing vehicles to be manoeuvred safely within them if
    required, and the appellant has not provided anything to dissuade me of this
    observation.
15. The existing barns are closely grouped but surrounded by hardstanding such
    that I find no clear reason as to why these structures could not be used
    efficiently and safely for the purpose described in this appeal. The permitted
    barns have some open sections, and I note that this proposed extension is
    intended to be weatherproof. However, nothing has been advanced to suggest
    that those existing barns could not be made weather tight.
16. With a wealth of existing storage space at the site, and in the absence of
    compelling evidence to indicate otherwise, not only does there appear to be at
    least sufficient storage provision for the purposes of agricultural trade or
    business, but there is also a good amount of covered space for related activities
    for the unit, such as log cutting, and storage. Indeed, the existing barns were
    serving this purpose at the time of the site visit.
17. The proposed development may well satisfy many of the restrictions and
    conditions of this part of the Order. However, the evidence points to there being
    plenty of covered storage space for the function and purpose of, what is at
    most, a modest agricultural unit. In light of these factors, having regard to the
    whole agricultural unit relevant in this appeal, the current provision of barns and
    the limited details about the agricultural purposes in this particular unit, I find
    that reasonable necessity has not been proven in this process.
18. The appellant suggests that the Council failed to request information about the
    agricultural trade and business relevant in this case. Be this as it may, this
    matter was raised in the officer’s report, and yet the appellant has submitted
    very little evidence beyond the high-level description of the purposes in this
    appeal process. While accepting evidence should be proportionate, this limited
    information falls short of demonstrating reasonable necessity in my view, taking
    account of the factors outlined above.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004495



19. As mentioned, the Council states that there are unauthorised works at the site,
    regarding a log business and the location of permitted barns. However,
    insufficient information is submitted to consider these matters, which in any
    event would likely fall outside the scope of this decision. This is therefore a
    matter between the main parties and has not been determinative in this appeal.
20. The Council has concluded that the proposal would meet most of the
    restrictions and conditions of this part of the Order, and I see no reason to
    dispute this. Be this as it may, I find that it has not been demonstrated in this
    case, for the reasons stated above, that the proposed extension would be
    reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture within this agricultural unit;
    the proposal would not satisfy this requirement of Part 6 Class A of the Order.
21. The appellant contends that the proposal would be an acceptable design and
    would conserve the scenic beauty of the Cotswolds National Landscape.
    However, even if I agree that the proposal would be acceptable in terms of
    siting and appearance it would still not be permitted development in the terms
    set out in the Order. Therefore, it is unnecessary to deal with matters of prior
    approval in this case.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons stated the proposal would not be permitted development in the
    terms set out in Paragraph A (a) of Class A Part 6 in Schedule 2 of the Order,
    and the appeal should be dismissed.



AJ Sutton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
