Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by E Worley BA (Hons) Dip EP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004676
252 Havant Road, Draydon, Portsmouth PO6 1PA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Pompey Properties Ltd against the decision of Portsmouth City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/00705/FUL.
•   The development proposed is the change of use of part ground floor (Class E) and upper floor (Class
    C3) to 9 bedroom/9 person House of Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis); external alterations to
    include construction of mansard roof and single storey rear extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
   part ground floor (Class E) and upper floor (Class C3) to 9 bedroom/ 9 person
   House of Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis); external alterations to include
   construction of mansard roof and single storey rear extension at 252 Havant Road,
   Draydon, Portsmouth PO6 1PA in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   25/00705/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Pompey Properties Ltd against Portsmouth
   City Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matter
3. The description of development given above is taken from the Decision Notice, it
   reflects amendments that were made to the scheme at application stage in relation
   to the number of bedrooms proposed and the application was determined on this
   basis.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
      •    whether the proposal is in a suitable location having regard to development
           plan policies for the Havant Road local centre;
      •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the occupiers
           of neighbouring properties;
      •    the effect of the proposed development on parking stress and highway safety,
           with particular regard to on-street parking provision;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004676


         •   the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
             area; and
         •   the effect of the development on the Chichester and Langston Harbours
             Special Protection Area (SPA), the Portsmouth Harbour SPA and the Solent
             and Southampton Water SPA, the Solent and Isle of Wight Lagoons Special
             Area of Conservation (SAC) and the Solent Maritime SAC.
Reasons
Local centre
5. The appeal site comprises a 2 storey semi-detached property fronting Havant
   Road. Like others nearby, it has a commercial use, currently a funeral director, at
   ground floor with residential accommodation above. Permission is sought for the
   change of use of part of the ground floor and upper floor to a 9 bedroom/9 person
   House in Multiple Occupation (HMO), including a mansard roof and single storey
   rear extension.
6. The site is located within the Havant Road local centre. Policy PCS18 of the
   Portsmouth Plan, adopted January 2012 (PP) supports development in local
   centres where it helps maintain their role, including meeting top-up shopping
   needs, avoiding an over-concentration of non-shopping uses and encourages
   residential and office uses above ground floor, but not at ground floor level.
   Although the proposed residential use at ground floor level is not encouraged by
   Policy PCS18, the development would retain the Class E (Commercial, Business
   and Service) unit at ground floor level to the front of the building. As such, the
   proposal would continue to support the role of the Havant Road local centre.
7.       While I am mindful that the proposed commercial floor area may be smaller than
         that of the existing commercial use and may no longer be suitable to meet the
         needs of the current occupier, there is no compelling evidence that there is not a
         market demand for units of this size or that the reduction in commercial floorspace
         at the property would have a tangible effect on the overall vitality or viability of the
         local centre or local employment opportunities.
8. I appreciate my findings differ from that of the Inspector in assessing a similar
   proposal at 246 Havant Road1 against Policy PCS18 of the PP. While I have had
   regard to this decision, I have determined this appeal on its specific circumstances
   and the evidence before me.
9. In light of the above considerations, the proposal would not conflict with the aims of
   Policy PCS18 of the PP and would thus be in a suitable location having regard to
   the development plan policies for the Havant Road local centre.
    Living conditions
10. The Council is concerned that the proposed increase in occupancy of the property
    by up to 9 individuals would harm the living conditions of the occupiers of the
    adjoining residential properties through increased noise and disturbance associated
    with additional comings and goings.



1
    Appeal Ref: 6001588


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6004676


11. The proposal may generate different patterns of activity, at different times of day,
    and a higher level of movement than the occupation of the existing single flat on the
    upper floor. However, there is no substantive evidence to demonstrate that it would
    result in a materially greater degree of general noise and disturbance than that
    arising from the combination of commercial and residential uses at the site, which
    could include the occupation of the flat by a family including a number of adults, or
    that the effects of such would be made worse by virtue of the position of the
    entrance between the properties. In addition, there is no particular evidence that
    the use would result in anti-social behaviour due to the number of occupiers or the
    nature of the proposed residential use to have a material impact on levels of
    disturbance.
12. Furthermore, any disturbance during construction work would be likely to be short
    term and would not be a reason to withhold panning permission.
13. The proposed roof alterations would increase its bulk; however, the height of the
    roof would not exceed the existing height of the building. Furthermore, although the
    site occupies an elevated position relative to the adjoining residential properties to
    the rear, the proposed roof would be set further back than the existing two-storey
    rear gable at the property. As a result of the position of the roof and taking account
    of the separation distance between it and the adjoining residential properties to the
    rear, the development would not appear unduly imposing when viewed from the
    neighbouring rear gardens and properties, including those to either side of the site.
    Nor is there any clear evidence that the proposed additions would lead to a
    reduction in light to the adjoining properties.
14. Interested parties have also raised concerns regarding overlooking from the
    proposed development. The mansard roof would introduce 2 additional bedroom
    windows facing towards the side elevation of 250A Havant Road, where there are
    2 first floor side openings. The Council do not object to the proposals on the
    grounds of loss of privacy as any views from the window to bedroom 9 towards the
    windows in the adjoining property would be at an oblique angle. In addition, the
    window to bedroom 8 would be fitted with a brise soleil to prevent any direct views
    towards the neighbouring kitchen. There is no particular evidence before me to
    persuade me otherwise to reach a different conclusion.
15. Furthermore, the proposed window arrangement to the rear elevation of the appeal
    property would not differ significantly to the existing configuration. While the ground
    floor openings currently serve the commercial premises, subject to a condition to
    secure suitable screening to the external door and staircase, given people might
    linger in this area, the proposed two rear-facing bedroom windows, the lower of
    which is very modest in size, would not give rise to any materially greater
    overlooking of neighbouring properties than may occur at present.
16. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not cause harm to the living conditions
    to the occupiers of neighbouring properties in terms of noise and disturbance or
    outlook. Accordingly, it would not conflict with the aims of Policy PCS23 of the PP
    which among other things, require new development to protect amenity and provide
    a good standard of living environment for neighbouring and local occupiers.
Character and appearance
17. The surrounding area contains a mix of residential and commercial buildings which
    display an eclectic mix of roof heights, forms and architectural styles, including

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004676


        buildings with mansard roofs nearby. The proposal would replace the existing
        pitched roof with a mansard roof, resulting in a design that would differ from the
        adjoining semi-detached property. Although this would reduce the existing
        symmetry between the pair, the mansard roof, by virtue of its scale, height and
        design would not be unduly visually discordant or appear as an anomalous feature
        in the varied character of the street scene.
18. The proposed single storey rear extension is subservient to the host property in
    terms of its scale and design and would not constitute an unusual or
    uncharacteristic addition to the rear of the building.
19. I have also considered the suggestion that approval of the proposed mansard roof
    would set a precedent for similar extensions in the area, however, I have
    considered the proposal on the evidence before me and the specific circumstances
    that apply in this case, any future applications will be considered on their own
    planning merits.
20. Taking these considerations together, the proposed development would not harm
    the character and appearance of the area. In that regard it would not conflict with
    the aims of Policy PCS23 of the PP in so far as it requires new development to be
    well designed and, in particular, respect the character of the city.
Parking
21. The proposed sui generis HMO use with 4+ bedrooms would be expected to
    provide 2 parking spaces, in accordance with the Council’s Parking Standards2.
    The proposed site plan indicates a single parking space to serve the development,
    located to the rear of the property. This arrangement appears to reflect the
    longstanding situation, indeed, at the time of my site visit, a vehicle was parked to
    the rear of the appeal property, access to which is via the shared access between
    the buildings and is likely to rely on crossing the adjoining land. However, it remains
    unclear whether a vehicle would be able to satisfactorily manoeuvre into and out of
    the parking space following construction of the proposed rear extension, particularly
    if a vehicle were parked on the adjoining land. As the availability of the space
    cannot be relied upon, it is probable that, in practical terms, the proposal would be
    likely to lead to a shortfall in 2 spaces, having regard to the expected provision.
22. Due to the location of the site within the Havant Road local centre, future occupiers
    of the HMO would benefit from accessibility to nearby amenities and services,
    including public transport links and a range of shops, by cycle and on foot, which
    would be likely to discourage travel by the private car. Moreover, while there are
    parking restrictions on Havant Road, I did see at my site visit that there are
    unrestricted on-street parking spaces on the surrounding streets, a short distance
    from the site. Whilst parking in these locations may be a little inconvenient, this
    would not be particularly unusual in an urban location.
23. Furthermore, while concerns regarding local parking pressures are acknowledged,
    no robust evidence, such as a kerbside parking survey demonstrating parking
    stress, has been provided to demonstrate that the proposal, without the provision of
    the expected 2 parking spaces, would give rise to or materially worsen parking
    congestion in the area. As such, it has not been demonstrated that the proposal


2
    Council’s Parking Standards and Transport Assessments Supplementary Parking Document, adopted July 2014, Figure 5


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6004676


     would lead to adverse effects upon highway safety or increase parking stress as a
     consequence of the failure to provide off-street parking spaces.
24. Any rights of way over adjoining land during construction work and upon occupation
    of the HMO would be a civil matter for the parties to resolve outside of the appeal.
25. For the foregoing reasons I conclude that the proposed development would not
    lead to undue parking stress or harm highway safety, having particular regard to
    on-street parking provision. In that regard it would not conflict with the aims of
    Policy PCS23 of the PP, in so far as it requires new development to be well
    designed, including car parking which is, among other things, convenient to users
    and protect amenity and provide a good standard of living environment for
    neighbouring and local occupiers as well as future residents and users of the
    development. The refusal also reason also cites Policy PCS 17 of the PP, which
    focuses on the delivery of a strategy that will reduce the need to travel and provide
    a sustainable and integrated transport network. However, it has not been
    demonstrated as to how conflict would arise in that regard.
Appropriate Assessment
26. The site is within 5.6km of the Chichester and Langston Harbours Special
    Protection Area (SPA), the Portsmouth Harbour SPA and the Solent and
    Southampton Water SPA, referred to collectively as the Solent SPAs. Other sites
    which could potentially be impacted by the proposal include the Solent and Isle of
    Wight Lagoons Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and the Solent Maritime SAC.
    The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (the
    Regulations) impose a duty on the competent authority to consider, within the
    framework of an appropriate assessment, whether the development, either alone or
    in combination with other development, would have a significant effect on the
    conservation objectives of the sites.
27. The Solent SPAs are of international importance, designated due to their bird
    population, including over-wintering waders and wildfowl such as dark-bellied brent
    geese. There are also plants, habitats and other animals of national and
    international importance. The qualifying features of the Solent and Isle of Wight
    Lagoons SAC and the Solent Maritime SAC include coastal lagoons, annual
    vegetation of drift lines, Atlantic salt meadows, mudflats and sandflats, coastal
    shingle vegetation, annuals colonising mud and sand, and sandbanks and shifting
    dunes with marram, as well as a significant population of Desmoulin's whorl snail, a
    protected species of European importance.
28. The conservation status of the designated sites is at risk from increased
    recreational bird disturbance and eutrophication caused by increased levels of
    nitrogen input into the water environment, which the development, through the
    provision of additional residential accommodation, without appropriate mitigation,
    would exacerbate.
29. The Council indicate that, subject to financial contributions towards mitigation
    measures set out in the Bird Aware Solent (Solent Recreation Mitigation Strategy)
    August 2024 and a nutrient neutrality mitigation contribution, calculated in
    accordance with the Council’s Updated Interim Nutrient Neutral Mitigation Strategy
    for New Dwellings, June 2022, the integrity of the sites will be maintained. In
    addition, the Council has confirmed that the appropriate contributions have been


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6004676


     paid, as set out in the undertaking pursuant to S111 of the Local Government Act
     1972.
30. Having sought the views of Natural England and following appropriate assessment
    under the Regulations, I am, therefore, satisfied that adverse effects on the integrity
    of the sites will be avoided. Accordingly, the proposal would not conflict with the
    aims of Policy PCS13 of the PP, which sets out that development which would
    have an adverse effect on a European site will be refused or the relevant provisions
    of the Regulations.
Other Matters
31. The Council’s submissions indicate that the number of residential properties within
    a 50m radius of the site in occupation as HMOs, including the appeal proposal and
    that for which permission was recently granted at 246 Havant Road, would remain
    below the 10% threshold set out in the Council’s Houses in Multiple Occupation
    (HMOs) Supplementary Planning Document, adopted October 2019 (SPD). While I
    am mindful of criticism in relation to the accuracy of the Council’s records, and the
    10% threshold, I have not been presented with any substantive evidence to
    demonstrate that the area in which the appeal site is located is suffering from a
    significant concentration of HMOs. Thus, taking account of these factors and the
    evidence before me, the proposal would not have a significant effect on the mix of
    dwelling types or the availability of family housing which would unbalance the
    community to the detriment of social cohesion by virtue of the number of properties
    used as HMOs or the likely transient nature of their occupation.
32. The SPD also discourages proposals that would ‘sandwich’ a property between an
    existing and proposed HMO. Given there are 2 intervening properties between the
    appeal site and the proposed HMO at 246 Havant Road, the proposal would not
    result in ‘sandwiching’ and would therefore not conflict with advice in the SPD in
    that regard.
33. The Council has not raised an objection in relation to the living conditions of the
    future occupiers of the HMO, having regard to the internal layout of the
    accommodation or the provision of communal facilities and amenity space, which
    the officer’s report indicates would accord with the relevant guidance. Based on the
    evidence before me, I have no clear reason to disagree with this assessment. In
    addition, the development would be required to comply with relevant building
    regulations in relation to the health and safety of future occupiers, including fire
    safety.
34. There is no compelling evidence that the proposed HMO would give rise to
    unacceptable pressure on existing infrastructure or public services in the area
    including schools, GP and healthcare services, dentists, utilities and refuse
    collection.
35. While engagement with the local community prior to the submission of a planning
    application is encouraged, it is not a pre-requisite of the planning application
    process. Whether or not the appellant intends to pursue a revised proposal is not
    determinative to the appeal before me. Furthermore, interested parties suggest an
    attempt to ‘wear down’ local residents, however, this matter falls outside of the
    remit of this decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6004676


36. While I note concern that the appellant company was dissolved some time ago,
    there is no clear evidence to demonstrate that the right of appeal may have been
    lost.
Conditions
37. The conditions set out in the accompanying schedule are based on those
    suggested by the Council should the appeal be allowed. Where I agree the
    conditions are necessary, I have amended the wording, in the interests of precision
    and clarity, and to comply with advice in the Planning Practice Guidance. In
    addition to the standard condition controlling the timescale within which the
    development must commence, a condition is required to specify the relevant plans,
    in the interests of certainty.
38. While some indication of cycle parking is shown on the submitted site plan, details
    are limited. Therefore, a condition requiring further details, together with
    implementation, is necessary to promote sustainable methods of travel. To ensure
    the development does not exceed the scope of the Nitrate Mitigation Credits
    purchased, a condition is necessary to restrict future water usage to protect the
    designated sites.
39. A condition is necessary to agree details of the storage of waste and recycling
    material and subsequent implementation in the interests of living conditions of local
    residents and the character and appearance of the area.
40. A condition is also necessary to secure details of the materials to be used in the
    construction of the roof, to safeguard the character and appearance of the area.
41. To ensure appropriate internal space standards and living conditions for future
    occupants, a condition to restrict the number of residents in the HMO to 9 is
    necessary.
42. A condition to require the installation of brise soleil to the window serving bedroom
    8 is reasonable to safeguard the privacy of the occupiers of the adjoining property,
    as is a condition to require details of screening to the rear staircase. In light of my
    findings regarding the windows to the rear elevation of the building, I have not been
    presented with any compelling reason why a condition to require details of the
    window serving bedroom 2 would be necessary to prevent any loss of privacy of
    the occupiers of the adjoining properties.
43. The Council suggest conditions relating to a scheme of sound attenuation for road
    traffic noise and sound from the commercial unit, the types of Class E permissible
    and the hours of operation of the commercial premises, in the interests of the living
    conditions of future occupiers of the HMO. However, I have not been provided with
    any evidence that the existing Class E use to the ground floor of the building is
    subject to the same restrictions. Moreover, given the reduction in floor area of the
    commercial space, and the relationship between the ground floor commercial use
    and residential use above, which would not be dissimilar to the existing situation,
    the evidence before me does not justify the imposition of such conditions in this
    case.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6004676




Conclusion
44. For the reasons set out above, having regard to the development plan as a whole,
    and all other relevant material considerations, the appeal is allowed, subject to
    conditions.



E Worley
INSPECTOR


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
   date of this decision.

2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with drawing
   nos: Site, Location Plan and Street Scene dwg. no. PG.1086 · 25 · 03 Rev B; and
   Proposed Plans and Elevations dwg. no. PG.1086 · 25 · 02 Rev C.

3) Prior to the first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation, details of secure
   and weatherproof bicycle storage facilities for 4 bicycles shall be submitted to and
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The facilities shall be provided
   in accordance with the approved details before the first occupation of the
   accommodation and shall thereafter be retained for the parking of bicycles at all
   times.

4) Prior to the first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation written
   documentary evidence, in the form of a post-construction water efficiency
   calculator, demonstrating that the development has achieved a maximum water
   use of 110 litres per person per day as defined in paragraph 36(2)b of the Building
   Regulations (2010) (as amended), shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
   the Local Planning Authority The development shall be carried out and thereafter
   remain operational in accordance with the approved details.

5) Prior to the first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation, details of refuse
   and recyclable materials storage facilities shall be submitted to and approved in
   writing by the Local Planning Authority. The facilities shall be provided in
   accordance with the approved details before the first occupation of the
   accommodation and shall thereafter be retained for such use at all times.

6) Prior to their installation, details of the types and colours of external materials to be
   used (including details of the windows and roof covering and treatment of corners
   and joints) in the construction of the roof of the building shall be submitted to and
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be
   carried out in accordance with the approved details and retained thereafter in
   perpetuity.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6004676


7) The House in Multiple Occupation hereby permitted shall be occupied by a
   maximum of 9 residents.
8) Prior to the first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation, the window to
   bedroom 8 shall be fitted with brise soleil, as shown on drawing number PG.1086 -
   25- 02 Rev C, to prevent any views towards the opposite kitchen window and shall
   be retained as such for the lifetime of the development.
9) Prior to the first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation, details of the
   screening to the external staircase to the rear elevation of the building shall be
   submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
   development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details prior to
   the first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation and shall be retained
   thereafter for the lifetime of the development.


                                           ******end of conditions******




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          9
