Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by A James BSc (Hons) MA MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 08 September 2026


Appeal A: 6004604
Willow Cottage, The Village, Latchmore Bank, Little Hallingbury, Essex CM22 7PX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr N Anderson against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•    The application reference is UTT/25/2544/HHF.
•    The development proposed is new build cart lodge.


Appeal B: 6004605
Willow Cottage, The Village, Latchmore Bank, Little Hallingbury, Essex CM22 7PX
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr N Anderson against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•    The application reference is UTT/25/2545/LB.
•    The works proposed relate to a new build cart lodge.


Decisions
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B - listed building consent is not required for the works. I therefore take no
       further action in connection with this appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3.    There are two appeals on this site, relating to the same scheme. Appeal A relates
      to the planning application and Appeal B to the listed building consent application.
      Section 1(5) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
      (the Act) defines a ‘listed building’ as a building that is included in a list compiled or
      approved by the Secretary of State. The definition of a listed building also includes
      any object or structure within the curtilage of the building which, although not fixed
      to the building, forms part of the land and has done so since before 1st July 1948.
4.    According to the proposal description on the application form, the appellant is
      seeking listed building consent for a new build cart lodge, which is a freestanding
      structure. The proposed plans also refer to the removal of the existing garage.
      Both main parties confirm that the existing garage is a modern structure and no
      objection is raised to its demolition. The appellant has confirmed on the application
      form that the proposal does not involve the partial or total demolition of a listed
      building or any alterations to a listed building. Accordingly, listed building consent
      is not required for the proposal and it has not been necessary for me to determine
      Appeal B.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6004604 and Appeal B: 6004605


5.     Since the Council issued its decision notices, a new National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Both main parties
       have been given the opportunity to comment on it and I have taken all comments
       received into consideration.
6.    Following the Council’s determination of the applications, the Uttlesford Local Plan
      2021–2041 (the Local Plan) was adopted in March 2026 and now forms part of the
      development plan. It supersedes the Uttlesford Local Plan 2005. I am required to
      determine the appeals on the basis of the development plan at the time of my
      decision. The Council, within its statement of case, identifies policies from the new
      Local Plan that are relevant to the appeal scheme. The appellant has had the
      opportunity to comment on this information and I have taken all comments
      received into consideration.
7.    As the appeal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to section 66(1)
      of the Act.
Main Issue
8.    The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the setting of a Grade II listed
      building, known as ‘Willow Cottage’ (Ref: 1322687).
Reasoning
9.     Willow Cottage is a detached, timber-framed dwelling with a cross wing, which is
       believed to date back to the 16th century or earlier. It has a plastered finish and a
       clay-tiled roof. The building features traditional, leaded casement windows. Willow
       Cottage has been extended and altered in the 17th and 20th centuries and ranges
       in height from single storey to two storeys. The building sits within a spacious plot.
       A footpath runs along one side of the appeal site, which leads to open countryside.
10. Based on my site visit and the evidence before me, I find that the listed building’s
    special interest, insofar as is relevant to this appeal, is derived from its historic and
    architectural interest as an illustration of domestic architecture from the 16th
    century or earlier. The building’s surviving historic fabric, presence of traditional
    materials and architectural detailing are important components of its special
    interest. The building’s special interest also stems, in part, from its setting. Insofar
    as this appeal is concerned, the spacious and verdant character of the plot,
    together with the building’s relationship with the surrounding rural landscape,
    contribute to its special interest.
11. The proposal seeks to demolish an existing modern garage and construct a new
    cart lodge. The existing garage has a gable front, with a hipped roof. The ridge of
    the existing garage is roughly in line with the eaves on the two-storey part of the
    dwelling. While the existing garage is visible from the public realm, its set-back
    location, design, roof form and ridge height ensure that it is subservient in relation
    to the listed building. The existing garage has a plain-tiled roof and leaded
    casement windows and, in the main, its materials are sympathetic to the host
    building. However, the existing garage is not historically significant, neither does it
    contribute to the special interest of the listed building. Consequently, the
    demolition of the existing garage would not harm the special interest of the listed
    building.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6004604 and Appeal B: 6004605


12. The proposed cart lodge would be single storey in height. It has been designed to
    appear as a rural outbuilding, with two open bays and an exposed timber frame.
    The proposed cart lodge would utilise traditional materials, including timber
    windows and doors, that would be sympathetic to the listed building and rural
    character of the locality. The proposal would be set back from the highway, in a
    similar position to the existing garage, and would be dug into the ground to help
    minimise its overall height. The proposal would not result in the loss of any historic
    fabric.
13. While the proposed roof would slope away from the highway, the proposed
    structure would be wider than the existing garage and its roof would also be wider
    than the two-storey part of the dwelling when viewed from the highway. I
    appreciate that the proposal would appear visually lighter at ground-floor level than
    the existing garage and would not obscure views of the listed building from the
    highway. However, given its height and more prominent roof form, I find that the
    proposal would fail to be subservient to the listed building and would result in an
    unduly prominent new addition in close proximity to the listed building, which would
    harm the setting and special interest of the listed building.
14. The appellant advises that the existing soft landscaping and boundary treatment
    would be retained and enhanced. However, there are limited details before me in
    respect of any proposed landscaping and I therefore give this matter limited weight
    in my decision. Even if additional screening was proposed, listed buildings are
    safeguarded for their inherent architectural and historic interest, irrespective of
    whether public views of the building can be gained. In this case, I do not find that
    conditions relating to soft landscaping and external materials would mitigate the
    harm that I have identified above.
15. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would fail to preserve the
    setting of the Grade II listed building. Policy HE6 of the Framework advises that
    when considering the effect of a proposal on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. In
    this case, I find that the proposal would cause harm to the special interest of the
    listed building, albeit the harm would be at a low level. Nonetheless, a low level of
    harm does not equate to a low planning objection and the Framework is clear that
    any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable
    importance and weight. Where harm is identified, the Framework requires that the
    effect on the asset and its significance be weighed against any public benefits from
    the proposal.
16. The proposal would result in investment in the property, which would have a small
    economic benefit. I give this limited weight in my decision as a public benefit. I
    acknowledge that the existing garage is a modern structure and does not
    contribute positively to the special interest of the listed building. However, for the
    reasons given above, overall, I find that the appeal scheme would result in harm to
    the setting of the listed building and consequently I give limited weight to any
    public benefits associated with the removal of the existing garage. As set out
    above, I do not find that the use of traditional materials or additional soft
    landscaping would mitigate the harm that I have identified. While the provision of
    additional soft landscaping can have environmental benefits, there are limited
    details before me of any landscape enhancements and I therefore give this matter
    limited weight in my decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6004604 and Appeal B: 6004605


17. I do not find that the omission of the first floor office or living accommodation
    amounts to a public benefit. The appeal proposal must be assessed on its own
    merits, rather than by reference to a more intensive alternative scheme that is not
    before me. There is no substantive evidence that such a scheme has previously
    received planning consent or represents a realistic fallback position.
18. I acknowledge that the proposal would make continued use of an established
    developed part of the curtilage, without further encroachment into the countryside
    or harm to Green Belt openness. However, this is principally an absence of harm,
    rather than a positive public benefit.
19. It is clear that the benefits which would accrue would primarily be of a private
    nature. There is no compelling evidence before me to suggest that the use of the
    listed building as a dwelling would cease in the absence of the proposal. As a
    result, I do not find the proposal necessary to secure the viability and long-term
    conservation of the listed building. Furthermore, there is no clear and convincing
    justification for the harm that I have identified.
20. Overall, I give the public benefits limited weight in my decision. Consequently, there
    would be insufficient public benefits arising from the proposal to outweigh this
    harm.
21. Given the above, I conclude that, on balance, the proposal would fail to preserve
    the special interest of the listed building. The proposal would also fail to satisfy the
    requirements of the Act and Policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework. The proposal
    would also conflict with Core Policies 61 and 62 of the Local Plan. These policies,
    among other things, require proposals to conserve designated heritage assets and
    their settings in a manner appropriate to their historic character and significance.
Other Matters
22. Planning permission and listed building consent were granted in 2021 for a
    replacement garage. It is common ground between both main parties that this
    scheme has expired. There appear to be discrepancies in relation to the size and
    dimensions of the approved scheme and its relationship to the listed building. There
    has also been a change in national and local planning policies since the previous
    scheme was consented. Given the above, I give the consented scheme limited
    weight in my decision.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    as a whole and there are no other material considerations, including the
    Framework, that would outweigh that conflict. Therefore, I conclude that Appeal A
    should be dismissed.

A James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
