Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by A James BSc (Hons) MA MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6004332
Wood Farm, Pledgdon Green, Brick End Road, Henham, Essex CM22 6BN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Hayley Fletcher against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•    The application reference is UTT/25/2423/HHF.
•    The development is repair existing flint wall, extend the wall and install electric gates at the entrance
      to the property.


Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. In the interests of conciseness, I have taken the description of the development
   from the decision notice and appeal form.
3. As the appeal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to section 66(1)
   of the Act.
4. Since the Council issued its decision notice, the Uttlesford Local Plan 2021–2041
   (the Local Plan), March 2026 has been adopted. It now forms part of the
   development plan for the area, superseding the Uttlesford Local Plan 2005. A new
   National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was also published on 17
   August 2026. I am required to determine the appeal on the basis of the
   development plan and the Framework in force at the time of my decision. Both
   main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on the Local Plan and
   the Framework and I have taken all comments received into consideration.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether the appeal scheme preserves the setting of nearby listed
   buildings.
Reasons
6. ‘Wood Farmhouse’ is a Grade II* listed building (Ref: 1306916), which dates back
   to the 16th century or earlier. It is a large, detached dwelling, which is two storeys
   high, with accommodation in the roof and has two gabled cross wings. The building
   has a timber frame and plastered finish. It has a plain, red tiled roof. The building
   lies within a rural location and sits within a spacious and verdant plot.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6004332


7. Based on my site visit and the evidence before me, I find that the listed building’s
   special interest insofar as is relevant to this appeal is derived from its historic and
   architectural interests as an illustration of domestic architecture from the 16th
   century or earlier. The building’s surviving historic fabric, presence of traditional
   materials and its pleasing architectural design make important contributions in
   these regards. The building’s special interest also stems, in part, from its setting.
   Insofar as this appeal is concerned, the verdant and spacious nature of the plot and
   the rural character of the area, contribute to its special interest.
8. Adjacent to the appeal site is ‘Five Bay Barn circa 25 metres North West of Wood
   Farmhouse’, which is a Grade II listed building (Ref: 1112257). The barn was
   constructed in the early 19th century and is timber framed and finished with
   weatherboarding. It has a red plain tile roof. The barn has a gabled midstrey, with
   large cart doors. While the Council advises that the barn has been converted into a
   dwelling, the elevation facing the appeal site retains much of its agricultural
   character.
9. Insofar as is relevant to this appeal, I find that the barn’s special interest is derived
   from its historic and architectural interests as an illustration of agricultural
   architecture from the early 19th century. The building’s agricultural form, its timber
   frame and presence of traditional materials make important contributions in these
   regards. The barn also has group value with Wood Farmhouse. Its historic and
   functional relationship with the farmhouse contribute to the significance of both
   listed buildings and assists in understanding their historic agrarian context.
10. The appeal seeks consent for repair works to the front boundary wall to Wood
    Farmhouse. Consent is also sought for the extension of the walls and the
    installation of electric gates. The development has already been carried out.
11. There is insufficient information before me to reach a definitive conclusion as to
    whether the wall is curtilage listed and therefore forms part of the listed building,
    known as Wood Farmhouse. Nonetheless, the wall is clearly a historic wall, which
    is associated with the Grade II* listed building. The historic wall by reason of its
    siting and relationship to Wood Farmhouse and its use of traditional materials and
    detailing, makes a positive contribution to the special interest of Wood Farmhouse
    and also the adjacent listed barn.
12. The Council raises no objections to the repair works to the wall, which was
    previously in a poor condition and deemed unsafe by the appellant. The works
    have been carried out sensitively using traditional materials and techniques. The
    repair works have helped to improve the condition, stability and visual appearance
    of the wall, which in turn has resulted in a modest enhancement to the setting of the
    listed buildings and the character and appearance of the area. The wall has also
    been extended. With the exception of the stone caps and balls, I find that the
    height, design and use of materials in the extended section of the wall
    complements the historic wall.
13. The stone caps and balls that have been installed on top of the posts have a
    suburban appearance and do not reflect the rural and agricultural character of the
    locality. An electric gate has also been installed. While I observed dark coloured
    weatherboarding and timbers on the nearby buildings, the electric gate uses a
    timber-effect material. In this case, I find that the black, composite material due to
    its manufactured, solid and shiny appearance fails to appear authentic and it is


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6004332


     visually discordant with the more traditional materials found in the locality and on
     the adjacent listed buildings. The gate by reason of its design and height is also
     visually impermeable and is an unduly urbanising feature, within the setting of two
     rural buildings.
14. I appreciate that Wood Farmhouse is set back in its plot, some distance away from
    the entrance walls and entrance gates. The gates are also subordinate in size
    when compared to the listed farmhouse. Nevertheless, the walls and gates form
    part of the entrance to the listed farmhouse and are experienced together in views
    from the public realm. Given the discordant form and unsympathetic materials, I
    find that the appeal scheme detracts from the special interest of the listed
    farmhouse and the adjacent listed barn.
15. For the reasons given above and taking into consideration the positive effect of the
    repair works, overall, I find that the appeal scheme fails to preserve the setting of
    the Grade II* farmhouse and Grade II listed barn. Policy HE6 of the Framework
    advises that when considering the effect of a scheme on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation. The Framework is clear that the more important the asset, the
    greater the weight will be. Wood Farmhouse is a Grade II* listed building, which is a
    building of particular importance of more than special interest.
16. In this case, I find the harm to the setting of both listed buildings to be at a low
    level. Nevertheless, a low level of harm does not equate to a low planning objection
    and the Framework is clear that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a
    matter of considerable importance and weight. Where harm is identified, the
    Framework requires that the effect on the asset and its significance be weighed
    against any public benefits from the appeal scheme.
17. The appeal scheme has resulted in investment into the property, which has had a
    small economic benefit, which I give limited weight in my decision as a public
    benefit. The repair works to the historic wall have improved its structural soundness
    and visual appearance and have been carried out in a manner that is sympathetic
    to the historic character of the locality. I give the repair works limited weight as a
    public benefit in my decision. Nonetheless, there is no compelling evidence before
    me that the harmful elements of the wider scheme, including the stone caps and
    balls and electric gate, were necessary to secure those repairs.
18. The appellant argues that the set back location of the entrance gate has resulted in
    highway safety benefits as vehicles no longer need to wait on a 60mph stretch of
    the highway, prior to entering the property. However, the appellant confirms that
    there was no gate present at the time that they purchased the property, so I find no
    improvement in this regard. Furthermore, there is no substantive evidence before
    me that any historic gate resulted in highway safety issues. In addition, from what I
    observed on site, the width of the frontage and the available space between the
    historic wall and the highway would allow a vehicle to wait largely clear of the
    carriageway while any gates were opened. Accordingly, I give this argument limited
    weight in my decision.
19. The appellant advises that the gates are necessary in order to secure the
    appellant’s property, prevent unauthorised access and protect the appellant’s
    family, pets, visitors and property. I acknowledge the appellant’s concerns
    regarding security and the incidents of unauthorised access and trespass referred


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6004332


     to in the evidence, and I have sympathy with the effect these matters have had on
     the appellant and their family. I also recognise that the Framework supports
     development that promotes safe and secure living environments and seeks to
     reduce the opportunity for crime and the fear of crime. However, I am not
     convinced from the evidence before me that the appeal scheme represents the only
     or most appropriate solution for achieving the appellant’s security objectives,
     particularly given the sensitive historic context. Consequently, I give this argument
     limited weight in my decision.
20. The appellant argues that the composite gate would have a significantly longer
    lifespan, require less maintenance and offer improved recyclability when compared
    to a timber gate, and that this would accord with the sustainability principles of the
    Framework. However, there is no substantive or technical evidence before me to
    demonstrate that the composite material would perform materially better than an
    appropriately specified and maintained timber gate over its lifetime and I therefore
    give this argument limited weight in my decision. Furthermore, reduced
    maintenance would primarily be a private benefit, as opposed to a public benefit.
21. It is clear that the benefits which have accrued are primarily of a private nature.
    There is no compelling evidence before me to suggest that the use of ‘Wood
    Farmhouse’, as a dwelling would cease in the absence of the appeal scheme. As a
    result, I do not find the appeal scheme necessary to secure the viability and long-
    term conservation of the listed building.
22. Overall, I give the public benefits limited weight in my decision. Consequently, there
    would be insufficient public benefits arising from the appeal scheme to outweigh the
    harm that I have identified.
23. Given the above, I conclude that, on balance, the appeal scheme fails to preserve
    the setting of the listed buildings and fails to satisfy the requirements of the Act and
    Policies DP3, HE4 and HE6 of the Framework. The appeal scheme also conflicts
    with Core Policies 52 and 62 of the Local Plan. These policies, among other things,
    require proposals to conserve designated heritage assets and their settings in a
    manner appropriate to their historic character and significance.
Other Matters
24. While no objections have been received from neighbouring residents, this does not
    alter my findings set out above.
Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above, having regard to the development plan as a whole
    and all other relevant material considerations, I conclude that the appeal is
    dismissed.

A James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
