Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 May 2026
by Laura Bartle BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005877
Land Off Bolshaw Farm Lane, Heald Green, Cheadle, Cheshire East SK8 3JZ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Aiman Salama against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/0958/PIP.
•      The development proposed is permission in principle of up to 6no. dwellings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted only for the part of the
         development situated within the administrative area of Cheshire East Council for
         residential development comprising a minimum of one dwelling and a maximum of
         six dwellings at land off Bolshaw Farm Lane, SK8 8JZ in accordance with the
         terms of the application, Ref 25/0958/PIP, dated 11 March 2025.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
         advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
         is suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when
         the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
         of these two stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
         permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.       The PPG2 also advises that, for housing-led development, the amount of
         development should be expressed as a minimum and maximum number of
         dwellings. In this case, the application seeks permission in principle for "up to 6
         dwellings" and specifies only a maximum amount of development. Nevertheless,
         the Council determined the application on that basis, and the appeal has
         proceeded on the same understanding. In the circumstances, I have determined
         the appeal on the basis of residential development comprising a minimum of one
         dwelling and a maximum of six dwellings.



1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615
2
    PPG Paragraph: 052 Reference ID: 58-052-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005877


5.     A plan showing how the development could be laid out is before me. However, as
       this appeal does not relate to technical details, I have taken the submitted plan to
       be illustrative only.
6.     For clarity, I have added the words "Heald Green, Cheadle, Cheshire East" to the
       site address in the heading of this decision in order to more accurately identify the
       location of the appeal site.
7. The appeal site lies predominantly within the administrative area of Cheshire East
   Council (CEC). However, a very small part of the appeal site extends into the
   neighbouring authority area of Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council (SMBC). No
   corresponding planning application was submitted to SMBC in respect of the land
   within its administrative area.
8. Each local planning authority is empowered to determine planning applications only
   in respect of land within its own administrative boundary. Accordingly, the appeal
   before me can only relate to the land situated within Cheshire East, being the land
   to which the Council's decision relates. Whilst the submitted plans show land
   extending into Stockport, no determination has been made, nor could one be made
   in these proceedings, in respect of that part of the site. I have therefore considered
   the proposal on the basis that any decision on this appeal would apply only to the
   land within Cheshire East's administrative boundary.
9. During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given an
   opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the
   appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching my decision.
   References to the Framework in my decision are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
10. The main issue is whether the site would be suitable for housing development
    having regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of
    development.
Reasons
11. It is not disputed that, subject to detailed consideration at the technical details
    consent stage, the site is capable of accommodating up to six dwellings. However,
    the site lies within the Green Belt. Policy PG3 of the Cheshire East Local Plan
    Strategy (CELPS) seeks to restrict development within the Green Belt. It states
    that development in the Green Belt is inappropriate save for identified exceptions.
    The exceptions do not apply to the proposal.
12. However, Policy PG3 predates the revised Green Belt provisions now contained
    within the Framework and does not reflect the concept of grey belt land or the
    exceptions now found in Policy GB7 of the Framework. Consequently, whilst
    Policy PG3 remains part of the development plan, I attach very limited weight to
    the policy conflict in accordance with Annex A of the Framework.
13. Policy GB6 of the Framework states that development within the Green Belt is
    inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories set out in Policy GB7.
    Policy GB7(g) provides that development is not inappropriate where: it would
    utilise grey belt land; would not fundamentally undermine the purposes of the
    remaining Green Belt across the plan area; there is an evidenced unmet need for

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005877


       the type of development proposed; the development would be in a sustainable
       location; and, where applicable, it complies with Policy GB8.
14. The Framework defines grey belt land as land in the Green Belt, comprising
    previously developed land and/or any other land that does not strongly contribute
    to purposes (a), (b), or (d) in Policy GB2.
15. The appeal site forms a parcel of land located between the built-up edge of Heald
    Green and the farm redevelopment off Bolshaw Farm Lane. Expansive agricultural
    structures are located beyond the field immediately to the west.
16. Although the site is undeveloped, it is physically enclosed by development and
    infrastructure along the majority of its boundaries. I find that development of up to
    six dwellings would not materially affect the visual or functional containment of the
    site. Equally, and regardless of where the local authority boundaries lie, substantial
    separation would remain between Heald Green and Handforth, with intervening
    open land and the Manchester Airport Relief Road continuing to provide a clear
    physical break between the settlements.
17. The site does not therefore strongly contribute to Green Belt purposes relating to
    unrestricted sprawl or settlement merging. Furthermore, there is no evidence that it
    contributes to the setting or special character of a historic town. I therefore
    conclude that the site comprises grey belt land for the purposes of the Framework.
18. The main parties agree that development of this limited and well-contained site
    would not fundamentally undermine the purposes of the remaining Green Belt
    across the plan area. Accordingly, the requirement in Policy GB7(g)(i) is satisfied.
19. The Council's most recent five-year housing land supply evidence indicates a
    shortfall of deliverable housing sites. In those circumstances I am satisfied that
    there is an evidenced unmet need for housing and that the proposal would make a
    modest contribution towards meeting that need. The requirement of Policy
    GB7(g)(ii) is therefore met.
20. Turning to sustainability, the site adjoins the built-up area of Heald Green and
    benefits from access to good pedestrian infrastructure connecting it to some day-
    to-day services and facilities. The proposed development would therefore satisfy
    the access requirements of Policy SD 1 of the CELPS.
21. Although not all facilities lie within the distances referred to in the supporting text to
    Policy SD 2 of the CELPS, future occupiers would have reasonable access to
    shops, education facilities, public transport options and other services. Taking the
    evidence as a whole and having particular regard to the sustainable location
    requirements now referenced in Policy TR3 of the Framework, I find that the site
    occupies a sustainable location.
22. The major development provisions of Policy GB8 do not apply in this case.
    Drawing matters together, I conclude that the proposal satisfies all the
    requirements of Policy GB7(g) of the Framework. Consequently, the proposed
    development would not constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt
    and should not be regarded as harmful to the Green Belt or required to
    demonstrate very special circumstances.
23. Policy H1 of the Handforth Neighbourhood Plan (HNP) requires development
    proposed within the Green Belt to be acceptable in planning terms. In light of my

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005877


       findings above, the proposal would be consistent with that policy. Given the scale
       of development proposed, there is no substantive evidence before me that the
       proposal would give rise to significant highway impacts. Consequently, nothing
       before me indicates conflict with Policy 18 of the HNP.
24. I therefore conclude that the location, land use and amount of development are
    acceptable in principle.
Other Matters
25. I have had regard to the comments made by interested parties on various matters
    including construction management, flood risk and water management, trees,
    ecology and biodiversity, infrastructure and highways impact. However, as set out
    in the preliminary matters, my assessment is confined to matters relevant to an
    application for permission in principle.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
26. I have found that the proposed development would not be inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt. Accordingly, Policy S5(5) of the Framework is
    engaged.
27. The proposal would contribute to housing delivery in a reasonably sustainable
    location. These benefits attract moderate weight in favour of the proposal. I have
    not identified any adverse effects that would substantially outweigh those benefits.
    Consequently, the presumption in favour of sustainable development, as set out in
    Policy S3 of the Framework, applies.
28. Having regard to the development plan as a whole and all other material
    considerations, including the Framework, I conclude that the appeal should be
    allowed.

Laura Bartle
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
