Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 June 2026
by Chris Mayes CMLI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 03 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005976
Redlands, Main Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE13 8BW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Ladhar against the decision of Newcastle Upon Tyne City Council.
•   The application reference is 2025/1277/01/DET.
•   The appeal development is described as extension and alterations to rear elevation of existing main
    dwelling, extensions and alterations to form 3 storey ancillary annex, erection of residential garage
    block and associated hard and soft landscaping.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Since the appeal was lodged, the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) has been updated. I have determined the appeal on the basis of the
   current Framework. The parties, through the evidence submitted with the appeal,
   have had the opportunity to address the planning merits of the proposal, including
   matters relating to development in the Green Belt. I am satisfied that the changes
   to the Framework do not alter the substance of the main issues in this appeal or
   prejudice either party.
3. The application form indicates that the development is complete. I was able to see
   the completed development during my site visit and have determined the appeal on
   that basis.
4. The Council amended the description of development during the determination of
   the application. As the appellant did not agree to those amendments, I have used
   the description contained within the application as submitted and validated, which is
   reflected in the heading of this decision. I have nevertheless assessed the
   development as built.
5. The Council requested that material relating to a separate Certificate of Lawfulness
   appeal, submitted as Appendix 2 to the appellant's rebuttal statement, should not
   be taken into account. I have had regard to that request. Nevertheless, my
   conclusions on the planning merits of this appeal do not depend upon the outcome
   of the separate Certificate of Lawfulness appeal and I have determined the appeal
   accordingly.
6. A signed and dated Unilateral Undertaking has been submitted during the appeal
   process. Among other matters, the obligation would restrict occupation of the annex
   building so that it could only be occupied ancillary to the main dwelling and not as a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005976


     separate planning unit. I have taken the Undertaking into account as a material
     consideration in my determination of the appeal.
Background and Main Issues
7. The appeal site lies within the Green Belt and contains a substantial detached
   dwelling, associated outbuildings and surrounding land. The appeal development
   comprises extensions to the existing dwelling, the erection of a detached annex
   building, the erection of a garage block, associated hard and soft landscaping
   works and the extension of domestic garden areas into adjoining land.
8. The site has a long-established residential use. Historical evidence indicates that a
   dwelling occupied the site from at least the mid-twentieth century until its
   destruction by fire. Planning permission was granted in 2003 for the erection of a
   replacement dwelling and associated garage. A further planning permission was
   granted in 2017 for extensions to the main dwelling and the erection of an ancillary
   annex building.
9. The parties disagree as to whether the 2017 permission was lawfully commenced.
   That matter is the subject of a separate appeal relating to a Certificate of
   Lawfulness. However, I have determined this appeal on the basis of the
   development before me. Even if I were to assume, in the appellant's favour, that
   the 2017 permission was lawfully implemented and remains capable of being relied
   upon as a fall-back position, the evidence demonstrates that the development as
   built materially departs from that approved scheme. Indeed, the appellant accepts
   that while elements of the development were undertaken pursuant to the 2017
   permission, the development as completed is not wholly in accordance with that
   approval.
10. Taking the above matters into account, the main issues are:
          •    whether the appeal development constitutes inappropriate development in
               the Green Belt having regard to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
               Framework) and relevant development plan policies;
          •    the effect of the development on openness;
          •    the effect of the appeal development on the character and appearance of the
               area;
          •    the effect of the appeal development on ecology and biodiversity; and
          •    whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm,
               would be clearly outweighed by other considerations so as to amount to the
               very special circumstances necessary to justify the development.
Reasons
Whether Inappropriate Development
11. The Framework provides that certain forms of development on grey belt land may
    not constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt where the relevant
    criteria are satisfied.
12. The site comprises a long-established residential use and contains substantial
    existing built development. Having regard to the characteristics of the site and the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005976


     evidence before me, I am satisfied that it comprises grey belt land for the purposes
     of the Framework.
13. In such circumstances, policy GB7(1) g.ii of the Framework requires there to be an
    evidenced unmet need for the type of development proposed. The appellant refers
    to the needs of an expanding family, multi-generational living arrangements,
    cultural considerations, security concerns and mobility needs. I have no reason to
    doubt the genuineness of those circumstances. However, only limited evidence has
    been provided to demonstrate the specific accommodation requirements said to
    arise from mobility needs or why those requirements necessitate development of
    the scale now present on the site. Furthermore, prior to the construction of the
    development now before me, the site already provided substantial residential
    accommodation, and previous permissions had facilitated significant additional
    accommodation associated with its occupation. While family circumstances can
    carry weight, the evidence before me does not demonstrate an unmet need
    requiring development of the scale proposed.
14. Consequently, I am not satisfied that the development meets the requirements of
    policy GB7(1) g.ii of the Framework. As the criteria are cumulative, that conclusion
    is sufficient to mean that the development does not benefit from the grey belt
    provisions. It therefore falls to be considered against national and local Green Belt
    policy in the usual way.
15. For the development to be not inappropriate it would, in accordance with policy
    GB7(1) b of the Framework need to not result in a disproportionate increase in size
    compared to the original dwelling. Footnote 40 to the Framework defines the
    original building for these purposes as that first constructed after 1 July 1948. There
    is no dispute between the parties that a detached house and detached garage was
    erected pursuant to the 2003 planning permission, which provides the appropriate
    baseline against which the scale of the additions should be assessed.
16. The development comprises extensions to the main dwelling, a substantial annex
    building and a large garage structure. No detailed volumetric assessment has been
    provided either of the development or the house as originally built. Although the
    original dwelling is substantial, the evidence before me, together with my
    observations during my site visit, indicates that the development as built represents
    a disproportionate increase in size. Indeed, the annex alone is of a scale broadly
    comparable to that of the dwelling originally constructed in 2003. Although
    physically detached, the annex and garage would remain functionally and
    physically related to the main house and would operate as ancillary residential
    accommodation. In those circumstances, I consider it appropriate to treat it as an
    addition to the original dwelling for the purposes of Green Belt assessment.
Openness
17. The additions have significantly increased the amount of built form on the site
    where previously there was none. The development therefore causes substantial
    harm to the openness of the Green Belt in spatial terms.
18. In visual terms, I acknowledge that the site is heavily screened by existing
    vegetation and that public views of the development are extremely limited.
    Consequently, I find that the effect on openness in visual terms is very limited.
    However, openness is also a spatial concept. Notwithstanding the limited visibility


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005976


     of the development, the substantial increase in the amount of built form on the site
     results in a significant reduction in openness in spatial terms.
19. For these reasons, notwithstanding the disputed change of use of woodland and
    paddock land, I conclude that the appeal development constitutes inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt. In addition to the definitional harm arising from
    inappropriateness, the appeal development results in substantial harm to the
    openness of the Green Belt, principally in spatial terms. In accordance with the
    Framework, I attach substantial weight to that harm. Consequently, the
    development conflicts with the Green Belt aims of the Framework and with Policy
    CS19 of the Core Strategy and Urban Core Plan for Gateshead and Newcastle
    upon Tyne 2010-2030 (March 2015) (CS), which seeks to protect the Green Belt,
    including by safeguarding the countryside from encroachment and checking
    unrestricted urban sprawl.
Character and Appearance
20. The site occupies a substantial plot and forms part of an area characterised by
    large, detached houses set within generous, landscaped grounds. Mature
    vegetation and woodland planting contribute significantly to the verdant character of
    the area and limit views of development from the surrounding countryside.
21. The annex building, extensions to the main house and garage block have been
    designed using materials, proportions and architectural detailing that are broadly
    consistent with the existing house. Consequently, the development reads as a
    coherent composition rather than an incongruous addition. Furthermore, the
    extensive landscaping and established vegetation substantially moderate the visual
    presence of the development. While the removal of sections of hedgerow and the
    extension of domestic curtilage have altered the historical extent of the residential
    plot, the site remains heavily landscaped and retains its distinctly verdant character.
22. Although the development has increased the amount of built form on the site, the
    buildings are arranged within a substantial plot and are experienced as part of a
    coherent group of structures associated with the main house. The spacing between
    buildings, mature landscaping and scale of the site mean that the development
    does not appear cramped, congested or overdeveloped. Consequently, while I
    have found that the development materially reduces openness through the
    cumulative increase in built form, that finding does not lead me to conclude that it
    causes harm to character and appearance. Openness and character are distinct
    planning concepts. In this case, the development has not resulted in a harmful
    change to the prevailing character of the area and does not appear visually
    intrusive in public views.
23. Taking these matters together, I conclude on this main issue that while the
    development has altered the extent and intensity of development on the site, it has
    not resulted in material harm to the character and appearance of the area.
    Consequently, I find no conflict with Policy CS15 of the CS or Policy DM20 of the
    Newcastle upon Tyne Development and Allocations Plan 2015-2030 (June 2020)
    (DAP). Furthermore, as I have assessed the appeal development as ancillary
    accommodation associated with the existing residential use rather than housing
    development, I do not find conflict with the housing-led spatial strategy objectives of
    Policy CS4 of the CS.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005976


Ecology and Biodiversity
24. The appeal site includes woodland that forms part of a Site of Local Conservation
    Interest. The woodland is locally designated due to its mature and heritage trees
    and the habitat provided for a range of protected and priority species.
    Consequently, it is recognised as being of ecological value at both parish and
    district level and is relatively uncommon within the local area. It is also located
    within a Wildlife Enhancement Corridor. The appeal development has resulted in
    the removal of groundcover from the woodland area to provide garden space with
    associated landscaping and residential activity which has altered the character of
    previously undeveloped areas.
25. Consequently, although the tree canopy remains largely intact, the removal of
    understorey vegetation, ground flora, soils and deadwood has eroded important
    habitat features that support biodiversity, including but not limited to nesting,
    roosting and foraging opportunities for priority species. There also is potential for
    increased disturbance arising from domestic activity including lighting and its
    consequent effect on bat foraging corridors. Furthermore, a hedgerow has been
    removed and areas of grassland disturbed. The development has therefore
    resulted in ecological harm and a degree of domestication of land that formerly
    formed part of the woodland setting.
26. The appellant proposes compensation for the loss of habitat through the provision
    of a new area of woodland planting and the provision of bird, bat and hedgehog
    boxes. However, the Council raises concerns about the location of the woodland
    and its ability to provide appropriate compensatory woodland. Furthermore, it has
    concerns regarding the Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) metric which demonstrates a
    15.56% net gain. The baseline identified within the report is not agreed, and the
    Council states that initial assessments were undertaken outside of the accepted
    botanical assessment period and, as such, habitat conditions cannot be accepted
    with confidence. The woodland areas that the report identify as degraded have
    been assumed to be in ‘moderate condition’ despite the wider woodland achieving
    a ‘good condition’ score and no justification has been provided for these assumed
    conditions in the form of a botanical species list or species abundance.
27. Even if I were to accept that the proposed woodland planting provided adequate
    compensation for the harm caused to ecology, and enabled an appropriate level of
    BNG, there is no mechanism before me to ensure that it would be provided. The
    proposed planting area is not within the appeal site and there is no legal agreement
    before me that would secure its provision.
28. For the reasons given above, I have found that the development has resulted in
    ecological harm. Furthermore, in the absence of a mechanism to secure the
    proposed compensatory measures, it has not been demonstrated that the identified
    harm would be adequately mitigated or that biodiversity net gain would be
    achieved. Accordingly, it conflicts with Policies DM28 and DM29 of the DAP or
    Policy CS18 of the CS in this regard.
Other Considerations and Green Belt Balance
29. The development has been advanced as providing accommodation for an extended
    family through multi-generational living arrangements. I have no reason to doubt
    the appellant's desire to accommodate family members within the appeal site and I


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005976


     accept that the annex would provide flexibility in that regard. I therefore attribute
     moderate weight to the family circumstances put forward.
30. I have also had regard to the appellant's references to mobility needs, cultural
    considerations, business requirements and security concerns. However, only
    limited evidence has been provided regarding the nature of the mobility needs
    relied upon or why those needs require development of the scale now present on
    the site. Similarly, while I acknowledge the concerns raised regarding security and
    family living arrangements, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that they
    necessitate development of the extent before me. Accordingly, I attribute limited
    weight to these matters.
31. The planning history of the site is a material consideration. In particular, permission
    was granted in 2017 for extensions to the main house and the erection of an annex
    building. However, even if I were to accept the appellant’s case that the permission
    remains extant, the development before me materially exceeds that previously
    authorised. It would therefore be preferable to the scheme before me now and its
    weight as a fallback position is limited, albeit I accept that additional
    accommodation associated with the residential use of the site has previously been
    found acceptable in principle. I afford this matter moderate weight.
32. I have also taken into account the submitted Unilateral Undertaking which would
    restrict occupation of the annex so that it remains ancillary to the main house and
    may not be occupied as a separate planning unit. I attach weight to that obligation.
    However, the principal Green Belt harm identified in this case arises from the scale
    and physical presence of the development. Consequently, the restriction on
    occupation would not materially reduce the identified harm in terms of
    inappropriateness and openness and therefore attracts only limited weight.
33. Finally, I recognise that the development makes use of an existing residential site. I
    attribute limited weight to that matter. I have also found no material harm in relation
    to character and appearance. That finding does not weigh against the
    development, but neither does it amount to a positive consideration of significant
    weight.
34. Taking these matters together, I attach moderate weight to the family living
    arrangements proposed and to the planning history of the site. I attach limited
    weight to the submitted Unilateral Undertaking, the use of an existing residential
    site, the matters relating to mobility needs and the concerns regarding security.
35. The Framework establishes that substantial weight should be given to any harm to
    the Green Belt and that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the
    Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special circumstances. In
    addition, the harm caused to ecology and biodiversity attracts moderate weight. In
    totality, therefore, I find that the other considerations in this case do not clearly
    outweigh the harm identified. Consequently, the very special circumstances
    necessary to justify the development do not exist.
Development Plan Conclusion
36. The development conflicts with Green Belt policies and those relating to ecology
    and biodiversity and is therefore in conflict with the development plan when read as
    a whole. While I have identified a number of material considerations in favour of the
    development, including the provision of accommodation to support multi-

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005976


     generational living arrangements and the planning history of the site, they do not
     indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with the
     development plan.
37. I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) set out under
    s149 of the Equality Act 2010, but the harm caused by the development outweighs
    its benefits in terms of eliminating discrimination against persons with the protected
    characteristics of religion, age and/or disability, advancing equality of opportunity
    for those persons and fostering good relations between them and others. Hence, I
    conclude that it is proportionate and necessary to dismiss the appeal.
Conclusion
38. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



Chris Mayes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
