Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Nick Davies BSc(Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005328
Land opposite Rose Meadow, Carnkie, Helston TR13 0DN
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Johnson against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•      The application Ref is PA25/08915.
•      The development proposed is construction of 6-9 dwellings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for construction of 6-9
         dwellings at Land opposite Rose Meadow, Carnkie, Helston TR13 0DN in
         accordance with the terms of the application, Ref PA25/08915, and the plan
         submitted with it.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (the
         PPG) advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
         is suitable in-principle, and the second (technical details consent stage), is when
         the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
         of these two stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
         permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.       An applicant can apply for permission in principle for a range of dwellings by
         expressing a minimum and maximum number of dwellings as part of the
         application. In this instance, permission has been sought for a minimum of six and
         a maximum of nine dwellings.
5.       The site lies in close proximity to the Fal and Helford Special Area of Conservation
         (the SAC). The Cornwall Council European Sites Mitigation Supplementary
         Planning Document (July 2021) (the SPD) explains the importance of the SAC and
         its qualifying features. It identifies that recreational activity within it, resulting from
         additional residential development nearby, has the potential to disturb this habitat,
         resulting in a likely significant effect on its qualifying features. The SPD provides a
         strategic scheme, and sets out a series of measures, to mitigate the effect of this

1
    The PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005328


       increased recreational pressure. For small developments, this involves securing a
       financial contribution to the strategic mitigation plan through each application.
6.     The PPG explains that conditions and/or planning obligations cannot be secured at
       the permission in principle stage, only at the technical details consent stage.
       However, in this case, the evidence indicates that a signed and dated undertaking
       under s111 of the Local Government Act 1972 has been submitted. This provides
       an undertaking to make the appropriate financial contribution to the strategic plan
       to mitigate the effect of the additional dwellings. The payment has already been
       made, so the mitigation requirements in the SPD have been secured.
7.     Any application for technical details consent must specify the permission in
       principle to which the technical details consent relates. There is, therefore, a direct
       link between the mitigation payment, related to the permission in principle stage for
       this scheme, and the process of submitting and considering any subsequent
       technical details, including its effects on the SAC.
8.     Natural England has endorsed the measures proposed in the SPD and, following
       the completion of the s111 undertaking and submission of the related payment, the
       Council is satisfied that the effect of the development on the SAC has been
       addressed. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the proposal, either alone or
       in combination with other schemes, would have no adverse effect on the integrity
       of the SAC. Consequently, when undertaking an appropriate assessment, I am
       satisfied that the scheme would accord with the requirements of the Conservation
       of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017. The proposal would not, therefore, be
       habitats development, so can be considered under the permission in principle
       application procedure.
9.     On 17 August 2026, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). Both parties have had the opportunity to comment
       on its implications for their respective cases. I have considered the new
       Framework in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issue
10. The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
    regard to its location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development.
Reasons
11. Policy 2 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030 (adopted 2016)
    (the Local Plan) sets out the spatial strategy for development. It seeks to maintain
    the dispersed development pattern of Cornwall, providing homes and jobs based
    on the role and function of each place. Based on this strategy, Policy 3 defines
    how development will be accommodated, with growth focussed on identified main
    towns. However, it also supports housing growth within or adjoining smaller
    settlements through rounding off; development of previously developed land
    (PDL); infill schemes that fill a small gap in an otherwise continuous built frontage;
    or rural exception sites. In this regard, it is not disputed that Carnkie is a
    settlement.
12. Carnkie is linear in form, with continuous development along the northern side of
    the road. Whilst there are buildings to the south of the road, they are scattered,
    and do not so closely follow the line of the highway. The appeal site lies on the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005328


         south side, opposite the western extremity of the linear development to the north.
         The site slopes down away from the bungalows opposite, and is separated from
         them by the road, a hedgerow, and trees. There is a loose scatter of buildings to
         the southeast, but these are detached from the settlement. To the east, there is no
         other development close to the south side of the road for a considerable distance.
         Consequently, although the site lies inside the road sign marking the edge of the
         village, it is surrounded on three sides by undeveloped land, and is physically and
         visually detached from the development on the northern side of the road. It is not,
         therefore, within the settlement.
13. However, the bungalows opposite the site are part of the continuous line of
    development on the northern side of the road, and are therefore part of the
    settlement. Case law2 has held that an intervening road does not prevent land
    from being immediately adjacent to a settlement. For the purposes of Policy 3,
    therefore, the site adjoins Carnkie.
14. The proposal is not put forward as a rural exception site, so support for residential
    development under Policy 3 is dependent on the proposal comprising infill,
    rounding off, or development of previously developed land (PDL) immediately
    adjoining the settlement. The appellant does not contend that the proposal
    comprises infill or rounding off, and I have no reason to come to a different
    conclusion. Furthermore, on the evidence before me, the site does not fall within
    the definition of PDL in the glossary to the Framework. There is, therefore, no
    support for the proposal under this strand of Policy 3.
15. Policy 21 of the Local Plan encourages the best use of land in sustainable
    locations, through the use of PDL, contaminated land, or by increasing building
    density. In this case, the land is not contaminated or PDL, and the proposal would
    introduce entirely new development, rather than increasing building density.
    Consequently, the proposal does not derive support from Policy 21.
16. Paragraph 2.33 of the Local Plan says that land outside the physical boundaries of
    existing settlements is defined as open countryside. In the absence of support
    from Policies 3 and 21, Policy 7 says that the development of new homes in the
    open countryside will only be permitted where there are special circumstances,
    none of which apply in this case. Consequently, the proposal would conflict with
    the spatial strategy set out in Policies 2, 3, 7 and 21 of the Local Plan.
17. Although the site is adjacent to the settlement, it is visually separated from the built
    development opposite by the road, hedgerow, trees, and the sloping topography.
    Consequently, it appears to be a part of the surrounding undeveloped landscape
    that provides an attractive rural setting for Carnkie. The proposal would introduce
    built development into this area of countryside, with only a tenuous visual
    association with the existing settlement. Approaching the site from the west, the
    development would be visible before any other buildings in the settlement, so
    would appear as an isolated group of buildings in the countryside, resulting in
    harm to the predominantly rural character and appearance of the immediate
    surroundings. However, the level of harm would be moderate as, in other views
    the site is seen in the context of the existing settlement. Furthermore, the site is
    not prominent in the wider landscape. Nevertheless, the moderate harm results in
    conflict with Policies 12 and 23 of the Local Plan, and Policy C1 of the Climate

2
    William Corbett v Cornwall Council v Dympna Wilson [2022] EWCA Civ 1069


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6005328


       Emergency Development Plan Document 2023 (the CEDPD), which seek to
       maintain and enhance Cornwall’s distinctive natural environment.
Other Matters
18. There is no evidence that the site is of particular importance to any protected
    species, so the impact of the development on biodiversity is not an issue to be
    considered at the permission in principle stage. This is a matter to be considered
    as part of the technical details consent stage, which will be subject to the statutory
    Biodiversity Net Gain requirements.
19. In the absence of any obvious constraints, means of access to the site is also a
    matter to be considered at technical details stage. As the site lies within Flood
    Zone 1, it is not at significant risk of flooding. The detailed drainage proposals that
    would be necessary to avoid increased off-site flood risk are also a matter to be
    considered at technical details stage.
20. It is suggested in representations that there may have been mining operations
    close to, or under the site. Any necessary investigations to demonstrate the extent
    of the workings, and any required remedial action, would need to be submitted
    with any future application for technical details consent.
Planning Balance
21. The proposal would conflict with the spatial strategy of the development plan and
    with its policies that seek to protect the distinctive natural environment of Cornwall.
    The proposal would, therefore, conflict with the development plan as a whole.
    However, it is not disputed that the Council cannot currently demonstrate a five-
    year supply of deliverable housing sites. The most recent evidence indicates that
    the supply is 3.9 years, so the shortfall is considerable. In these circumstances,
    the Framework’s approach to determining proposals for development outside
    settlements, as set out at Policy S5 1.j, is a material consideration of critical
    importance. This Policy advises that residential development that is physically
    well-related to an existing settlement, and is of an appropriate scale, should be
    approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    in the Framework.
22. Paragraph 2 of Annex A of the Framework says that development plan policies
    should not be given reduced weight simply because they were adopted prior to
    publication of the Framework. The spatial strategy set out in Policies 2, 3 ,7 and 21
    of the Local Plan is consistent with the Framework’s aims to direct development to
    the most appropriate and sustainable locations. However, it is not delivering a
    sufficient supply of homes in accordance with the other aims of the Framework.
    Consequently, I can only afford moderate weight to the conflict with the
    development plan policies governing the spatial location of housing.
23. Policies 12 and 23 of the Local Plan, and Policy C1 of the CEDPD are generally
    consistent with the Framework’s aims to achieve well-designed places and to
    conserve and enhance the natural environment. The proposal would result in
    moderate harm to the character and appearance of the area. I am mindful,
    however, that meeting the shortfall in housing provision is unlikely to be achieved
    without some visual impacts. In this case, the site does not lie within a protected
    landscape, and there is scope to minimise the harm through the technical details

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005328


         consent process. Consequently, I give limited weight to the conflict with Policies 12
         and 23.
24. Set against the harm that I have identified, there would be benefits associated with
    the development. It would support the Framework’s objective of delivering a
    substantial increase in the supply of homes. In view of the current evidenced
    unmet need for housing, Policy HO7 of the Framework requires that substantial
    weight should be given to this benefit. Furthermore, the scale of the proposal
    would exceed the threshold for an affordable housing contribution under Policy 8
    of the Local Plan. This could be secured at technical details stage, which is an
    additional, and significant benefit of the scheme, which would help to meet the
    Council’s stated objective of achieving a step-change in affordable housing
    provision3.
25. There would also be economic benefits associated with the development, through
    the creation of jobs during the construction phase. Thereafter, residents would
    contribute to the local economy through ongoing spending and support for local
    services. The scale of the development means that these benefits carry modest
    weight.
26. When assessed against the policies in the Framework, taken as a whole, the
    adverse impacts of the proposal do not significantly and demonstrably outweigh
    the benefits. Therefore, despite the conflict with the development plan, material
    considerations indicate that permission in principle should be granted.
Conditions
27. The PPG makes it clear that it is not possible for conditions to be attached to a
    grant of permission in principle, whose terms may only include the site location,
    the type and amount of development.
Conclusion
28. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan, but material
    considerations, including the Framework, indicate that a decision should be made
    other than in accordance with it. For the reasons given above the appeal should be
    allowed.



Nick Davies
INSPECTOR




3
    Securing Homes for All: A Plan to respond to Cornwall’s Housing Crisis (December 2021)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  5
