Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Terceiro BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6005225
1 The Down Cottages, The Down, Lamberhurst, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN3 8EX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Stitson against the decision of Tunbridge Wells Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02947/FULL.
•    The development proposed is single storey rear extensions & patio.

Appeal B Ref: 6005229
1 The Down Cottages, The Down, Lamberhurst, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN3 8EX
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Stitson against the decision of Tunbridge Wells Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02977/LBC.
•    The works proposed are single storey rear extensions & patio.

Decision
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     There are two appeals on this site. They relate to the planning application and
       listed building consent for the same scheme. To avoid duplication, I have dealt
       with them together, except where otherwise indicated.
4.     As the appeal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to sections
       16(2) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (the Act).
5.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       on 17 August 2026, and I have had regard to this in my decision. The main parties
       were invited to provide comments on the revised Framework and the comments
       received have been taken into account in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issue
6.     The main issue on both appeals is the effect of the proposal on the special interest
       of the Grade II listed building, Down Cottages.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005225


Reasons
7.       The appeal site is a Grade II listed building known as Down Cottages. While the
         property is currently a single dwellinghouse, the listing description1 indicates that in
         the past the building would have accommodated three cottages. The earliest
         phase of the building dates the 17th century with subsequent alterations and
         additions taking place in the 18th century (including addition of a timber frame
         range); 19th century (including two-storey extension); and 20th century (including
         chimney stack and single storey rear extension).
8.       The building is two-storey, with a half-hipped roof to one side and stepped up at
         centre to a hipped roof on the other side. The rear additions include a cat-slide
         roof. The building is externally finished in white weather boarding and red brick on
         the ground floor, tile hanging on the first floor, and plain tiled roof with a central
         chimney stack and a chimney on each side elevation. The building’s design and
         materials make for a pleasing appearance. The special interest and significance of
         the listed building derive, in part, from its architectural form and materials reflective
         of the local Wealden building vernacular and shared with many other buildings in
         the local area.
9.       The building can be appreciated from within the property’s garden, from other
         third-party viewpoints, and public views can be gained from nearby roads,
         including from The Slade and Furnace Lane. In this case, while the public views
         towards the proposal would be limited, it would be visible from within the appeal
         site and glimpsed from neighbouring properties.
10. The appeal proposal includes the construction of two separate single storey rear
    extensions. One extension would have an asymmetrical pitched roof sloping
    towards the host dwelling, while the other extension would have an asymmetrical
    hipped roof sloping away from the dwelling. The roof forms would be irregular and
    incoherent with one another, as well as with the roof form of the host building.
    Therefore, while the proposed roof forms would avoid visually intercepting the
    host’s roofline, the design would nonetheless appear contrived in comparison to
    the host dwelling. Even though the proposal would be nestled within the garden
    gradients and therefore would not be seen from wider viewpoints, harm to a listed
    building does not depend on visibility.
11. The extensions would be single storey and therefore of a lower height than the
    host dwelling and subservient in this respect. Still, even if they could be
    constructed to avoid interference with any historic fabric, because of their overall
    width and depth, they would obscure a large proportion of the rear elevation and
    visually overwhelm it, thereby diminishing the significance of the listed building.
12. The Lamberhust and The Down Conservation Areas Appraisal 2002 refers to the
    external materials on Down Cottages, tile hung at first floor and feather-edged
    boarding to ground, as a rare configuration. Both extensions would be externally
    finished in timber shingle material, and therefore the rear elevation of the host
    dwelling would be dominated by this material. This would be in stark contrast with
    the traditional materials on the host and would appear incongruous. In addition,
    despite the glazed link, the siting of the extension to accommodate the second
    living room would obscure a section of white featheredged weatherboarding and


1
    List Entry Number: 1085255


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6005225


       reduce the legibility of this façade. This would be harmful to the listed building and
       would diminish its aesthetic value.
13. It is accepted that new development does not have to be a pastiche of the host
    building. However, it does need to respect the scale, form, proportions and
    materials to ensure that the host dwelling, and in this case, the significance of the
    listed building, is not harmed. The later rear porch extension would be removed,
    however this would not justify the proposed development which for the reasons set
    out above would be harmful to the listed building.
14. Policy HE6(1) of the Framework advises that, when considering the impact of a
    proposed development on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE4(2)
    states that any harm to the significance of a designated asset, including from
    development within its setting, should have a clear and convincing justification.
15. Given the scope of works, the proposal would result in moderate harm to the
    significance of the listed building. Any harm to a designated heritage asset is a
    matter of considerable importance and weight. Where a development proposal
    would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, Policy HE6(4) informs
    us that the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any
    public benefits resulting from the proposal, including securing the long-term reuse
    of a vacant or underused listed building.
16. The proposal would be acceptable in terms of other aspects, including its effect on
    the living conditions of nearest neighbours. However, this is a neutral matter that
    neither weighs for or against the appeal scheme.
17. While the proposal would improve the dwelling’s internal floor space and would
    provide a more energy-efficient family home capable of meeting modern living
    requirements and contribute towards the preservation of the heritage asset, there
    is no substantive evidence before me to suggest that this could not be achieved in
    another, less harmful manner. There would be some economic benefits brought
    about through the construction phase, and the sedum and wildflower roofs on both
    extensions would support biodiversity. These public benefits attract modest weight
    and fall short of overcoming the substantial weight I give to the harm that would
    arise to the designated heritage asset.
18. Given the above, the proposal would fail to preserve the special historic interest of
    the Grade II listed building, Down Cottages, thus failing to satisfy the requirements
    of the Act, the Framework and would conflict with the relevant provisions of
    Policies H11, EN4 and EN1 of the Tunbridge Wells Local Plan 2025. These,
    amongst other things, seek to preserve and enhance heritage assets and require
    proposals to be compatible with existing buildings including in terms of external
    appearance and materials.
Other Matters
19. The site lies within the High Weald National Landscape (NL), and its special
    qualities include a detailed agricultural tapestry of fields, small woodlands and
    farmsteads. Section 245 of the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 includes a
    requirement to seek to further the statutory purpose of conserving and enhancing
    the natural beauty of National Landscapes. The proposed works would have
    effects on heritage assets which I have considered above, however, this harm

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005225


       would not affect the natural or scenic qualities of the wider landscape given its
       localised impacts.
20. The site lies within the Lamberhurst and The Down Conservation Area.
    Accordingly, I have had regard to the statutory duty set out in section 72(1) of the
    Act. The CA derives its significance, in part, from its open character dominated by
    landscaping features, including a large green space, and small collection of
    sporadic buildings to the edge. The proposal seeks to extend an existing dwelling
    to the rear and therefore would preserve the character of the CA.
21. Reference is made to other schemes elsewhere which incorporated shingle
    façades and roofs. However, the details provided pertaining to those
    developments are limited and, as such, I cannot be certain that the features on the
    appeal building would be comparable. As a result, I have considered the appeal on
    its own merits. These other examples therefore have limited bearing on my overall
    findings.
22. The appellant directs me to the Council’s pre-application response regarding the
    construction of a rear extension with a glazed link. However, I note the caveat that
    any advice given by Council Officers for pre-application enquiries does not indicate
    a formal decision by the Local Planning Authority. Irrespective, I have dealt with
    the appeal on its planning merits based on the evidence before me and found it
    would result in unacceptable harm.
Conclusion
23. For the above reasons and having regard to all other matters raised I conclude
    that the appeals are dismissed.

P Terceiro
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
