Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by L Clark MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005578
Treeton, Friars Lane, Burnham Norton, Norfolk PE31 8JA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Woodson Homes Ltd against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk
    Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/01211/F.
•   The development proposed is Extensions & Alterations to Dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for extensions &
   alterations to dwelling at Treeton, Friars Lane, Burnham Norton, Norfolk PE31 8JA
   in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/01211/F subject to the
   following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing nos 02 D, 03 F and 04 A.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal upon the character and appearance of
   the area with particular regard to its location within the Norfolk Coast National
   Landscape.
Reasons for the Recommendation
4. The appeal site comprises a detached bungalow with a garden surrounding. The
   site is bordered by mature trees and hedging. The property is on the edge of the
   settlement alongside open countryside. There are a mix of housing types to the
   side, rear and beyond including bungalows and two storey dwellings of varying
   sizes and materials, some with gable rooflines and some without. However,
   properties are generally detached with a garden surrounding. Although the site is
   within a rural setting, there is a semi built up feel around it. Land levels gradually
   lower from the road across the site and to the closest property to the rear. Land
   levels opposite the site substantially rise towards the Church of St Margaret.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005578


5. National Landscapes are designations of national importance and great weight
   should be given to conserving their scenic beauty. I am aware of the duty to seek to
   further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of National
   Landscapes when performing their functions.
6. Although the proposed alterations would substantially increase the size of the
   dwelling, it would still sit comfortably within the plot and would retain a garden
   surrounding. Existing hedgerows along the side and front boundaries would also
   mainly be preserved. Furthermore, the dwelling would not project beyond the
   existing boundary to the side and would remain consistent with the pattern of
   development in line with neighbouring properties to the rear and set back from the
   roadside. There is no strict uniformity between the nearby dwellings and although it
   would be larger than the existing bungalow, it would not be out of place given its
   immediate context.
7. Whilst the enlarged dwelling would be visible in wider views from the B1335 and
   the A149, it would not appear prominent within the landscape due to the screening
   provided by existing hedgerows and the presence of surrounding residential
   development, including other large two-storey dwellings. Although the appeal site
   occupies land at a slightly higher level than the property to the rear, the difference
   in levels is not substantial. Consequently, the dwelling would sit comfortably within
   the natural topography and the gradual rise in land towards the church.
8. There are listed buildings within the area, of which the Council have only
   referenced the Grade I Church of St Margaret and the Grade II* Windmill. The
   Council do not specifically refer to any harm to the setting of these buildings
   explicitly, and their concerns appear to relate more to how the buildings contribute
   to the landscape. Section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
   Areas) Act 1990 requires decision makers to have special regard to preserving a
   listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic
   interest.
9. The open and undulating landscape influences how the buildings are appreciated
   and combining this with the rising land levels towards each building, they have a
   sense of prominence therein. Neither building can be clearly seen from within the
   appeal site and similarly, the appeal site is not clearly visible from each listed
   building and there is a relatively long distance between the sites. Even if the appeal
   site were more visible, particularly in the winter months, the addition of one storey
   to the existing property would not be substantial and due to the distances between
   the buildings and the lower land levels of the appeal site, the proposal would not
   cause harm to the setting of either building nor would it compete for visual
   dominance within the landscape given what is nearby.
10. Combining all of these factors together, the proposal would conserve the natural
    beauty of the National Landscape and would reflect the character and appearance
    of the area. The proposal would therefore comply with Policies LP16, LP18, LP19,
    LP20, LP21 & LP35 of the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk Local Plan 2025 which are
    concerned with conserving the special qualities of the National Landscape amongst
    other things.
Other Matters
11. The appeal before me is for householder alterations and I have dealt with the
    proposal accordingly. Any future use of the building would be outside of the scope

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005578


     of the appeal scheme and may require a separate planning application. I have not
     been provided with any planning history relating to Herring’s Lane nor what the
     proposal is, and I am therefore unsure of its relevance with regard to the appeal
     scheme.
12. There is no obligation upon the appellant to notify neighbouring properties before
    the submission of a planning application. There may have been some mistakes
    within the original submission with regard to the location of other dwellings
    however, I have seen the existing layout of the area at my site visit, and I am
    comfortable that I have considered the correct position of all the closest properties
    when making my recommendation. Nevertheless, the living conditions of the
    occupants of other dwellings was not a contentious matter in the appeal, and I have
    no reason to disagree with the Council’s assessment in these regards. The same
    can be said for any concerns relating to highway safety.
Conditions
13. Other than the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to ensure that the
    development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans for certainty and
    enforcement. These also show an acceptable external materials match. There is
    thus no need for a further condition thereon.
Conclusion and Recommendation
14. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would comply with the
    development plan and there is nothing compelling to suggest a decision other than
    in accordance. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

L Clark
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
15. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed. Planning permission is therefore granted, subject
    to the conditions set out above.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
