Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 May 2026
by F P Tinsley MA (Hons) MBA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005590
2 Highbury Grove Court, Highbury Grove, London, N5 2NG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a
     refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Benjamin Cowen against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Islington.
•    The application reference is Ref: P2024/0895
•    The development proposed is ‘Conversion of the southern portion of the basement to three
     residential units and associated works to create a courtyard level with entry points.’


Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The description of development set out above reflects that contained within the
      application form. However, during the course of the application process the
      scheme was amended, reducing the number of proposed dwellings from three to
      two. The appeal has therefore been determined on the basis of the amended
      scheme comprising two dwellings, as reflected in the Council's decision notice and
      the evidence before me.
3.    Since the determination of the application, a revised National Planning Policy
      Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. At the same time,
      the Government published the results of the 2024 and 2025 Housing Delivery
      Tests. The main parties have been consulted and given the opportunity to
      comment on these matters in relation to the appeal. I have considered the
      proposed development against the relevant policies of the Framework, together
      with the findings of the 2024 and 2025 Housing Delivery Tests.
4.    Following the submission of the appeal, the appellant provided a Unilateral
      Undertaking (UU) as a planning obligation addressing affordable housing and
      carbon offset contributions to the Council. The Council was given the opportunity
      to comment on the UU, and I have had regard to it in determining the appeal.
5.    The Council during the appeal process confirmed that contrary to statements
      made on the appeal questionnaire the appeal does not relate to a listed building
      and does not affect a listed building.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005590


Main Issues
6.    The proposal will deliver two additional dwellings. There is no disagreement
      between parties that substantial weight should be attributed to this consideration in
      determination of the appeal, and I will return to this matter below. The main issues
      are therefore:
           •    whether the proposal would provide satisfactory living conditions for future
                occupiers, having regard to the layout, circulation space, outlook and
                aspect, and the provision of functional, usable and comfortable
                accommodation;
           •    whether the proposal would provide a high standard of inclusive design,
                with regard to the adequacy of the proposed access arrangements, safety,
                potential noise disturbance and the provision of step-free access; and
           •    whether sufficient information has been provided to demonstrate that the
                development would adequately address sustainability matters, including
                minimising greenhouse gas emissions, managing overheating risk,
                improving air quality, delivering integrated water management and
                sustainable drainage, promoting circular economy principles, and protecting
                and enhancing biodiversity, having regard to the loss of trees and the
                potential effects on the adjacent Site of Importance for Nature Conservation
                (SINC).
Reasons
Living conditions
7.    I am satisfied that the proposed units comply with the definition of dual-aspect
      development set out in Appendix 3 of the London Plan Housing Design Standards
      Guidance (2023), in that they are dwellings with opening windows on two external
      walls. In this case, those walls are located on opposite sides of the dwelling. The
      fundamental issue is whether those windows provide adequate living conditions for
      future occupiers, given their relationship with the railway line to the south and the
      courtyard area to the north.
8.    In respect of the northern elevation, the windows would be somewhat constrained
      by their outlook onto the courtyard. However, this is not unreasonable having
      regard to the highly urban location of the appeal site and the relationship
      experienced by other lower-level dwellings within the wider Highbury Grove Court
      development. Turning to the south-facing windows, these would provide significant
      levels of daylight and sunlight to the proposed units, which weighs in favour of the
      development. Nevertheless, I recognise that, whilst triple glazing would reduce
      noise transmission from the adjoining railway line, the close proximity of the tracks
      may discourage occupants from opening the windows, potentially resulting in
      higher internal noise levels and a reduced opportunity for natural ventilation. That
      said, ventilation would still be achievable. I also note that the dwellings above the
      appeal site have a similar relationship with the railway corridor, albeit they are
      located further from the tracks than the proposed units. I have not been provided
      with compelling evidence to demonstrate that the south-facing windows would be
      unlikely to be opened in practice, nor that they would give rise to a safety risk
      associated with access to the railway or adjoining land, particularly given the
      availability of private amenity space to the north.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005590


9.    My attention has been drawn to the Support for Housebuilding London Plan
      Guidance, adopted on 25 March 2026, which withdrew previous guidance relating
      to dual-aspect dwellings. Even though I have found that the proposal would
      provide dual-aspect homes, those units are nevertheless constrained to some
      extent for the reasons set out above. I do not regard the appellant's reference to
      this guidance as an acceptance that the proposal comprises single-aspect units.
      Rather, the guidance indicates that greater flexibility may be applied to housing
      design standards in appropriate circumstances in order to support increased
      housing delivery.
10. Taking all these matters into account, I am satisfied that the proposal would give
    rise to some limited harm to the living conditions of future occupiers. However, that
    harm would not be so severe as to render the development unacceptable in this
    regard, particularly as appropriate mitigation measures could be secured by
    planning condition. In reaching this conclusion, I have also had regard to the more
    positive aspects of the proposal, including the generous internal floor areas and
    the substantial floor-to-ceiling heights within the proposed units.
11. In summary, while the proposal would have some limited shortcomings in relation
    to the living conditions of future occupiers, having regard to the layout, circulation
    space, outlook and aspect, and the provision of functional, usable and comfortable
    accommodation, those shortcomings would not be of a degree that would warrant
    a finding of conflict with Policy D6 of the London Plan (2021), Policies PLAN1, H1,
    H2 and H4 of Islington's Strategic and Development Management Policies (2023)
    (SDMP), the London Plan Housing Design Standards Guidance (2023), the
    Islington Urban Design Guide (2017) or the Nationally Described Space Standard
    (2015).
Design and access arrangements
12. The proposed access to the units would be taken from the rear courtyard of the
    Highbury Grove Court development. I have had regard to the Council's concerns
    regarding the suitability of this arrangement, particularly in relation to the safety of
    those accessing the units, the potential for conflict with occupiers of the Highbury
    Grove Court development, for whom a revised rear access would be provided
    adjacent to the access serving Unit 2, and the provision of step-free access to the
    proposed residential units.
13. Significantly, the rear courtyard would be a secure area with no access available to
    the general public. Access would be restricted to residents of the proposed units
    and occupiers of the Highbury Grove Court development. The safety concerns
    highlighted by the Council are more commonly associated with situations where
    public access is available, which would not be the case here.
14. Furthermore, there would be a significant degree of natural surveillance of the
    access routes. The proposed entrances, together with surrounding residential
    windows overlooking the courtyard, would provide opportunities for passive
    surveillance from within the development.
15. The Council's concerns relating to lighting and CCTV coverage could reasonably
    be addressed through the imposition of planning conditions. I do not consider that
    such matters would necessitate a wholesale redesign of the development or
    render the proposed access arrangements unacceptable.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005590


16. Based on the evidence before me, I do not consider that access to the proposed
    units, and in particular access to Unit 2, would be inappropriate in the context of
    the adjacent revised access serving the Highbury Grove Court development. The
    revised entrance would comprise a secondary access to the existing building, the
    principal access to which is located on Highbury Grove. Given the relationship
    between the primary entrance and the proposed secondary entrance to the rear, it
    is reasonable to conclude that use of the latter would be limited by existing
    residents. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that the arrangement would give rise to
    conflict or result in an unacceptable living environment for occupiers of the
    proposed units.
17. Provision of step-free access to residential units is a key requirement of the
    accessibility and inclusive design objectives of Policies D5 and D7 of the London
    Plan and Policy H4 of Islington's Strategic and Development Management Policies
    (2023). Policy H4 confirms that the principles of inclusive design apply to all new
    housing development, including conversions and changes of use.
18. I am not persuaded that the proposal constitutes infill development such that the
    flexibility referred to in supporting paragraph 3.7.6 of Policy D7 would apply. While
    infill development can, in some circumstances, include the conversion of existing
    buildings, the proposal does not occupy a gap in the urban fabric, either spatially
    or through the redevelopment of previously vacant land or buildings. Rather, it
    would involve the conversion of ancillary storage space associated with an existing
    building. Consequently, I do not consider that the proposal falls within the category
    of development envisaged by the infill exception.
19. The Framework advises that planning decisions should not seek to duplicate or
    extend controls imposed through other regulatory regimes. In this regard, I have
    had regard to the requirements of Building Regulations M4(2) Accessible and
    Adaptable Dwellings. However, where an adopted development plan policy
    requires compliance with accessibility standards through the planning process, it is
    appropriate to consider those requirements as part of the planning balance.
20. I have not been presented with compelling evidence demonstrating that step-free
    access could not reasonably be achieved. I note that a ramped approach already
    serves the larger existing entrance to the space from the courtyard. I understand
    that alterations to facilitate compliant access may require significant works,
    including excavation and reconfiguration, the evidence before me does not
    demonstrate that such measures would be impracticable or incapable of delivery.
    In any event, my role is to assess the proposal as submitted, which includes
    access arrangements requiring the use of steps. Proximity to public transport is not
    a relevant consideration in this regard. Furthermore, I have considered the overall
    layout and internal configuration of the proposed units in terms of inclusive design
    in reaching my conclusions regarding accessibility.
21. The Council's Inclusive Design Officer raises concerns that the legibility of the
    approach to the proposed units would place a range of people with protected
    characteristics at a disadvantage. These include blind and partially sighted people,
    neurodiverse people, including those living with dementia, people with cognitive or
    learning disabilities, some older people and children. It is also argued that the
    design could facilitate anti-social behaviour, with potential implications for the
    safety of women and girls, particularly at night, as well as other vulnerable groups.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005590


22. As a public authority exercising functions under the planning system, I have had
    due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) contained within section 149
    of the Equality Act 2010. This requires regard to be had to the need to eliminate
    discrimination, advance equality of opportunity and foster good relations between
    persons who share a protected characteristic and those who do not.
23. I recognise that a poorly legible environment can create difficulties for certain
    groups, particularly people with visual impairments, cognitive impairments,
    learning disabilities and some older people. Equally, perceptions of safety and
    opportunities for natural surveillance can have particular relevance to women and
    girls, as well as other vulnerable users of the development. These are matters to
    which I attach significant weight.
24. Nevertheless, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that the layout would
    result in persons with protected characteristics being unable to access, navigate or
    use the development safely and effectively. Whilst the approach to the units may
    be less intuitive than would be ideal, I am not persuaded that the shortcomings
    identified would result in a level of disadvantage that would preclude occupation by
    persons with protected characteristics or amount to unlawful discrimination.
25. Accordingly, I have limited substantive evidence before me to conclude that the
    design would lead to anti-social behaviour or give rise to material safety risks
    beyond those typically associated with an urban residential environment. In
    reaching this conclusion, I note that the rear courtyard would not comprise a public
    space with unrestricted access. Rather, it would be a private area serving the
    development. It is not apparent from the evidence before me that the Council's
    concerns fully recognise this distinction. Consequently, I afford limited weight to
    assertions that the courtyard would be likely to attract anti-social behaviour or
    create significant safety concerns for residents, including those with protected
    characteristics.
26. I have also considered the proposal in the context of Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights, concerning the right to respect for private and family
    life and the home, and Article 14 concerning discrimination in the enjoyment of
    Convention rights. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that any
    interference with those rights would be limited, justified and proportionate in pursuit
    of the legitimate planning objectives of the development. Consequently, I find no
    conflict with the Human Rights Act 1998.
27. For these reasons, I find that the proposed access arrangements would not result
    in unacceptable impacts in terms of safety, natural surveillance, resident conflict,
    noise disturbance or the living conditions of future occupiers. Consequently, I find
    no conflict with Policies PLAN1, H1 and H2 of the SDMP (2023), the Nationally
    Described Space Standard (2015) or the London Plan Housing Design Standards
    Guidance (2023) in these respects.. The proposal would fail to provide step-free
    access to the proposed dwellings. Furthermore, I am not satisfied that the
    circumstances of the development justify departure from the accessibility
    requirements of the development plan. Consequently, the proposal would conflict
    with Policies D5 and D7 of the London Plan (2021) and Policy H4 of Islington's
    Strategic and Development Management Policies (2023). It would also fail to fully
    accord with the objectives of the Islington Urban Design Guide (2017) and the
    Inclusive Design in Islington SPD (2015). Although the shortcomings relating to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005590


      legibility and safety attract only limited weight, I attach significant weight to the
      failure to provide step-free access in the overall planning balance.
      Sustainability
28. SDMP Policy S2 sets out the information requirements for proposals involving
    residential development. The Council has identified a number of deficiencies in the
    information submitted in support of the appeal. In particular, it considers that the
    appellant has failed to provide a Circular Economy Statement or Adaptive Design
    Strategy, adequate evidence demonstrating compliance with the energy hierarchy,
    energy modelling to demonstrate the required carbon reductions, a clear heating
    strategy, details of water efficiency and drainage measures, and an overheating
    assessment addressing the cooling hierarchy. Furthermore, no Arboricultural
    Impact Assessment has been submitted to assess and justify the loss of four trees,
    there is no assessment of the potential effects on the adjoining North London Line
    (East) SINC, and no comprehensive Landscape Design Strategy has been
    provided to demonstrate ecological enhancements and biodiversity measures.
29. The Sustainable Design and Construction Statement (SDCS) submitted with the
    planning application seeks to address the requirements of these policies. The
    principal point of disagreement between the parties concerns the level of detail
    necessary to enable a proportionate assessment of the proposal, having regard to
    its modest scale and the provision of only two dwellings. The appellant contends
    that the Council's information requirements are excessive and disproportionate to
    the scale and nature of the development, whereas the Council maintains that the
    submitted information is insufficient to demonstrate compliance with the relevant
    sustainable design and construction policies.
30. Framework Policy DM7 states that planning decisions should not seek to duplicate
    or extend controls imposed by other regulatory regimes, except where
    development plan policies apply optional technical standards to the development
    proposed. Policy PM13 similarly advises that local policies should not address
    matters already controlled by Building Regulations, other than, amongst other
    things, water efficiency and energy efficiency. In relation to energy efficiency, any
    standards that exceed Building Regulations should be supported by a clear and
    robustly costed justification demonstrating that they would not adversely affect the
    viability or deliverability of development. Such standards should be expressed as a
    percentage uplift over a dwelling's Target Emissions Rate (TER). I have not been
    provided with substantive evidence demonstrating how the Council's information
    requirements in respect of energy performance are justified in the context of a
    development of the scale proposed.
31. Furthermore, Framework Policy DM1 states that applications for developments
    other than major development should be supported by only the minimum
    information necessary to enable a decision to be made. Policy DM2 similarly
    requires information requirements to be proportionate to the scale of development
    and its likely effects, which in this case I consider to be limited. In addition, Policy
    DM3 requires decision-makers to adopt a proportionate approach that reflects the
    scale and complexity of the proposal, its potential impacts, and whether any
    identified shortcomings could reasonably be addressed through the use of
    planning conditions.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005590


32. In this context, whilst the information before me is insufficient to demonstrate full
    compliance with Policies SI2, SI4, SI5, SI7, SI12, SI13, G4, G5 and G6 of the
    London Plan (2021) and Policies S1, S2, S3, S4, S6, S7, S9, S10, G4 and G5 of
    the Islington Development Management Policies (2023), I find that the degree of
    conflict is limited. In reaching this conclusion, I have had regard to the modest
    scale of the proposal, which would provide only two additional dwellings through
    the conversion of existing floorspace, and the correspondingly limited extent of its
    likely environmental impacts. I have also had regard to the Framework's emphasis
    on ensuring that information requirements and decision-making processes are
    proportionate to the scale and complexity of the development proposed, together
    with the potential for certain matters to be addressed through the imposition of
    planning conditions. The deficiencies relate largely to the adequacy of information
    rather than demonstrable environmental harm. Consequently, I attach only limited
    weight to this conflict in the overall planning balance.
Other Matters
33. An interested party has raised concerns regarding the construction phase impacts
    associated with the proposal. However, these matters relate principally to the
    construction process rather than the permanent effects of the completed
    development. Matters such as construction traffic, noise, dust, site management
    and the protection of neighbouring amenity are commonly addressed through
    planning conditions requiring the submission and approval of detailed
    management plans prior to the commencement of development. Whilst the
    absence of such information at application stage weighs slightly against the
    proposal, I have had regard to the modest scale of the development and the extent
    to which these matters could reasonably be controlled through appropriately
    worded planning conditions. I have attached neutral weight to this consideration.
34. The appellant has submitted a completed Unilateral Undertaking to address the
    issue of affordable housing. The planning obligation secures a financial
    contribution towards affordable housing provision, and I have taken this into
    account in my determination. I am satisfied that the obligation addresses the
    relevant policy requirements and attracts significant weight in favour of the
    proposal.
Planning Balance
35. Policies S3 and S4 of the Framework establish the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development and require that development within settlements which
    accords with the development plan and relevant national decision-making policies
    should be approved without delay. Development proposals should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by adverse
    effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies of the
    Framework. In applying Policy S4, paragraph S4(2)(c) confirms that such
    circumstances include, but are not limited to, situations where a proposal fails to
    comply with a national decision-making policy which states that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
36. Policies HO7 and L2 of the Framework require substantial weight to be given to
    the provision of homes that contribute towards meeting identified housing needs
    and to the efficient and effective use of land, including the reuse of vacant and
    underutilised buildings and previously developed land.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005590


37. The Housing Delivery Test (HDT) 2025 measurement indicates that Islington was
    required to deliver 2,325 dwellings during the three-year period 2022/23 to
    2024/25. However, only 1,609 dwellings were delivered, representing 69% of the
    identified requirement and resulting in a shortfall of 716 homes.
38. The most recent year's performance provides further evidence of the borough's
    housing delivery position. In 2024/25, against a requirement of 775 dwellings, only
    252 dwellings were delivered.
39. The Government has confirmed that the HDT 2025 measurement represents the
    most up-to-date assessment of housing delivery, supersedes the 2024
    measurement and should be used for decision-making purposes. Accordingly, I
    attach substantial weight to the contribution that the proposal would make towards
    meeting housing needs and boosting housing supply within the borough. The
    proposal would also make more efficient use of the existing building through the
    creation of additional dwellings. Nevertheless, the proposal would provide only two
    additional dwellings and, as such, the scale of this benefit is modest.
40. I also attach significant weight to the financial contribution towards affordable
    housing secured in the planning obligation.
41. I find that the proposed access arrangements would not give rise to unacceptable
    impacts in terms of safety, natural surveillance, noise disturbance, resident conflict
    or the living conditions of future occupiers. The access would be from a secure
    private courtyard rather than a publicly accessible space, would benefit from a high
    degree of natural surveillance, and any concerns regarding lighting or CCTV could
    be addressed through planning conditions. I am therefore not persuaded that the
    development would result in significant safety risks, anti-social behaviour or
    conflict between users of the proposed dwellings and occupiers of Highbury Grove
    Court. Consequently, I find no conflict with Policies PLAN1, H1 and H2 of the
    SDMP, the Nationally Described Space Standard (2015) or the London Plan
    Housing Design Standards Guidance (2023) in these respects.
42. In respect of sustainability, although the information submitted is insufficient to
    demonstrate full compliance with the Council's sustainable design, energy,
    biodiversity and environmental policies, I consider the degree of conflict to be
    limited. In reaching this conclusion, I have had regard to the modest scale of the
    proposal, which would provide only two dwellings, the correspondingly limited
    extent of its likely environmental impacts, and the Framework's emphasis on
    proportionate information requirements and decision-making. I also consider that
    some of the identified shortcomings could reasonably be addressed through
    planning conditions. Accordingly, I find limited conflict with the relevant
    sustainability policies of the London Plan and the SDMP, to which I attach only
    limited weight in the overall planning balance.
43. However, I attach significant weight to the proposal's failure to provide step-free
    access to the proposed dwellings. Step-free access is a key component of the
    accessibility and inclusive design objectives of the development plan and I have
    not been presented with compelling evidence demonstrating that compliance could
    not reasonably be achieved. Nor am I persuaded that the proposal qualifies for the
    flexibility afforded to infill development under the supporting text to London Plan
    (2021) Policy D7. Consequently, the proposal would conflict with Policies D5 and
    D7 of the London Plan (2021) and Policy H4 of the Islington Strategic and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6005590


      Development Management Policies (2023), and would fail to fully accord with the
      objectives of the Islington Urban Design Guide (2017) and the Inclusive Design in
      Islington SPD.
44. Policy DP3(3) of the Framework states that development proposals should be
    refused where, without clear justification, they conflict with explicit design
    standards set out in the development plan, including those contained within locally
    specified policies, design guides, codes and masterplans.
45. I have found that the proposal would fail to provide step-free access to the
    proposed dwellings and would therefore conflict with design principles identified in
    Policies D5 and D7 of the London Plan (2021) and explicit design standards
    identified in Policy H4 of Islington's Strategic and Development Management
    Policies (2023). Furthermore, it would fail to accord with the objectives of the
    Islington Urban Design Guide (2017) and the Inclusive Design in Islington SPD.
    Accordingly, there is a clear conflict with the explicit design standards referred to in
    Policy DP3(3) of the Framework.
46. I have carefully considered the justification advanced for that conflict. In essence, it
    rests on the provision of two additional two-bedroom dwellings within a borough
    where there is a pressing need for new housing including of this type and where
    housing delivery has consistently fallen below identified requirements.
    Notwithstanding that I attach substantial weight to housing delivery and significant
    weight to the affordable housing contribution, collectively these benefits do not
    amount to the clear justification required by Policy DP3(3) to depart from explicit
    accessibility standards in the development plan.
47. Consequently, in the absence of a clear and convincing justification for departing
    from the accessibility standards of the development plan, Policy DP3(3) indicates
    that planning permission should be refused.
Conclusion
48. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.



F P Tinsley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
