Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 June 2026
by M Cryan BA(Hons) DipTP MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026

Appeal Ref: 6005904
Upper Flat, 23 Ronalds Road, London N5 1XF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Juan Nascimbene against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Islington.
•    The application reference is P2025/2735/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of an extension above the existing rear two-storey
     outrigger; enlargement of the existing rear dormer on the main roof; installation of a rooflight on the
     rear roof slope; and replacement of the rear windows.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of an
      extension above the existing rear two-storey outrigger; enlargement of the existing
      rear dormer on the main roof; installation of a rooflight on the rear roof slope; and
      replacement of the rear windows at Upper Flat, 23 Ronalds Road, London N5 1XF,
      in accordance with the terms of the application reference P2025/2735/FUL, subject
      to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved drawings and documents:
              • Location Plan (B.EX.0.1, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Site Plan (B.EX.0.2, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Site Plan (D.PR.0.1, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Ground Floor Plan (D.PR.2.1, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Ground Floor Plan FSS (D.PR.2.1a, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • First Floor Plan (D.PR.2.2, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • First Floor Plan FSS (D.PR.2.2a, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Loft – Annex Plan (D.PR.2.3, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Loft – Annex Plan FSS (D.PR.2.3a, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Loft Floor Plan (D.PR.2.4, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Loft Floor Plan FSS (D.PR.2.4a, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Roof Floor Plan (D.PR.2.5, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Front Elevation (D.PR.3.1, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Side (Left) Elevation (D.PR.3.2, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Rear Elevation (D.PR.3.3, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Side (Right) Elevation (D.PR.3.4, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Section – 1 (D.PR.4.1, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Section – 2 (D.PR.4.2, issue date 28 October 2025)
              • Section – 25-degree rule (D.PR.4.3, issue date 8 October 2025)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005904


                •     Design and Access Statement (Model Projects Ltd, MP_1034 September
                      2025)
                •     Sustainable Design and Construction Template
        3)      The external surfaces of the development hereby permitted shall be
                constructed of the materials specified on the approved drawings and in the
                Design and Access Statement. The development shall be carried out strictly
                in accordance with the details so approved and shall be maintained as such
                thereafter.
Preliminary and Procedural Matters
2.       The description of the proposed development was amended, having been
         originally described on the planning application form as:
         “The creation of an ‘addition’ over the current annex (out rigger) to create an extra
         bedroom (access gained through the half landing of the current staircase that
         leads to the upper level). There will also be an enlarged rear dormer to the upper
         roof level. A new rooflight is proposed over the existing staircase. Replacement
         windows to the rear in sash style to match the original property (inline with the
         current windows to the front). Internal re-arrangement.”
         I have used the revised wording in the banner heading and my formal decision
         above, as it provides a more concise description of the proposal.
3.       On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
         Framework (“the Framework”). I have determined the appeal having regard to the
         provisions of the new Framework; where I have referred to the Framework in this
         decision, policy and paragraph numbers are from the current August 2026 version.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is the effect of the proposed rear extension on the character and
         appearance of the area.
Reasons
5.       The appeal relates to a flat on the first and second (loft) floors of a converted
         Victorian property, originally a single dwellinghouse. There is a two-storey pitched
         roof outrigger at the rear, the first floor of which forms part of the appeal property,
         while the two loft rooms – one at the front, one at the back – each have an original
         pitched dormer on the respective slope of the main roof. No 23 stands on the north
         side of Ronalds Road, within a long terrace of similar properties. The proposed
         development would include the erection of a flat-roofed rear extension above the
         outrigger, and the replacement of the existing dormer on the rear roof pitch with a
         larger flat-topped box dormer.
6.       The Council’s 2017 Urban Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (“the
         SPD”) provides a range of relevant guidance, including in respect of extensions
         and roof alterations. Among other things, it says that “rear extensions must be
         subordinate to the original building” and “no higher than one full storey below
         eaves to ensure they are sufficiently subordinate to the main building” 1. It notes
         that “many terraces have paired additions with consistent rooflines”, and that new

1
    Paragraph 5.134


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6005904


       extensions above these “can disrupt the natural rhythm of rear elevations and [so
       should] be avoided” 2; that “a typical terrace […] is designed with a consistent
       height at the front and rear” and that “where a roof extension […] involves raising
       the flank boundary parapets and chimneys this draws further attention to the
       addition” 3. It does, however, also make the point that outside conservation areas
       and where an extension would not be visible from the public realm – as is the case
       here – “there may be more scope for flexibility in the design” 4.
7.     The proposed rear extension would occupy almost the entire existing roofspace of
       the outrigger. Its size and flat-roofed form would give it a boxy and cumbersome
       appearance, unsympathetic to the outrigger and the property as a whole. It would
       rise above the eaves level of the existing main roof, and so would not read as
       being subservient to the original building. Furthermore, neither the appeal property
       nor No 25 next door (with which it shares the rear outrigger) currently have an
       extension of this type, so the development would unbalance the essentially
       symmetrical form at the rear of the pair; the raising of the party parapet would draw
       attention to this loss of balance. In these respects, the extension would not comply
       with advice in the SPD, and would be detrimental to the appearance of the host
       building; it would therefore cause some harm to the character and appearance of
       the area.
8.     The appellant has drawn my attention to outrigger extensions at other properties
       on Ronalds Road. Between 2016 and 2025, lawful development certificates
       (“LDCs”) were granted for such extensions at Nos 27, 31, 39, 43 and 51. For the
       pair of properties Nos 45 and 47, planning permission was granted on appeal in
       2017 for the erection of two rear extensions in order to form a second-floor level
       above the existing outriggers5 6.
9.     Because of access limitations, I was not able to view these examples myself
       during my site visit, but have seen the photographic evidence provided by the
       appellant7 showing those developments in place. To my mind, the four extensions
       allowed by LDCs (the fifth, at No 31 had not been carried out at the time the image
       was made, though I note that that LDC was only granted in September 2025) are
       illustrative of the harm which the SPD seeks to avoid. All are bulky and intrusive
       additions which pay little regard or respect to the form or massing of the original
       building.
10. The double extension at Nos 45 and 47 appears to be a fairly substantial addition
    to those properties. However, three-storey outriggers are not an uncommon
    original feature on some terraces in inner London, including close to the appeal
    site and, based on what I could see in the photographic evidence put to me, the
    rear extension at Nos 45 and 47 is somewhat more authentic in form (and
    sympathetic to the original terrace) than either the LDC schemes or the boxy
    scheme proposed here. Furthermore, in carrying out a unified scheme across two
    properties, a loss of balance or harmony has been averted. This would not be the
    case with the proposal before me, so the 2017 appeal scheme is not entirely
    comparable.


2
  Paragraph 5.140
3
  Paragraph 5.147
4
  Paragraph 5.153
5
  PINS Ref: APP/V5570/W/16/3160404
6
  An LDC had also previously been issued in 2016 in respect of No 45 alone.
7
  A Google Earth image in their appeal statement.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6005904


11. While some properties within the same terrace have extensions above outriggers,
    they are by no means a common feature – the examples to which I was directed
    amount to seven properties within the 29 properties on the northern side of this
    part of Ronalds Road, and only five of these (including the as-yet unbuilt extension
    at No 31) are of the type proposed here. All the same, they make some
    contribution to defining the character and appearance of the area. Furthermore,
    while the proposed extension would be seen from the rear windows and gardens
    of properties on Witherington Road to the north (as I was able to see extensions of
    varying quality at the rear of Witherington Road from the appeal property), it would
    not be visible from public spaces. These factors would limit, though would not
    totally mitigate or justify, the degree of harm which would be caused.
12. I also note that the Council considered that the design of the proposed
    replacement dormer and new rooflight on the rear roof pitch would be acceptable,
    and that the scheme as a whole would use materials which would be in keeping
    with those of the original property. None of the evidence before me leads me to
    disagree significantly with that assessment; I agree that the appearance of the
    development would be satisfactory in these respects.
13. Nevertheless, for the reasons I have set out in paragraph 7, I conclude that the
    proposed development would cause some harm to the character and appearance
    of the area. Though the impacts of this would be limited, there would be conflict
    with Policy PLAN1 of the 2023 Islington Local Plan Strategic and Development
    Management Policies document, and with Policy D4 of the London Plan 2021.
    Together, and among other things, these policies seek to ensure that all forms of
    development demonstrate high-quality design and make a positive contribution to
    local character and distinctiveness, including in respect of massing and detailing.
Other Matter
14. Representations made by interested parties during the appeal referred to a
    potential loss of light and outlook as a consequence of the extension above the
    outrigger. Little further information was provided in those representations, but it
    was evident from earlier submissions made to the Council that the greatest
    potential impact would be in respect of kitchens in the outrigger at the rear of
    No 25.
15. The Council had considered the impact on light and outlook, including in respect of
    the 45-degree and 25-degree tests (described in the SPD and the BRE
    guidelines 8 respectively), when determining the planning application, as set out in
    its officer report. It concluded that there were already breaches of these tests but
    that, because of the presence of other windows and glazed doors in the affected
    properties, and the marginal nature any further breach arising from this proposal,
    there would be no harmful loss of light or outlook. I also note that a kitchen is not
    normally considered to be a principal habitable room. Taking everything which I
    have seen together, I do not disagree with the Council’s initial assessment of these
    matters.




8
 Site Layout Planning for Daylight and Sunlight – A Guide to Good Practice, BRE 2022. This document does not set statutory
standards, but is widely accepted as established guidance in respect of daylight and sunlight.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decision 6005904


Planning Balance and Conclusion
16. I have found that the proposed development would cause harm to the character
    and appearance of the area. While this harm would be limited in scale and scope,
    the proposal would therefore conflict with the development plan taken as a whole.
17. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals
    within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
18. Policy DP3 of the Framework sets out key principles for well-designed places;
    among other things, it says that “development proposals should respond to their
    context” and “integrate with and enhance their surroundings”. Policy L2 of the
    Framework – which seeks to make effective use of land – says that substantial
    weight should be given to the benefits where development would (among other
    things) create additional homes or floorspace within settlements by using the
    airspace above existing residential and commercial premises. Such proposals
    should be “consistent with the overall street scene, other than where […] the
    development would not be visible from the street frontage”.
19. For the same reasons I have set out in dealing with the main issue, I consider that
    the proposed development would conflict with the requirements of Policy DP3 of
    the Framework to respond to site context and enhance their surroundings. Again
    though, I find that the combination of the small scale of the scheme, its location at
    the rear of the property, and the presence nearby of a modest amount of what
    might be described as precedent development, mean that harm (and therefore the
    degree of conflict) would be limited. The development would not be visible from the
    street frontage however and, in line with Policy L2 I attach substantial weight to the
    provision of additional residential floorspace in a sustainable urban location.
20. Taking all these points into the final balance, I find that the benefits of approving
    the proposed development would not be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework. Accordingly, the proposed development would constitute sustainable
    development within the meaning of the Framework.
21. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 states that
    applications for planning permission, and therefore appeals, must be determined in
    accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. While I have found that the proposed development would not comply
    with the provisions of the development plan in respect of the character of the area,
    the material considerations which I have identified (including the Framework)
    indicate that a decision other than in accordance with the development plan is
    appropriate. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be allowed and planning
    permission granted.
Conditions
22. I have considered the conditions proposed by the Council having regard to the
    tests in the Framework and the advice in the Planning Practice Guidance. Where
    necessary I have altered the suggested wording and ordering in the interests of
    clarity and effectiveness.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005904


23. In addition to the standard time limit condition (1) I have specified the approved
    plans and other documents so as to provide certainty (2). I have not included a
    reference to the “cover letter” suggested by the Council, as the version of that
    letter provided to me does not contain or otherwise define any of the essential
    details of the scheme. I have imposed a condition relating to materials (3) to
    protect the character and appearance of the area.



M Cryan
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
