Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by R Hall BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005861
14A Benson Road, Oxford OX3 7EH
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mrs A Lica against the decision of Oxford City Council.
    The application reference is 25/02472/FUL.
    The development proposed is rear detached garden building to form home office.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for rear detached
      garden building to form home office, provision of cycle and bin storage, at 14A
      Benson Road, Oxford OX3 7EH in accordance with the terms of the application,
      Ref 25/02472/FUL, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location Plan 1250; 3257/Block Plan
              (amended version); and 3257/Garden Bld.
     3)       The external walls of the proposed building shall be rendered to match the
              external walls of the existing building.
     4)       Development shall not commence until drainage works including a
              sustainable drainage system have been completed in accordance with details
              that shall first have been submitted to and agreed in writing by the local
              planning authority. The drainage works shall be managed and maintained
              thereafter in accordance with the agreed details.
Preliminary Matters
2.    Notwithstanding the description in the heading above which is taken from the
      original application form, the Council determined the proposal on the basis of the
      following description which is used in the Decision above, as it more precisely
      defines the proposal: rear detached garden building to form home office, provision
      of cycle and bin storage.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
           the character and appearance of the site and surrounding area;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005861


           the living conditions of the occupants of 14B Benson Road, with particular
            regard to privacy;
           the living conditions of the occupants of 14A, with particular regard to private
            outside space; and
           the Lye Valley Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), with particular regard
            to sustainable drainage provision.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.    The appeal site is located in an area where there is a predominance of semi-
      detached houses built to a similar design, set within plots of broadly similar sizes.
      Some houses have single storey outbuildings within their rear gardens. The
      proposal would be considerably larger than a typical garden shed and would
      extend across the majority of the width of the existing garden. Nonetheless, it
      would not directly adjoin any of its garden boundaries. This would retain a modest
      sense of space around the proposed building. In addition, the proposal would be
      single storey, with a flat roof. It would thus have a low profile, minimising the extent
      to which it would be noticeable from the surrounding area.
5.    The proposal would occupy the rear section of the garden. Whether or not it is the
      largest of such buildings in the locality, the addition of garden buildings of a similar
      scale to the one proposed is not an unusual feature in residential gardens such as
      this. Moreover, although the gardens for the two flats are subdivided, a reasonable
      area of land would remain undeveloped between the proposed outbuilding and the
      flats. Accordingly, the proposal would not appear to dominate the rear garden
      when seen from the surrounding houses and gardens. The extent to which it would
      be visible from public land would also be highly limited.
6.    Therefore, the proposal would not harm the character and appearance of the site
      and surrounding area. It would thus accord with Policies DH1 and RE2 of the
      Oxford Local Plan 2036 (Local Plan). These seek to ensure proposals achieve a
      high quality of design, taking into account the capacity of the site.
Living conditions - privacy
7.    The proposal would have a three-pane window and a door facing the rear garden
      of Flat 14B. However, there is an intervening fence between those windows and
      that garden. This would considerably reduce the potential for overlooking of the
      rear garden of 14B. There is no indication that site levels would contradict that
      finding even if there would be a slight step up into the building from the existing
      garden level. In addition, the proposed window and door on the outbuilding would
      be set below the height of the building’s eaves. This would further limit the extent
      to which there would be views from the outbuilding towards the garden of 14B.
      Accordingly, the proposal would not harm the living conditions of the occupants of
      14B Benson Road, with particular regard to privacy. It would thus accord with
      Policies H14 and RE7 of the Local Plan. These generally seek to ensure proposal
      achieve an acceptable standard of amenity, including in respect of the privacy of
      existing neighbours.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005861


Living conditions – outside space
8.    The proposal would result in a considerable portion of the rear garden at the
      appeal site being occupied by built form. However, as reasoned above, it would
      retain private outside space between the proposed office building and the
      boundary separating the garden from that of flat 14B. This would provide sufficient
      space for day-to-day activities such as the drying of clothes and a place to sit
      outside. I note also that the size of this space would exceed the minimum garden
      size required by Local Plan Policy H16. In addition, as it would adjoin the garden of
      14B, and the gardens of neighbouring plots to either side, it would not feel unduly
      enclosed by built form.
9.    Therefore, the proposal would not harm the living conditions of the occupants of
      14A, with particular regard to access to private outside space. As such, it would
      accord with Policy H16 of the Local Plan which seeks to ensure dwellings have
      sufficient private outside space.
Sustainable drainage
10. The Council’s flooding and environment officer confirms that the site is located
    within the catchment area for the Lye Valley SSSI and that this is highly dependent
    on its groundwater supply and sensitive to water quality changes in the catchment
    area. The proposal in isolation is very modest, would not connect to surface water
    sewers or streams and would not include significant below ground works. As such,
    it has been found to avoid adverse impacts on the SSSI associated with surface
    water runoff, aquifer recharge, and groundwater flows. No substantive evidence is
    before me to indicate otherwise. Moreover, I note that Natural England were
    consulted on the proposal and did not raise any objection.
11. The Council advise that a soakaway is necessary for the proposed outbuilding.
    Also, that standard practice is for soakaways to be located at least 5 metres from
    any building and 2.5 metres from any boundary. Full accordance with these criteria
    may not be achievable for the appeal scheme given the physical constraints of the
    appeal site. Nonetheless, given the modest scale of this proposal it seems
    reasonably likely a suitable soakaway could be an implemented-on land within the
    appellant’s control in order to effectively drain the appeal scheme. Moreover, a
    condition could reasonably be imposed to require its installation prior to
    development commencing. As such, in the seemingly unlikely event that a
    technical solution could not be demonstrated, the works could not lawfully
    proceed. The appellant confirmed their agreement to such a pre-commencement
    condition in their appeal submission.
12. The Council has drawn my attention to a soakaway that was required to be
    installed in connection with a rear extension of the main house, which has since
    been converted into the two flats. The location of that appears to involve land now
    proposed to be within the garden for flat 14B. However, as that relates to a
    separate permission, the extent to which that drainage has been lawfully
    implemented is not for consideration under this appeal.
13. Therefore, subject to the imposition of a pre-commencement drainage condition, I
    am satisfied that the proposal would be acceptable having regard to sustainable
    drainage, with particular regard to the hydrology and ecological integrity of the Lye
    Valley SSSI. Accordingly, it would comply with Policies RE3 and RE4 of the Local
    Plan. These generally seek to ensure proposals are suitably drained, incorporating

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005861


       sustainable drainage systems to manage run-off, including avoiding harm to the
       Lye Valley SSSI.
Conditions
14. I have considered the wording and suggested conditions put forward by the
    Council. In addition to the standard time limit condition, a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans is necessary
    to ensure that it is implemented as approved. A condition requiring the external
    walls of the proposal match those of the existing house is necessary to ensure it
    achieves an acceptable appearance. For the reasons given, drainage details are
    necessary prior to the commencement of development to ensure the building will
    be appropriately drained, without harm to the Lye Valley SSSI.
15. A condition was suggested to restrict the use of the proposal such that it could not
    be used as a separate dwelling. However, the description of the proposed
    development is for a home office, and the nature of the proposed building is
    consistent with that description. Moreover, use of the building for a different use,
    such as for its occupation as a dwelling in its own right, would require a separate
    planning permission. Consequently, a condition to restrict its use is not necessary
    and is therefore not imposed.
Conclusion
16. For the above reasons, and having had regard to all other matters raised, the
    appeal should be allowed.

R Hall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
