Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by L J O'Brien BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: APP/X5990/W/26/3377217
33 Craven Road, London W2 3BX
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Secret Layers Ltd against the decision of City of Westminster Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/05307/FULL.
•      The development proposed is described as “retrospective approval for the replacement of a
       previously damaged black timber panel with a new timber panel of the same material. The original
       panel had become unsafe, and the replacement was necessary to ensure safety. The new panel has
       been installed within the existing opening, with no changes to the size, structure, or appearance of
       the frame. The interior remains untouched. The panel is currently painted cream, but we are willing to
       repaint it black to match the original if required. No other alterations have been made or proposed.”


Appeal B Ref: 6005051
33 Craven Road, London W2 3BX
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Secret Layers Ltd against the decision of City of Westminster Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/05033/LBC.
•      The works proposed are described as “retrospective application for the replacement of an existing
       timber panel, formerly used as a letterbox access, with a new timber serving hatch on the Brook
       Mews North elevation at ground floor level. The hatch is constructed from high-quality timber in
       keeping with the character of the building and is proposed to be painted black to match the original
       panel. The previous panel had been broken and posed a safety concern. The new hatch improves
       both function and safety. The planter box installed beneath the hatch will be removed as part of this
       application. No further alterations are proposed.”


Appeal A Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B Decision
2. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3. Both appeals relate to 33 Craven Road which forms part of a Grade II listed
   building, 29-45, Craven Road, W21, situated within the Bayswater Conservation
   Area (CA). The descriptions of development/works are the same for both proposals
   and the issues within the appeals are similar. As such I have dealt with them within
   the same Decision Letter. I have, however, set out two separate formal Decisions.

1
    National Heritage List for England Number: 1220842

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions APP/X5990/W/26/3377217 and 6005051


4. In the interests of clarity, I have taken the descriptions of development/works from
   the Council’s Decision Notices rather than those found on the original application
   forms. Though the original description of development states that the serving hatch
   would be painted black this detail has been omitted from the revised description and
   the submitted plans consider the painting of the hatch to be “optional but not
   preferred”. The Council’s Decision Notices omit reference to the colour, and both
   describe the development/works as “replacement of an existing black timber panel
   with a new timber serving hatch on the Brook Mews North elevation (Retrospective
   application).” I have determined the appeals on this basis.
5. Both descriptions of development relate to the installation of the timber serving
   hatch and do not refer directly to the use of the hatch for the commercial enterprise
   known as Secret Layers Ltd. However, the description of development is clear that
   the hatch is a “serving hatch” and there is no dispute between the parties that the
   serving hatch is in place to facilitate the commercial use. I have reached my
   conclusions on the appeals accordingly.
6. At the time of my site visit the development/works had been completed at the
   appeal property and the serving hatch is in situ. The submitted plans, with the
   exception of those denoted as “optional” appear to accurately reflect the hatch as
   installed. I have considered and determined the appeals against this background.
7. Following the issue of the Council’s Decisions on these appeals a review of the
   Westminster City Plan 2019 – 2040, originally adopted April 2021, was completed
   and a revised version of the Westminster City Plan 2019 – 2040 was adopted in
   January 2026 (LP) prior to the submission of the planning appeals. I have
   determined the appeals on the basis of the up-to-date adopted development plan.
8. Furthermore, the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was also
   updated in August 2026, during the consideration of these appeals. The parties
   have been given the opportunity to consider whether the Framework 2026 has
   relevance to these appeals and to provide comments on this matter. Any comments
   received have been taken into account in my determination of the appeals and no
   parties have been prejudiced as a result. I have considered the new Framework in
   my determination of the appeals.
9. Due to the status of the appeal property as a listed building within a Conservation
   Area and as required by sections 16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
   Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), I have had special regard to
   the desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special
   architectural or historic interest which it possesses; and paid special attention to the
   desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the
   conservation area.
Main Issues
10. The main issues in these appeals are:

     •    whether the scheme preserves the listed building or any features of special
          architectural or historic interest which it possesses and, linked to that, whether
          the development/works preserves or enhances the character or appearance of
          the conservation area; and, in relation to Appeal A

     •    the effect of the scheme on highway safety.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decisions APP/X5990/W/26/3377217 and 6005051


Reasons
Listed building and Conservation Area
Special interest and significance
11. The appeal property is part of a mid-19th Century, Grade II listed, row of houses.
    The property is set over four storeys with commercial uses at ground floor level. At
    first floor level a continuous bombé balcony runs across the row. The buildings are
    constructed of brick with stuccoed dressings and a consistent arrangement of
    windows.
12. The appeal property is sited at the junction of Craven Road, a busy main road with
    commercial uses at ground floor level, and Brook Mews North which has a calmer
    almost entirely residential character. The side elevation of No. 33 forms a wall within
    the arched opening of Brook Mews North and is of brick construction with a clear
    and interesting patina of age. Within the mews on the flank wall of No. 33 there has
    previously been a panel of some variety covering a niche of uncertain function.
13. The site is also located within the Bayswater Conservation Area (CA). The CA is
    characterised by large areas of 19th Century architecture and includes a significant
    number of listed buildings. The Bayswater Conservation Area Audit, adopted as
    Supplementary Planning Guidance in July 2020 (CAA) is clear in setting out that
    there is a clear hierarchy of spaces and streets in Bayswater. The CAA states that
    smaller streets and Mews developments are a key feature of the area; with their
    more modest buildings offering a contrast in scale and style and providing quiet
    havens from the bustle of the surrounding busy roads. The appeal property
    occupies a corner plot at the junction of a busy principal road and the calmer and
    more peaceful environment at Brook Mews North.
14. The significance of the building as a heritage asset insofar as it relates to these
    appeals derives, in part, from the architectural and historic interest of the building.
    Further significance is derived from its corner position and its role in the transition
    between the busier main road and the quieter mews development beyond. The
    building is an important heritage asset and also contributes positively to the
    significance of the CA.
The effects of the proposals
15. The serving hatch comprises a timber frame with two handle-less hinged doors
    opening outwards into the street. The timber frame is painted in a cream/off-white
    colour. Signage relating to the business is located externally on one of the doors.
    Further signage within the same burgundy and black colour palette is attached to
    the inside of each of the doors. A black metal latch is affixed to the wall on either
    side of the hatch in order to hold the hatch doors open during use. Further brackets
    have been attached to the wall beneath the hatch. These brackets are not pictured
    on the submitted evidence and presumably relate to the flower box which had
    previously been affixed underneath the hatch but no longer forms part of the
    proposal before me. The internal configuration of the serving hatch, which is made
    up of four inset timber boxes, does not appear to have changed from the
    arrangement which was previously in place.
16. Due to its siting, the serving hatch is visible when approaching the appeal property
   along Craven Road. The serving hatch sits proud of the flank wall of the appeal


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decisions APP/X5990/W/26/3377217 and 6005051


    property and is of a notable size and bulk; its profile is not slim. The relative bulk of
    the hatch combines with its colour, which contrasts markedly with the black paint
    beneath it, to cause it to appear as an obtrusive feature within this elevation of the
    building. The hatch is appreciably larger and more conspicuous than the plate/panel
    which was previously in place. The materials used in the construction of the serving
    hatch and timber frame are such that they too contrast severely with the brick wall
    within which they sit. The serving hatch draws the eye towards it and appears as a
    notable feature within the wall of the building. During times of operation the hatch
    doors would be held open against the wall of the appeal building. At these times the
    size of the hatch would be markedly larger thus further increasing its prominence.
17. Overall, the scheme appears as a visually disruptive addition which jars, and draws
    attention away from, the simple and attractive brick elevation of the historic building.
    The serving hatch introduces an incongruous feature to the building and adversely
    alters the appearance of the simple, residential side elevation.
18. The side elevation of the appeal building runs along Brook Mews North at a location
    where the road narrows and the archway marks a change from the bustling busy
    road to the more peaceful, residential Mews. Serving hatches, are commonly
    associated with commercial activity. Such features are not characteristic of buildings
    such as the appeal property, nor are they commonly found elsewhere within the CA.
    The signage on the hatch doors, both during times when the hatch is open and, to a
    lesser extent, when the doors are closed, clearly denotes a commercial use.
    Furthermore, the purpose of the hatch is for customers to use it to collect their
    orders from the business and thus commercial activity would be introduced. The
    encroachment of commercial activity into the mews compromises the more
    peaceful, residential character of Brooks Mews North and erodes the clear contrast
    between the quieter mews development and the vibrant activity found along Craven
    Road. The CAA considers that such contrasts are an important characteristic of the
    CA and values the contribution made by the tranquillity of mews development such
    as Brook Mews North. In raising the status of Brooks Mews North, the scheme
    would have a detrimental effect on the hierarchy of the streets and spaces in the
    area.
19. I accept that the scheme is considered to be fully reversible by the appellant and no
    historic fabric is said to have been lost. The somewhat temporary nature of the
    scheme does not, however, preclude it from causing harm whilst in place and I find
    this degree of harm to be unacceptable even if it were for only a short period. The
    fact that no historic fabric is said to have been lost is a neutral consideration and
    adds weight neither for nor against allowing the appeal.
20. I note that the opening behind the serving hatch is not new and that an alternative
    panel was previously in place. However, the evidence before me indicates that the
    previous panel was smaller, significantly more flush with the brick wall and sat
    relatively unobtrusively within the brick wall in such a way so as to not cause harm
    to the listed building or the wider area.
21. The appellant has stated that it would be possible for the serving hatch to be
    painted black in the interests of achieving a less discernible contrast between the
    hatch and the wall beneath it and to better reflect the former appearance of the
    panel. Though this amendment to the scheme would, to my mind, represent an
    improvement on the current situation the hatch would continue to visually protrude
    and the introduction of commercial activity to the mews would not be reduced. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
Appeal Decisions APP/X5990/W/26/3377217 and 6005051


    proposed amendments would not be sufficient to mitigate the harm I have set out
    above to any significant degree.
22. For the reasons set out above, I consider that the serving hatch unacceptably and
    harmfully alters the character and appearance of the listed building and thus
    undermines the significance of the designated heritage asset. The scheme therefore
    fails to preserve the special architectural and historic interest of the Grade II listed
    building.
23. Additionally, the introduction of a commercial feature and associated activity at a
    point where the character of the area has transitioned from the intensity of the lively
    main road to the more subdued mews causes harm to a key quality typical of the
    CA. The serving hatch also causes direct harm to an asset which adds positively to
    the significance of the CA. It follows that the scheme before me fails to preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the CA as a whole and harms its
    significance.
24. In finding harm to the significance of designated heritage assets the Planning
    Practice Guidance (PPG) requires the extent of harm within that category to be
    clearly articulated. In this instance, given the limited extent and nature of the
    scheme before me, the harm to the significance of the designated heritage assets is
    at the lower end of less than substantial. Notwithstanding this, the identified harm is
    of considerable importance and weight.
25. The approach set out in the Framework is that where a proposal causes harm to the
    significance of a designated heritage asset(s), as in this case, that harm should be
    weighed against the public benefits.
Public benefits and heritage balance
26. It is not unreasonable to conclude that the scheme has economic benefits in
    facilitating the effective operation of a small business enterprise. I also acknowledge
    that such benefits could stretch beyond the business itself and have a positive
    impact in encouraging footfall and activity into the area for the benefit of the wider
    economy. I have also taken into account the sustainable location of the appeal
    property.
27. Conversely, on the other side of the balance, I have found that the scheme causes
    harm to the Grade II listed building and fails to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA. The Framework indicates that great weight should be given
    to the conservation of such heritage assets. Consequently, the public benefits of the
    scheme do not outweigh the harm identified.
28. The scheme, therefore, conflicts with the statutory presumptions of s.16(2), s.66(1)
    and s.72(1) of the Act. The scheme also fails to accord with Policies 42 and 45 of
    the LP. Amongst other things, these policies state that new development will be
    sensitively designed and incorporate exemplary standards of high quality,
    sustainable and inclusive urban design and architecture which positively contributes
    to the borough’s townscape and streetscape by having regard to the character and
    appearance of the existing area, adjacent buildings and heritage assets and the
    pattern and grain of existing streets, squares, mews and passageways.
29. The scheme is also contrary to LP Policy 44 which expressly relates to
    Westminster’s heritage and sets out that works to listed buildings will preserve their


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
Appeal Decisions APP/X5990/W/26/3377217 and 6005051


    special interest, relating sensitively to the period and architectural detail of the
    building and that development will preserve or enhance the character and
    appearance of Westminster’s conservation areas.
Highway Safety
30. The proposed serving hatch would be located to the side of the building along the
    access archway to Brook Mews North. Access to Brook Mews North is from Craven
    Road. Craven Road is a fairly wide, busy street with high levels of pedestrian,
    bicycle and vehicular traffic. In the vicinity of the appeal site, Craven Road has
    commercial units along both sides of the road.
31. The opening to Brook Mews North is narrow and its enclosed nature has an impact
    on visibility and light levels along this particular stretch of the road. A number of
    residential properties, garages and what appears to be an access point to a car park
    are situated along Brook Mews North. As such vehicular traffic along the mews is
    expected. The entrance to Brook Mews North has double yellow lines along both
    sides of the road.
32. There is no formal footpath along this section of Brook Mews North; a very narrow
    kerb runs between the building line and the carriageway. The pavement along
    Craven Road is also fairly narrow and low level walls serving the properties either
    side are located at the junction with Brook Mews North. Street furniture, such as
    tables and chairs, serving the commercial properties nearby is also located along
    the pavement of Craven Road further limiting its width.
33. Due to the limited width of the pavement along Craven Road, the location of the
    hatch and the lack of formal pavement along Brook Mews North, customers utilising
    the hatch would be highly likely to wait within the narrow road. Though I note that
    customers are encouraged to collect their orders and take them elsewhere to enjoy,
    there is, nevertheless, a likelihood of customers spending longer amounts of time
    outside of the hatch before moving on. Pedestrians within this area would impede
    the flow of traffic, both in respect of other pedestrians and vehicles and other road
    users. In a restricted location such as this, any blockage along the route would
    represent a high risk to the safety of all road users.
34. Additionally, parking for motor vehicles within the area is limited and, due to the
    concentration of nearby commercial units, demand for parking is high. As such,
    customers attending the hatch via motor vehicle would be more likely to pull-in and
    wait in positions where the free flow of traffic would be obstructed.
35. I accept that the appellant has implemented systems, such as pre-ordering, pre-
    paying and arranging collection time slots, in order to reduce the numbers of
    customers attending the hatch concurrently. However, the exact numbers of
    customers attending at any one time would be difficult to control and multiple
    individuals could arrive at the same time to collect a single order. Moreover, due to
    the lack of any meaningful pavement area upon which to wait, even a single
    pedestrian waiting to collect an order would be likely to stand within the road itself
    and would cause an unacceptable highway safety risk. Furthermore, no enforceable
    mechanism to restrict customers from attending the site in motor vehicles or to
    prevent them remaining outside the hatch for a protracted period of time has been
    demonstrated.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    6
Appeal Decisions APP/X5990/W/26/3377217 and 6005051


36. I note that the serving hatch has, to date, been operational on a limited basis and
    does not operate full-time. However, during the periods where the hatch was in
    operation the implications on highway safety I have outlined above would,
    nevertheless, occur. Such implications are unacceptable, in my view, even for a
    short time.
37. Though I acknowledge the appellant’s intentions, the information before me is
    limited in its specificity and I have not been provided with the details of a scheme
    which, to my mind, would reduce the degree of risk to an acceptable level. I also
    acknowledge the appellant’s statement that there have been no complaints or
    incidents to date. However, the lack of notable or documented problems thus far
    does not preclude such occurrences in future and, as set out above, I am not
    satisfied on the basis of the evidence before me that the level of risk associated with
    the proposal is acceptable or that it could be satisfactorily mitigated.
38. For the reasons set out above I consider that the scheme has an adverse effect on
    highway safety. As such, I find conflict with the aims of Policy 28 and Policy 29 of
    the LP which, amongst other things, promote the creation of high-quality and safe
    streets. Additionally, the scheme departs from the aims of LP Policy 48 which sets
    out to ensure that development contributes to a well-designed and clutter-free public
    realm and is clear in its aims to minimise any obstruction to pedestrian movement or
    traffic conditions.
39. Furthermore, the scheme does not align with the Council’s Westminster’s Streets
    and Spaces Public Realm Guidance Supplementary Planning Document, August
    2025 (SPD) which seeks to ensure that streets and public spaces within the area
    are safe and functional and specifically sets out that the function and character of
    the highway and public realm should not be compromised by commercial activity
    and should remain primarily accessible and free for all users.
Conclusion
40. For the reasons set out above, the scheme is contrary to the development plan.
    There are no material considerations that indicate that permission should be
    granted. Therefore, taking all other matters raised into account, the appeals are
    dismissed.

L J O'Brien
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    7
