Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 31 July 2026
by G Sylvester BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005903
Land North of Bishops Lane, West of Willow Bank, Robertsbridge TN32 5BX
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Devine Homes PLC against the decision of Rother District Council.
•      The application Ref. RR/2022/1379/P.
•      The development proposed is the creation of 41 new dwellings including 39% affordable housing,
       with associated landscaping, amenity space, parking and provision of public open space.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2.       The main parties have commented on the relevance of the revised National
         Planning Policy Framework ("the Framework"), published on 17 August 2026, to
         their respective cases in this appeal. I have considered those comments in
         reaching my decision. All references to the Framework are to the revised version.
3.       The council is satisfied that the planning obligations secured by the completed and
         executed Section 106 Agreement would address refusal reason 2. Having
         considered the Agreement in the context of the evidence before me, I see no
         reason reach a different conclusion.
4.       The appeal site lies within the High Weald National Landscape (“the HWNL”),
         which was formerly known as The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural
         Beauty. In determining this appeal, I shall have regard to my duty1 to seek to
         further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of national
         landscapes.
Main Issue
5.       The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on the
         landscape and scenic beauty of the HWNL.
Reasons
6.       The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan (“the
         HWMP”) describes the HWNL as one of the best-preserved medieval landscapes
         in north-west Europe, with a natural beauty derived from its essentially rural and
         small-scale landscape character. The HWMP sets out the special qualities and key
         characteristics of the HWNL. So far as relevant to the appeal scheme, those

1
    Section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 as amended by the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005903


       characteristics include the irregular shaped and productive fields of its rural
       landscape, the network of historic routeways that cross it, and dispersed historic
       settlement.
7.     The appeal site is an irregular shaped arable field in the countryside on the edge
       of the settlement that was recently used for growing crops. It is bordered on two
       sides by the rows of relatively modern dwellings that front Bishops Lane and
       Willow Bank, within the built-up area of the settlement. The land slopes down
       towards the Darwell Stream which extends along its northwest boundary. The
       southern boundary of the appeal site is largely defined by the row of hedgerow
       lining the north side of the section of Bishops Lane which extends out from the
       built-up area of the settlement and into the countryside.
8.     The appeal site, together with land that extends away from the settlement to west
       and that on the opposite side of Darwell Stream, comprises part of a swathe of
       land consisting mostly of spacious fields interspersed with trees and hedgerows
       that pervades up to built-up area of the settlement. The spacious and verdantly
       rural character and appearance of the appeal site is reflective of the rural and
       small-scale landscape of fields that are identified by the HWMP as a characteristic
       of the HWNL.
9.     Furthermore, the appeal site comprises a sizeable section of the densely
       vegetated raised roadside embankment that extends along the northern side of
       Bishops Lane. This section of Bishops Lane, which extends away from the
       settlement and slopes down towards the Darwell Stream crossing, is characterised
       by steeply sloping embankments on both sides of the narrow carriageway.
       Together they contribute to the well-defined sunken lane morphology of this
       section of Bishops Lane, which exhibits the key characteristics of a historic sunken
       lane that is described in the HWMP.
10. Sunken lanes are identified by the HWMP as important components of the historic
    routeway network in the HWNL, reflecting a close relationship between settlement
    patterns, their hinterlands, and local identity, and representing a rare survival of an
    essentially medieval landscape. The appeal site forms an integral part of the
    character and morphology of this part of Bishops Lane, which is clearly distinct
    from the section to the east which passes through the built-up area of the
    settlement, and is fronted by rows of dwellings served by driveways.
11. The baseline condition of the appeal site therefore contributes positively to the
    small-scale rural landscape of irregular fields, including the verdant character of
    the settlement, and the sunken lane morphology of Bishops Lane as part of the
    historic routeways network. It displays several core components and key
    characteristics of the landscape and scenic beauty of the HWNL that are described
    in the HWMP’s chapters on fieldscape, settlement and historic routeways.
12. The HWMP identifies those characteristics as being threatened by the cumulative
    effects of development, including urbanisation and the loss of fields, and
    insensitive highway engineering. The objectives of the HWMP include seeking to
    minimise the erosion of landscape character through urbanisation and to maintain
    the historic pattern, morphology and features of routeways.
13. The appeal site’s positive contribution to the landscape and scenic beauty of the
    HWNL is clearly appreciable from a range of public viewpoints, including Bishops
    Lane. Due to the network of public rights of way that cross the area, the appeal

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005903


         site and its wider surroundings are highly visible to walkers enjoying the
         countryside for its landscape and scenic beauty. They would be amongst those
         receptors most sensitive to the landscape and visual effects of the proposed
         development.
14. I have had regard to the methodology in the appellant’s landscape and visual
    impact assessment (LVIA). I consider that reaching a view on the effects of the
    proposed development requires a series of site-specific and context-sensitive
    judgements. Even taking account of the appeal site’s position on the edge of the
    settlement and the presence of housing on neighbouring land, for the reasons
    given above, the overall sensitivity of the site, including the frontage to Bishops
    Lane, is more than moderate.
15. Compared to the baseline situation the proposal would result in buildings, roads
    and associated infrastructure covering a large part of the existing arable field. The
    access road and junction would cut through the raised embankment that extends
    across the Bishops Lane frontage. Even taking account of the proposed new
    planting and the retention of existing hedgerows, the proposed development would
    have an urbanising effect on the appeal site that would harmfully erode its positive
    contribution to the spaciously verdant and intrinsically rural character of the
    landscape.
16. In views from the public right of way crossing the appeal site, and to a lesser
    extent in longer-distance views from across the Darwell Stream valley, the
    proposed development would appear as a significant intrusion of built form into the
    swathe of spacious and verdantly rural land between Bishops Lane and the edge
    of the built-up area on Station Road.
17. I have read the responses of design and landscape consultees2 as advising that
    the amendments to the scheme have resulted in a less intrusive linear layout that
    has a stronger response to the High Weald Housing Design Guide, albeit adverse
    effects of the access junction appear to remain of some concern. Those
    consultees consider that the proposal could create a high-quality built environment
    that improves the interface between the built-up area of the village and the rural
    landscape beyond. However, although visible on the edge of the settlement, the
    existing dwellings along Bishops Lane, which have relatively long gardens, do not
    create an unduly harsh edge to the settlement.
18. This is because those rows of dwellings are unified by their simple designs,
    consistent forms and rooflines. Due to their consistent dark coloured external
    materials, the contrast between those dwellings and the darker green tones of the
    trees and fields on the edge of the village is relatively modest when seen in longer
    distance views. In closer distance views they are softened to a degree by the
    planting along their rear boundaries, which includes the occasional tree.
19. Owing to the varied sizes, forms, proportions and colour finishes of the proposed
    dwellings, the village-vernacular aesthetic of the proposed development would
    have a comparatively more noticeable and strident appearance than the existing
    dwellings along Bishops Lane. Furthermore, the proposed route of the diverted
    public right of way would still more or less follow a route close to the backs of
    dwellings and their rear garden boundaries, resulting in a relatively inactive edge


2
    Planning & Design Advisor for High Weald National Landscape Unit and the County Council’s Landscape Architect


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6005903


       to the open space. The softening effects of the trees behind those dwellings would
       significantly diminish during the months around winter.
20. While the appeal scheme would provide a sizeable area of landscaped public open
    space, I find that the extent to which it would enhance the interface between the
    settlement and the rural landscape beyond would be comparatively modest.
    Consequently, in taking account of the methodology in the appellant’s LVIA, the
    proposal’s urbanising effect on the arable field would be visually intrusive. Seen in
    the context of the spacious and verdantly rural character of the land between
    Bishops Lane and Station Road, the visual effects of the proposed development
    would cause greater than moderate harm to the appearance of the area.
21. Even if I were to agree that historic routeways are not uncommon within the
    HWNL, it would not alter my conclusion that the sunken lane morphology of the
    section of Bishops Lane along the appeal site frontage is an important
    characteristic of the HWNL. While views of the proposed access road and junction
    would be more localised than those of the proposed buildings, its effects would
    nevertheless be significant.
22. This is because the proposed access road and junction would require an opening
    to be cut through the raised embankment creating a relatively wide gap that would
    disrupt its continuity and diminish the sunken lane’s sense of enclosure. Even
    accounting for the growth of the proposed mitigation planting, the access road and
    junction, together with the associated alterations to Bishops Lane, including road
    widening and the provision of new footways, would have a distinctly engineered
    appearance. It would result in an urbanising effect that would harmfully erode the
    morphology of the historic sunken lane and its verdantly rural character and
    appearance.
23. Consequently, the proposed development would cause significant harm to the
    character and appearance of this section of Bishops Lane, in conflict with HWMP
    objective R1 of conserving the morphology and features of historic routeways and
    avoiding urbanising interventions that detract from their character.
24. I see no reason to disagree with the main parties’ assessment that the appeal
    scheme is not ‘major’ within the context of the Framework’s policy on protected
    landscapes. Nonetheless, for the reasons given above, I conclude on this main
    issue that the proposed development would harm the spacious and verdantly rural
    character and appearance of the area, including the morphology and historic
    routeway character of the sunken Bishops Lane. It would be visually intrusive and
    result in adverse visual effects from a range of viewpoints, particularly to users of
    the public rights of way and Bishops Lane.
25. I have taken account of the proposed development’s linear layout, its proximity to
    the existing built-up edge of the settlement, the vernacular designs of the proposed
    dwellings, the provision of public open space, and the softening effects of new
    planting. Whilst those aspects of the scheme accord with several objectives of the
    High Weald Housing Design Guide, particularly house design, they do not
    outweigh the totality of the harm to the HWNL that I have identified.
26. Listed in the evidence before me are several planning permissions for housing in
    the HWNL, which covers a sizeable proportion of the council’s district. Those
    permissions are an indicator that housing developments are being approved in the
    HWNL, including some recent permissions for more than 20 dwellings, including in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005903


       Robertsbridge. However, as full details of those permissions are not before me, it
       has not been shown that their effects on the HWNL would be comparable to those
       of the appeal scheme. Accordingly, they have limited relevance to my assessment
       of the proposed development and the judgements I have formed on its landscape
       and visual effects.
27. Consequently, the totality of the proposed development would have a significant
    adverse effect on the landscape and scenic beauty of the HWNL and would fail to
    conserve its statutory purposes and special qualities. It would therefore conflict
    with Policy EN1 of the Rother Local Plan Core Strategy Adopted September 2014
    (“the CS”), Policies DEN1 and DEN2 of the Rother District Council Development
    and Site Allocations Local Plan, Adopted December 2019 (“the DaSA”), and Policy
    EN3 of the Salehurst and Robertsbridge Neighbourhood Development Plan 2016-
    2018, ’made’ in July 2018 (“the SRNDP”).
28. Together those policies seek to ensure that development conserves and seeks to
    enhance the landscape and scenic beauty of the HWNL having particular regard to
    the impacts on its character components, as set out in the HWMP, including
    relating well to historic routeways and not damaging their rural character by loss of
    important features such as banks and hedgerows.
Other Matters
29. I have taken account of the comments made about the appeal site by the examiner
    of the SRNDP. The evidence indicates that planning permission for the
    development of the allocated Hodson’s Mill site lapsed in 2024. However, I am not
    party to the evidence that was put before the examiner when they considered the
    appeal site, and I am not aware of any obligation for the SRNDP to be reviewed.
    Accordingly, the examiner’s comments about the appeal site hold little relevance to
    my consideration of the appeal scheme.
30. The appeal proposal does not comply with the limited circumstances in Policy RA3
    of the CS which provide for housing outside development boundaries. Accordingly,
    it conflicts with the development plan’s locational strategy for housing growth in
    Policies RA3 and OSS2 of the CS, Policy DIM2 of the DaSA, and Policy HO1 of
    the SRNDP.
31. The evidence before me indicates that the Council can only demonstrate a
    housing land supply of some 3.04 years and that its housing register contains
    some 1400 applicants seeking affordable housing. The Council has scored only
    35% in the most recent Housing Delivery Test. Accordingly, the shortfall in the
    supply of deliverable housing land appears to be very significant and the shortage
    of affordable housing acute.
32. The development plan’s locational strategy for housing growth appears to be
    contributing to the current shortfall in the supply of housing by restricting housing
    growth. It is described by the appellant as based on out-of-date housing targets
    and I see no reason on the evidence before me to reach a different view.
    Furthermore, as the appellant’s evidence indicates that preparation of the
    emerging Local Plan is at an early stage with adoption not anticipated until
    2027/2028, the shortfall in the supply of housing is likely to persist for a number of
    years with nothing before me to indicate a marked improvement in the foreseeable
    future.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005903


33. The appeal site occupies an accessible location in relation to the local services
    and facilities that future residents are likely to use on a regular basis. Even if I
    were to give very little weight conflict to the conflict with the development plan’s
    locational strategy, I find that the harm to the landscape and scenic beauty of the
    HWNL, and the conflict with Policy EN1 of the CS, Policies DEN1 and DEN2 of the
    DaSA, and Policy EN3 of the SRNDP, is sufficient to bring the proposal into
    conflict with the development plan as a whole.
Benefits of the development
34. There appears to be no dispute between the main parties that developing
    greenfield land will be necessary to meet housing needs in the district. The
    proposed development would make an important beneficial contribution to
    increasing the supply of market and affordable housing in the Council’s area. It
    would deliver homes of a size, type and tenure that reflect policies on housing mix.
35. The proposed development could be delivered reasonably quickly given the
    greenfield condition of the appeal site and the detailed nature of the planning
    application. It would generate economic benefits, including jobs for local people
    during the construction phase. Future occupants would support business, services
    and facilities in the local area and beyond, contributing to the vitality of the wider
    rural area.
36. The location of the proposed development would be within a reasonable distance
    of local services and facilities. Improved pedestrian connections and local bus
    infrastructure would be secured through the grant of planning permission. The
    proposed development would offer future occupants a genuine choice of transport
    modes to reach services and facilities.
37. The proposal would deliver a sizeable area of accessible open space. The
    continuity of public rights of way would be protected by the provision of route
    diversions. It would provide walkers with a dedicated path through the site as an
    alternative to walking within Bishops Lane, albeit there is nothing of substance to
    indicate that the current situate is unsafe.
38. The development would deliver net gains in biodiversity that would enhance
    nature. The proposed homes would use energy and water efficiently and would be
    fitted with air source heat pumps and devices to charge zero and low emission
    vehicles. There is no reason to doubt that policies concerning environmental
    standards would not be met.
39. The main parties agree that no harms would be caused to highway safety, heritage
    assets, flood risk, ecology and protected species, or the living conditions of
    occupants of nearby properties. However, an absence of harm in those respects
    would not weigh positively in favour of the appeal scheme.
40. I acknowledge that planning officers considered the adverse effects on the HWNL
    would not be significant and would be outweighed by the proposal’s economic,
    social and environmental benefits. I am aware of some local support for increasing
    the supply of housing in the local area. However, in my judgement, the benefits of
    the proposal, although attracting weight of a high order in favour of the proposal,
    are outweighed by the harm it would cause to the landscape and scenic beauty of
    the HWNL, and the resultant conflict with the development plan as a whole.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005903


The Framework
41. The Framework is a material consideration. As the appeal development would be
    located outside of the settlement of Robertsbridge, Framework Policy S5 is
    relevant. The proposal would contribute to addressing an evidenced unmet need
    for housing and would be a form of development that meets the terms of Policy
    S5(1.j.i) of the Framework.
42. The appellant’s evidence indicates that the proposed development would be within
    a reasonable walking distance of the railway station. However, the evidence does
    not demonstrate that the station would be a ‘well-connected station’ within the
    Framework’s definition. Accordingly, it has not been shown to meet the criteria in
    Policy S5(1.h.).
43. Nonetheless, under Framework Policy S5, the proposed development should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    this Framework. Policy S5(2) of the Framework explains the circumstances in
    which the benefits are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects.
44. In accordance with Policies H07 and H08 of the Framework, the proposed
    development would make an important contribution towards meeting the
    evidenced housing needs of the community, including the provision of homes for
    those in need of affordable housing. It would therefore contribute positively
    towards the objectives of creating mixed and balanced communities.
45. In transportation terms, there is no dispute between the main parties that the
    proposed development would be appropriately located relative to services and
    facilities. It would therefore accord with Policies TR3, TR4 and TR8 of the
    Framework.
46. Even if I were to agree that the appeal proposal is limited in scale and extent, its
    adverse effects on the statutory purposes and special qualities of the HWNL,
    results in conflict with Policy N4 of the Framework, which requires development to
    be sensitively located and designed to avoid those harms. The proposal would
    also conflict with Policy N2(1) of the Framework insofar as it would harm the
    landscape character and beauty of the countryside.
47. In accordance with the Framework, I have given substantial weight to the overall
    benefits of the proposed development. Nevertheless, given the importance and
    weight that I attach to conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the HWNL,
    the harm to the HWNL carries greater than substantial weight against the
    proposal. I conclude that this harm substantially outweighs the development's
    benefits when assessed against the national decision-making policies of the
    Framework. The harm is determinative in this instance.
48. In accordance with paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 of the Framework, development
    proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with
    paragraph 1 of Policy DP3. Due to those adverse effects on the statutory purposes
    and special qualities of the HWNL, the proposed development would also fail to
    respond appropriately to its context, or to successfully integrate with and enhance
    its surroundings.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005903


49. Therefore, the proposal would conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the
    Framework. Given the importance and weight that I have attached to the harm to
    the HWNL, the conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 would not be justified by the
    benefits of the proposal. Consequently, the proposal would fail to comply with
    Policy DP3 and in the circumstances specified in paragraph 3 of the Policy,
    planning permission should be refused.
Conclusion
50. The proposal conflicts with Policies RA3, OSS2 and EN1 of the CS, Policies
    DEN1, DEN2 and DIM2 of the DaSA, and Policies EN3 and HO1 of the SRNDP,
    and the development plan as a whole. The material considerations including the
    benefits of the proposed development and the provisions of the Framework are
    insufficient to outweigh that conflict. Therefore, I conclude that the proposed
    development is unacceptable, and the appeal should be dismissed.



G Sylvester
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
