Appeal Decision
Inquiry held on 24 - 25 June 2026 and (online) on 30 June 2026
Site visits made on 24 and 25 June 2026
by H Nicholls MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005809
Land to the North of Spring Hill, Kingston Bagpuize with Southmoor
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Nicholas King New Homes Limited against the decision of Vale of White
       Horse District Council (VoWHDC).
•      The application Ref is P24/V2357/O.
•      The development proposed is outline planning application for the erection of up to 249 dwellings,
       including means of access into the site (not internal roads) from Spring Hill, with all other matters
       (relating to appearance, landscaping, scale and layout) reserved.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted for the erection of
   up to 249 dwellings, including means of access into the site (not internal roads)
   from Spring Hill, with all other matters (relating to appearance, landscaping, scale
   and layout) reserved on Land to the North of Spring Hill, Kingston Bagpuize with
   Southmoor, in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref P24/V2357/O,
   subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. A case management conference was held on the 5 May 2026 with representatives
   of the main parties to discuss arrangements for the Inquiry to allow for it to run
   efficiently. The merits of the appeal case were not discussed.
3. The appeal application was made in outline form with all matters reserved save for
   the main access points from Spring Hill. As such, the submitted plans depicting
   details of layout, scale, appearance and landscaping have been taken as largely
   indicative in nature.
4. The fifth and sixth reasons for refusal related to the potential effects of the proposal
   on protected species and lack of measures to secure Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG).
   The Council confirmed in its Statement1 that these matters were capable of being
   addressed by planning conditions. I find no reason to reach an alternative view.
5. On the 8 June 2026, the Council wrote to advise that the second, third and fourth
   reasons for refusal had also fallen away through evidence submitted with the
   appeal. These reasons respectively related to sustainable travel, highways access
   suitability and impact on the Frillford junction. Whilst I have had regard to the views
   of interested parties, I find no reason to reach alternative conclusions in these
   regards.

1
    April 2026

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005809


6. The seventh, eighth and ninth reasons for refusal related to the absence of a legal
   obligation under S106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (S106). The
   terms of the S106 were the subject of discussion in the lead up to the Inquiry and a
   final agreed draft was submitted during the Inquiry. The final engrossed S106,
   dated 9 July 2026 was received the day following the close of the Inquiry.
7. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the 2026 Framework) was issued
   on 17 August 2026 and forms a material consideration for decision making
   purposes from the date of its publication. The main parties have commented on the
   relevance of the new Framework policies to the appeal scheme to avoid any
   prejudice and I have taken the comments into account in reaching my decision.
8. The parties provided an updated Statement of Common Ground (SoCG) ahead of
   the Inquiry. Amongst other things, the SoCG sets out the agreement that the
   emerging Joint Local Plan (JLP) of the Council and South Oxfordshire District
   Council is at examination stage and, as such, can only attract very limited weight at
   the present time. As the emerging JLP will not plan for enough housing relative to
   the standard method outlined in the Framework, work on a new plan will need to
   commence immediately on its adoption (JLP2). The Council has indicated that
   resources are already in place for this situation.
Main Issues
9. In light of the above and the other matters outlined in the SOGC, the main issue in
   the appeal is whether, by virtue of its scale, nature and location, the appeal scheme
   would comply with the development plan in terms of access to facilities, services
   and higher order settlements.
10. In terms of the planning balance, other key issues are whether the Council can
    demonstrate an adequate five year supply of housing land and the implications of
    the 2026 Framework.
Reasons
Location, nature and scale
11. The appeal site extends to approximately 11.3 hectares of arable farmland and is
    located on the western edge of the settlement of Kingston Bagpuize with
    Southmoor (KBS). The appeal scheme would take access from Spring Hill to the
    south. The A420 lies to the north of the site.
12. The Vale of White Horse Local Plan Part 1 (LPP1) (adopted 2016) outlines a spatial
    strategy which includes prioritisation of growth within the ‘Science Vale Area’ (not
    applicable to the appeal site); the reinforcement of the service centre roles of the
    main settlements across the district; and, promoting thriving villages and rural
    communities whilst safeguarding the countryside and village character.
13. LPP1 Policy CP3 lists 20 no. ‘Larger Villages’ which form the third tier of settlement
    in the hierarchy, below the ‘Market Towns’ (of Abingdon, Wantage, Faringdon) and
    ‘Local Service Centres’ (Botley, Grove), but above the ‘Smaller Villages’. KBS is a
    ‘Larger Village’ and these are defined as settlements with a more limited range of
    employment, services and facilities. KBS lies within the ‘Abingdon-on-Thames and
    Oxford Fringe Sub-Area’ due to its strong linkages to the City of Oxford, some
    approximate 16km to the north-east of the appeal site. The ‘Market Town’ of
    Abingdon-on-Thames is approximately 8km in an easterly direction. Under Policy

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005809


      CP3, unallocated development should be limited to providing for local needs and to
      support employment, services and facilities within local communities.
14. Policy CP4 sets the overall minimum housing target for the plan period and sets out
    the distribution across the strategic allocations, other allocations to be made in the
    Local Plan Part 2, neighbourhood plans or other development management
    processes. It goes on to state that there is a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development within the existing built area of Market Towns, Local Service Centres
    and Larger Villages. The policy supports development outside of the existing built
    area of these settlements where it is allocated or has been allocated within an
    adopted Neighbourhood Development Plan or future parts of the Local Plan.
15. Under LPP1 Policy CP4, the scale of permissible unallocated development suited
    to meet local needs would be expected to relate to the scale and function of the
    respective settlement. This would typically equate to larger developments for
    Market Towns than when compared to Larger Villages. As such, whilst not explicit,
    the consideration of scale is relevant to the type of settlement and the nature and
    extent of local need it is intended to meet.
16. LPP1 Policy CP8 reinforces the settlement hierarchy specific to the Abingdon-on-
    Thames and Oxford Fringe Sub-Area and the sets out the expected sources of
    housing supply, relative to the sub-area housing requirement. An allocation for 600
    dwellings was included for a site to the eastern side of KBS in the Vale of White
    Horse Local Plan Part 2 (LPP2) (adopted 2019), Policies CP4a and CP8a. This has
    since received both outline planning permission and reserved matters consent2.
    When built out, this allocation is to provide additional facilities to KBS including
    another primary school, local centre and sports pitches.
17. The appeal site is not allocated in either LPP1 or LPP2 and nor is it intended to be
    in the draft Kingston Bagpuize with Southmoor Neighbourhood Development Plan
    (draft KBS NDP). There is no defined settlement boundary for KBS either.
    However, given its scale and location, the appeal site lies adjacent to the existing
    built area, rather than within it. This view is supported by the draft KBS NDP which
    would exclude the appeal site and place it close to its eastern edge.
18. As an unallocated development of up to 249 dwellings, the appeal scheme would
    not be limited to providing for local needs to support employment, services and/or
    facilities specifically within the community.
19. The appeal site is outside of the built up area of the settlement, is unallocated and
    would serve a more strategic role than one specific to the local needs of KBS that is
    already expected to absorb a committed strategic growth allocation. Therefore, the
    scheme conflicts with LPP1 policies CP3, CP4 and CP8 and LPP2 policies CP4a
    and CP8a. The appeal site is not intended to be allocated in the emerging JLP
    either, despite that it is noted as both available and achievable under the Housing
    Economic Land Availability Assessments (HELAAs) of 2017 and 2024.
Housing Land Supply (HLS)
20. The Housing Land Supply SoCG and related Housing Land Supply SoCG
    Addendum (June 2026) confirm the total five year requirement of 4,982 dwellings

2
 Outline application ref: P22/V0248/O Hybrid scheme comprising outline for up 660 dwellings, extra care development of up to 70
units (use class C2), a local centre and a one form entry primary school, albeit undergoing variation under related s73 application.
Related reserved matters consent ref: 25/V2746/RM for 605 dwellings, community building and open space


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  3
Appeal Decision 6005809


        for the period 1 April 2025 (the base date) to 31 March 2030, including a 5% buffer
        (reflecting the latest Housing Delivery Test Results). On the basis of the areas of
        agreement and disagreement, the respective positions as at the opening of the
        Inquiry were a 5.34 year supply according to the Council, and a 4.24 year supply
        according to the appellant. As such, the best case of the Council is that it has a
        supply of 342 dwellings above the minimum five year requirement.
21. The main parties’ disagreement about Category A sites, i.e. those with detailed
    planning permission or non-major development, as a source of supply had been
    overcome prior to the opening of the Inquiry. The outstanding areas of dispute left
    to address at the Inquiry were the windfall allowance and Category B sites which I
    deal with respectively below.
Windfall Allowance
22. The Council seeks to make an allowance for windfall in years 4 and 5 of the supply
    period, comprising 180 dwellings per annum (dpa) and, thus, a total of 360
    dwellings. The appellant’s case is that the windfall allowance should be 130
    dwellings in total.
23. The Council’s evidence demonstrates that since monitoring commenced in
    2011/12, an annual average of 574 dwellings has been delivered through windfall
    schemes across a range of site size and type (i.e. major, minor, brownfield etc.).
    The Council has deducted 394 dwellings from the annual average figure of 574
    dwellings in order to generate its 180 dpa windfall figure for years 4 and 5.
24. The appellant’s assertion is that the Council relies too heavily on these past windfall
    delivery trends rather than considering in greater detail the likely effects of
    economic, policy and other factors which will influence future delivery, such as
    anticipated changes to the planning system and the effects of changes in inflation
    and the costs of borrowing.
25. The Council’s 2025 Housing Land Supply Statement3 details past windfall delivery
    rates and a wide range of economic, policy and other external factors which have
    influenced the rate of housing delivery over the monitoring period. When
    considered against the annual average for the whole period from 2011/12, the
    deduction of 394 dwellings pa is healthy. However, that data shows that since
    2020/21, the annual average has consistently been far lower, albeit without much in
    the way of explanation for such a change in the trend. For instance, in the
    2022/2023 monitoring year, the windfall delivery was only 170 dwellings in total,
    which, whilst an isolated incident, is below the offered 180 dpa target.
26. In view of the above and the lack of rationale to explain the more recent past and
    predicted future trends, I have reservations about the windfall allowance being
    overly optimistic. On the other hand, the appellant’s offered windfall allowance of
    130 dwellings split across the two relevant years appears overly negative, with the
    annual windfall delivery never having dropped to such a level over the entirety of
    the monitoring period.
27. Having regard to the tests for windfall allowances, as set out in the Framework, I
    am not entirely persuaded that the windfall allowance is suitably robust for the
    current 5 year period without further analysis of the more recent delivery and

3
    Appendix 5 of CD102 – Housing Land Supply Statement 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              4
Appeal Decision 6005809


     anticipated future trends. However, a further modest deduction to the allowance
     would only need to provide a little more headroom over the projected 180 dpa
     figure to provide greater assurance of delivery. As such, on the evidence before
     me, a modest reduction in the windfall allowance of around a total of 40 dwellings
     would provide greater confidence in delivery. i.e. a total of 320 dwellings across
     years 4 and 5 could be expected from this source.
Category B Sites
28. As set out in Annex B of the Framework, Category B sites are those with outline
    permission, allocations, permission in principle or those on a brownfield register,
    which require clear evidence that housing completions will begin within five years.
    The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) also outlines sources of information that
    can be taken into account in assessing deliverability of these types of sites and lists
    planning performance agreements; signed written agreements between the local
    planning authority and the site developer(s) which confirms the developers’ delivery
    intentions and anticipated start and build-out rates; firm progress with site
    assessment work and clear relevant information about aspects such as site viability
    and infrastructure bids.
29. Whilst both parties refer to what was known about the 7 disputed sites at the base
    date, both parties refer to evidence gained since the base date to inform their
    respective positions on the projections. I deal with each of the disputed sites below.
HLSS Site Ref 41: Land west of Great Western Park, Didcot
Phase 3P
30. The projected build out rates differ between the Council and the housebuilder.
    Whilst the Council refers to past delivery rates on the wider sites during 2024/2025
    to justify its position, the recent decline in numbers of completions across the
    district as a whole suggests that a more cautious approach would be more
    appropriate. As such, the clearer evidence is that offered by the housebuilder who
    anticipates delivery of the units at a rate of 50 in year 3 and 80 dpa in years 4 and
    5. The total yield from this phase is therefore a total of 210 dwellings which is a
    deduction of 90 from the Council’s projection of 100 dpa in years 3, 4 and 5).
Phase 2Ta
31. As the Council’s and housebuilders trajectories align with this Phase, the need for
    clear evidence of completions is met and no further deductions are necessary.
Phase 6T
32. The Council offer evidence of 225 completions over years 3, 4 and 5. The
    housebuilder’s trajectories indicate a delayed commencement and only 50
    completions split across years 4 and 5. In response, the Council highlights that the
    suggested delay to start on site is inconceivable and that the delivery rates bear no
    resemblance to the typical 80 dpa build out rate achieved elsewhere. I take a view
    between the two positions on the basis that the delivery rates seem unusually
    supressed by the housebuilder without sufficiently evidenced rationale, though the
    Council have placed a high expectation on its delivery in contradiction of the same.
    As such, whereas the Council rely on delivery of 225 dwellings within the 5 years,
    and the housebuilder offers only 50, I assume that delivery of the typical 80dpa at


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005809


     least across the final years would be a more reasonable expectation, i.e. a total of
     160 dwellings.
Phase 2C
33. As a Phase of a relatively modest 105 dwellings in total, the clearer evidence of
    likely delivery appears to lie with housebuilder’s projection, which, whilst contrived,
    appears to take a sensible approach given other commitments and resource
    implications. In any event, the difference between the Council and housebuilder on
    this site is limited, but I find in favour of the housebuilder’s projections and deduct
    17 units from the yield from this Phase.
Phase 3PA and 3PB
34. The permission for this phase is for a total of 172 dwellings of which the Council
    relies on 150. The clearer evidence of timescales being met or exceeded appears
    to lie with the Council and thus, I accept that the Council’s expectations of 150
    dwellings within the five year period are realistic.
HLSS Site Refs 24 & 1237: Monks Farm, Grove
35. The difference between the parties on this site is a total of 92 units which form part
    of the 129 unit reserved matters application submitted well after the production of
    the 2025 Housing Land Supply Statement. This reserved matter application
    remains undetermined at the present time, with uncertainties relating to viability
    under the terms of the original outline permission. The Council have projected the
    delivery of 92 units based on average build-out rates from this site of 46 dwellings
    per annum. The housebuilder has not disputed the Council’s delivery trajectory
    through the agreement of the proforma. On the basis that this is the last phase of
    this multi-phase scheme, notwithstanding the unresolved reported issues at the
    present time, the yield expected from the final reserved matters scheme is not so
    high or unrealistic and the evidence appears sufficiently clear to leave this source in
    in without further deduction.
HLSS Site Refs 1255 & 1256: North of Abingdon on Thames
36. A yield of 100 dwellings and 42 dwelling-equivalents from the care home
    component of this outline permission are relied upon by the Council within the five
    year period. It does not appear that reserved matters applications have yet been
    received for either component part, though a recently submitted reserved matters
    application deals with at least one part of the site.
37. The detailed proforma is signed by a planning consultant on behalf of the housing
    developers breaks down the delivery expectations by unit type. It sets out the
    expectation that reserved matters application/s will be made within 2026 or early
    2027 – targets which haven’t yet been missed. The yield over the 5 year period for
    the typical market housing element (houses/flats) of 100 units does not appear
    unrealistic but the care home component may be delivered by another developer
    following acquisition of this part of the site.
38. Having scrutinised the evidence offered on both sides, my concern is not with the
    market housing but with the care home element. Given the relatively specialised
    nature of this type of development, the evidence trail would be clearer if the
    developers of this particular component had contributed to the proforma process.
    As no one could point to such a developer being committed to the site at the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005809


       present time. As such, deducting the 42 dwelling equivalents from the total
       expected yield is appropriate.
HLSS Site Ref 1270: East of Kingston Bagpuize with Southmoor
39. The Council expect a yield of 140 dwellings from this site which has a recently
    submitted reserved matters application for 605 dwellings, amongst other aspects.
    The proforma submitted by the developer of the site is on the more cautious side in
    terms of delivery trajectories but the milestone targets are currently being matched.
    Despite that there are some issues to resolve on the related variation to the outline
    permission, there is limited reason to exclude the 140 units within the 5 year period.
40. Again, it should be reiterated that the appellant seeks to offer 140 dwellings for
    inclusion within a five year period if permission were forthcoming on the appeal site.
    This highlights the anticipated delivery yields are not unrealistic, despite the
    differences between the schemes.
41. It is also noteworthy that the appellant promotes the delivery of the additional
    community facilities for KBS from this particular scheme. Whilst no reliance is
    placed on a delivery timescale for such, it is evident that the appellant anticipates
    delivery of the scheme in full within a reasonable timeframe. As such, I make no
    further deductions from this source.
HLSS Site Ref 1636: Rogers Concrete, Farringdon
42. There is sufficiently clear evidence available now that this site will deliver in full
    within the five years. Despite some ongoing issues to address with both the original
    outline and current reserved matters scheme, there is no reason to adjust the
    expected yield within the five year period.
HLSS Site Ref 1735: Land at Crab Hill, Wantage
43. The Council seeks to rely on delivery of 259 dwellings and the appellant broadly
    half that amount which represents the number of dwellings with reserved matters
    consent.
44. The Council submitted late information in relation to this site which is being used to
    inform the production of the 2026 Housing Land Supply Statement. Though
    additional completions from other parts of this largescale outline scheme are
    discussed, the Council seeks to advance its case only on the basis of the 130
    dwellings originally relied upon.
45. Whilst the proforma received from the site vendor is unsigned and the trajectories
    not fully complete, the fundamental points are that it is confirmed that the site sale
    is progressing and that there is a commitment to a timeframe for submission of
    reserved matters and commencement and that the delivery rate of 60 dpa is
    realistic. As such, I make no deductions.
Conclusions on HLS
46. On assessment of the evidence presented to the Inquiry, some deductions should
    be made from the Council’s five year supply calculation from windfall and Category
    B Site sources. If the deductions outlined above are taken into account, it leaves
    the Council with a relatively marginal buffer in the region of 88 dwellings above the
    five year threshold. This is a far reduced buffer from the 342 dwellings claimed by


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005809


       the Council on its best case and is therefore an even more delicate position which
       points towards evidence of an unmet need for housing in the district. I return to this
       in the overall balance below.
Implications of the 2026 Framework
47. The Council’s NPPF Addendum indicates that the proposal is unsustainable when
    considered in the context of Policy TR3(1)(a) of the 2026 Framework. This policy
    requires that developments which could generate a significant amount of
    movement should be in locations that are sustainable (or which can be made so,
    taking into account planned improvements, including any provided for as part of the
    development itself). This means that the location should limit the need to travel,
    particularly by private car, and offer a genuine choice of transport modes for
    residents and users.
48. The limited range of employment opportunities, services and facilities within KBS,
    specific distances from the appeal site thereto and resulting need for residents to
    travel are highlighted by the Council as reasons for the conflict with Policy
    TR3(1)(a).
49. However, I have considered the reasons in the recent Sustainability Appraisals4 for
    the appeal site having been discounted the selection for allocation and consider
    that the position is rather nuanced.
50. Whilst the village itself may offer relatively limited employment opportunities at the
    shops and community facilities that exist and at Kingston Business Park, KBS is
    within a wider sub-area that offers plentiful employment opportunities within either a
    relatively short drive or by public transport. Whilst the Council seeks to underplay
    its importance, the bus service with 20-minute frequency to Oxford and other
    destinations available directly outside of the site is a significant factor in connecting
    the area to outlying higher order settlements without the need to travel by car.
51. Whilst the walk to John Blandy Primary School is around double the distance of the
    recommended 800m walkable neighbourhood, it is comparable to existing
    dwellings in KBS such as those at the end of Wood Lane. Once the footways have
    been improved, the journey will be along a relatively level, uncomplicated route.
52. It is unclear whether John Blandy Primary School will relocate into the eastern
    expansion of KBS. If this were to happen, it would increase the walking distances
    between many other existing homes and the School, with the increased distance to
    the site making little material difference overall. Additionally, it is not uncommon for
    secondary school pupils to require bus transport to access the closest secondary
    school/s as would also be the case here.
53. Considered in the round and taking account of its scale and location, the proposal
    would not raise conflict with 2026 Framework Policy T3(1)(a).
54. It is not disputed that the appeal site lies outside of the settlement of KBS and that,
    in this regard, the relevant policy of the 2026 Framework is Policy S5, where only
    certain forms of development should be approved outside settlements, unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects.



4
    CD P01, P03


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6005809


55. The Council indicate that S5(1)(a) to (i) (inclusive) are not relevant to the appeal
    scheme. Therefore, the key consideration is S5(1)(j) whether the development
    would address an evidenced unmet need (including, but not limited to, development
    proposals involving the provision of housing where the local planning authority
    cannot demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable housing sites or scores below
    75% in the most recent Housing Delivery Test (HDT)), and where the development
    would be physically well-related to an existing settlement and be of a scale which
    can be accommodated taking into account the existing or proposed availability of
    infrastructure.
56. Taking these strands in reverse order, put straightforwardly, the appeal site is
    clearly well-related to the existing settlement of KBS when considered spatially,
    functionally and visually on the ground. Furthermore, the scale of the development
    can be accommodated taking account of both existing and proposed infrastructure
    within the settlement and linking to other main centres. At the time of the Inquiry,
    the Council did not raise any issues of infrastructure deficiency that was incapable
    of being remedied through contributions secured via planning obligation. Whilst the
    Council’s NPPF Addendum casts some doubt on the delivery timescales of
    proposed infrastructure to accommodate the development, it is clear that
    infrastructure is proposed to supplement the existing infrastructure that would
    capably accommodate the development and other planned development in KBS.
57. The wording in Policy S5(1)(j) referring to evidence of an unmet need specifically
    uses the words ‘including, but not limited to’, indicating that the absence of a five
    year deliverable supply and HDT outcomes are not the only means by which an
    unmet need can be proven to exist. These are key indicators, but the list is not
    exhaustive.
58. The Council’s most recent HDT outcomes of 177%, 193% and 192% do not
    establish evidence of unmet, but are incapable of being relied upon as a marker of
    future delivery.
59. The appellant advances that the evidenced significant unmet need for affordable
    housing is also a relevant consideration in this regard. The appellant’s evidence
    indicates that as of the 31 March 2025, there were 2,904 households on the
    Council’s Housing Register. The Council’s evidence confirms that a significant
    affordable housing need remains even when Band 4 households5 are excluded.
    The NPPF Addendum references the significant continuing need for affordable
    housing and the substantial positive weight that should be given to the 35%
    contribution that the scheme would make to meeting that need.
60. In this case, the very marginal five year housing land supply position and the
    evidenced significant unmet need for affordable housing combine together to
    indicate that the scheme complies with 2026 Framework Policy S5(1)(j).
Other Considerations
61. I have considered the range of representations made by interested partes,
    including locally elected representatives.
62. Whilst it has been brought to my attention that the sewerage system is at capacity,
    a planning condition would be imposed to increase the capacity to the level

5
    Band 4 households categorised as ‘Adequately Housed’, see para 7.7 of CDE.15


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                9
Appeal Decision 6005809


     necessary prior to occupation of any respective dwellings. Planning conditions
     would also apply in relation to surface water and the water supply to serve the
     dwellings.
63. Whilst it has also been suggested that the nearby school is at capacity, the
    submitted S106 would made adequate provision for the increase in capacity to
    serve additional pupils generated by the development.
64. The provision of a new health centre as part of the eastern expansion of KBS will
    eventually increase capacity to serve new residents generated by that development
    and assist in offering increased capacity and choice for existing KBS residents. A
    contribution towards such was not requested as part of the S106.
65. The concerns highlighted in connection with the physical provision of bus stops and
    land ownership is not a matter at issue for the Highways Authority. I find no reason
    to reach an alternative conclusion.
66. On a similar topic, I have considered the suggestion that increased traffic will
    increase risks to road users, particularly at the A420/Charney Bassett junction at
    which there have reportedly been serious accidents within the last 10 years. I have
    also considered the suggestion that the chosen locations of the points of access
    are poor in terms of the alignment of the road and speed of traffic. My findings are
    that whilst there would be an overall increase in traffic, this factor would not give
    rise to road safety hazards and the provision of the accesses as designed would
    not prejudice highway safety.
67. The suggestion that the development would block light or overshadow neighbouring
    dwellings could be considered in more detail at reserved matters stage, but the
    indicative plans indicate a sufficiently generous spacing between any dwellings and
    existing dwellings so as to avoid undue harm to existing neighbouring residents.
68. I have taken account of the fact that residents perceive Spring Hill as having its
    own identity, sparse population, tranquil character and a degree of separation from
    KBS which would be eroded by the development. On the ground, the area of Spring
    Hill does not appear as a separate satellite settlement from KBS. It has a partly
    transitional character but is part of KBS which appears as one continuous
    settlement in any event. This does not mean that it should continue to expand
    further west or south, but the appeal proposal itself would be in a position that
    would complete the form of KBS, would be confined by existing hard boundaries to
    the west and north.
69. I accept that there is only one public house left in the village, though it is not clear
    that it would be incapable of coping with the addition of more patrons through this
    and other proposals for KBS. There are a number of other community facilities in
    the village and busses to alternative locations where people may choose to travel
    for social or other recreational purposes in any event.
70. I also appreciate that the A420 currently limits recreational walking options in a
    northerly direction but the future scheme to downgrade this road, unrelated to the
    appeal scheme, may assist in providing priority to pedestrians and recreational
    walkers more generally.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6005809


S106
71. As agreed by the Council and the County Council, the finalised S106 provides for
    the following:
       •    35% affordable housing, with provisions for affordable and social rented units
            and shared ownership housing;
       •    Biodiversity net gain provisions;
       •    Public art provision and maintenance contributions;
       •    Street naming contribution;
       •    Waste and recycling contributions and separate waste management
            contribution;
       •    Public open space provision, including informal open, landscaped and
            equipped areas of play for both younger and older children;
       •    Management company and transfer provisions relating to the public open
            space;
       •    Sustainable urban drainage and adoption and/or management responsibilities
            relating to the same;
       •    A contribution towards works of improvement to Frillford Junction to offset the
            impact of additional trips through the same;
       •    Primary education contribution based on a formula per number and size of
            dwellings towards increasing primary education capacity in the area;
       •    Primary land contribution based on a formula per number and size of dwellings
            towards a new primary school to increase primary education capacity in the
            area;
       •    Public rights of way contribution towards improvements to the public rights of
            way in the vicinity of the Site;
       •    Public transport infrastructure contribution towards public transport services
            serving the site and surrounds;
       •    Secondary education contribution based on a formula per number and size of
            dwellings towards increasing secondary education capacity to serve future
            resident (pupils) of the appeal scheme;
       •    Special Educational Needs (SEND) contribution based on a formula per
            number and size of dwellings towards increasing SEND education capacity for
            future resident (pupils) of the appeal scheme;
       •    Travel plan monitoring contribution towards the cost of monitoring the travel
            plan for the appeal scheme;
       •    And numerous highway works, including preparatory and ancillary works to
            facilitate the provision of:
            o Two new site access T-junctions on Spring Hill;
            o Improvements to footway on northern side of Spring Hill to create a
                 continuous minimum 2m width footway from the western most site access
                 on the northern side of Spring Hill, to link up with existing provision at
                 Draycott Lane, with associated dropped kerbs and tactile surfacing;
            o Proposed traffic calming scheme on Spring Hill in the form of build
                 outs/give way features, speed cushions and carriageway lane narrowing;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6005809


               o    Relocation of existing bus stops and upgrades to 3 bay shelters;
               o    Localised footway widening to 2m, at westbound bus stop adjacent to the
                    site, opposite Springhill Cottage;
               o    A 3m Cycleway link from Spring Hill through site to PRoW 288/11, with
                    associated access works in the form of dropped kerbs and give way
                    markings;
               o    Advisory cycle road markings on either side of the carriageway from the
                    western site access to Draycott Lane; and
               o    Extension of nearside entry flares on the A415 Frillford Road (37.8m to
                    72.9m) and A338 Wantage Road (43.0m to 90.0m).
72. Regulation 122 of the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations (2010) (CIL
    Regulations), as amended, and the Framework set out that planning obligations
    must only be sought where they meet the relevant tests, including where they are
    necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms, directly related
    to the development and fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the same.
    The Council and County Council have submitted CIL Compliance Statements
    outlining the necessity for the various components of the S106, the methods of
    calculation for the various financial contributions and the related links to policies of
    the development plan.
73. I am satisfied based on the agreement between the main parties and the wording of
    the S106 that all of the obligations are entirely necessary, directly related, and fairly
    and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development and that all aspects
    can be taken into consideration.
Overall Planning Balance
74. The Council completed a Regulation 10A review6 of the LPP1 in April 2022, five
    years after its adoption. The same exercise was undertaken for LPP2 five years
    following its adoption. Whilst it was acknowledged in the Reviews that the policies
    were infected by the changes over time to the relevant local housing needs figures
    and proportionate allocation targets, the planning policy context has moved on
    again with the publication of the 2026 Framework in any event. Annex A (2) of the
    2026 Framework sets out that development plan policies (or parts of those policies)
    which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies should be
    given very limited weight.
75. The Council’s NPPF Addendum sets out that parts of LPP1 Policies CP3 and CP4
    are materially inconsistent with the 2026 Framework, specifically Policy S5, insofar
    as they preclude unallocated development outside of settlements other than limited
    defined situations. The case is also made that Policy CP8 of LPP1 and CP4a and
    CP8a of LPP2 are not materially inconsistent with the 2026 Framework.
76. LPP1 Policies CP3 and CP4 are the key policies that establish that development
    other than allocated schemes limited to providing for local needs will be
    unacceptable and I share the Council’s view that these restrictive elements are
    materially inconsistent with the 2026 Framework. Thus, the conflict with the
    restrictive parts of LPP1 Policies CP3 and CP4 attracts limited weight. LPP1 Policy
    CP8 and LPP2 policies CP4a and CP8a are less affected by the 2026 Framework

6
    Regulation 10A of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 12
Appeal Decision 6005809


     because they either reiterate parts of the settlement hierarchy defined elsewhere
     and are otherwise framed to promote the policy allocations therein. By its omission
     from these policies and, by implication, the degree by which the appeal proposal
     would exceed the allocation targets for KBS relative to its role in the settlement
     hierarchy, the appeal scheme conflicts with these policies. This conflict attracts
     great weight.
77. Although not a reason for refusal, there would be harm from the loss of Grade 2
    Best and Most Versatile agricultural land extending to around 3.3ha (29% of the
    total site area compared to the remainder which is Grade 3b). This is a harm and
    conflict with 2026 Framework Policy N2 that weighs modestly against the scheme.
78. Despite the absence of a reason for refusal, there would be residual harm from the
    effects on landscape character and visual impacts of the proposal as
    acknowledged in the submitted Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment.
    However, due to the absence of landscape designations, the site’s topography and
    high degree of containment, and despite the existence of Public Rights of Way that
    have connectivity to the A420, the landscape character and visual effects would be
    moderate adverse at most, which would further reduce over time through the
    establishment of landscaping. Though this modest adverse harm still weighs
    against the scheme, it is rare that such a scale of scheme could be so readily
    absorbed without greater landscape character and visual harms.
79. Whilst it is not a mathematical exercise to consider the number of policies with
    which the proposal complies rather than conflicts, through the absence of technical
    objections subject to conditions and obligations where necessary, the appeal
    scheme complies with a wide range of other policies of LPP1 and LPP2.
    Furthermore, there are some clear and compelling benefits that weigh in favour of
    the scheme
80. The delivery of up to 249 dwellings of a range of types and sizes on a site largely
    deliverable within a five year period aligns with the Framework’s objectives of
    supporting the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes and attracts
    substantial weight. The scheme would also deliver 35% affordable housing, up to
    88 total units across a mix of tenures, for which there is significant evidenced and
    growing need. Even though this amount at 35% would meet, rather than exceed the
    current Policy CP24 requirement, the delivery of affordable homes is a factor that
    also weighs substantially in favour of the appeal scheme. As such, the scheme
    complies with 2026 Framework Policy S5(1)(j).
81. In addition to its accessibility to village facilities and services, the appeal scheme
    would be very well connected via public transport with a highly regular bus service
    to Oxford accessible directly outside of the site. Some enhancements to bus stops
    and passenger facilities could better promote the uptake of bus services. A range of
    improvements would also make the readily walkable distance to village facilities
    more attractive for future occupiers to use. These aspects collectively attract
    modest weight in favour of the scheme.
82. Notwithstanding the moderate adverse landscape and visual harms as would be
    typical of development of a greenfield site, the appeal scheme would appear as a
    logical extension to KBS, when considered spatially and visually. It would be
    contained by existing highways that would serve to limit further expansion.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6005809


83. Other benefits of the scheme include the delivery of public open space, the
    enhancement of the site’s biodiversity value and PROWs enhancements which
    collectively attract modest weight. Additionally, there would also be benefits to the
    local economy from the construction phase and thereafter by future residents of the
    scheme that attract modest weight.
84. Owing, in part, to the lack of other site constraints, there are no other technical
    objections or conflicts with any national decision-making policies which indicate that
    development proposals should be refused. Conversely, the scheme would meet the
    requirements Framework Policy S5(1)(j) and that the benefits of approving the
    scheme would substantially outweigh the limited adverse effects when assessed
    against the Framework when taken as a whole.
85. Bringing together the points outlined above, though the development conflicts with
    the development plan taken as a whole, I consider that the material considerations,
    including the provisions of the 2026 Framework and the public benefits outlined
    above, collectively indicate that the appeal scheme should be approved other than
    in strict accordance with the development plan.
Conditions
86. I have considered the suggested conditions in light of the tests outlined in the
    Framework and PPG. Where necessary, minor changes have been made in the
    interests of clarity. Furthermore, pre-commencement conditions have been kept to
    a minimum.
87. In the interests of certainty, conditions are required to specify which matters are
    reserved for future consideration, the timescale for submission of reserved matters
    and commencement of development and the list of approved plans. Whilst the
    appellant agreed in principle to expedited timescales for submission of reserved
    matters application/s and commencement of development on the ground, this may
    not time well with the delivery of other planned infrastructure or offer sufficient
    flexibility such that a standardised timeframe is more appropriate in this instance.
88. A condition is also needed to specify the framework plans with which substantial
    compliance will be expected at reserved matters stage.
89. In view of the scale of the development and to help clarify the order and timescales
    for delivery of its component parts, a condition is required for approval of a phasing
    plan. To define the nature and extent of the development, conditions are also
    needed to specify the parameter plans and the maximum number of dwellings. To
    provide additional certainty, a condition is required to ensure details of the housing
    mix and accessibility standards are provided with each reserved matters
    application.
90. To avoid an increased risk of flooding or environmental harm, a condition is
    required to require the approval and implementation of a sustainable urban
    drainage scheme. A related condition requiring details of its ‘as built’ specification
    and maintenance requirements and responsibilities is also needed.
91. In the interests of protecting species and the biodiversity interests of the site and
    surrounding area, conditions are needed to secure a lighting strategy, protection
    measures for the construction phase and post-construction enhancement
    measures.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6005809


92. To ensure a satisfactory quality of development and in the interests of
    environmental protection, a condition for details of waste management (storage, bin
    presentation points etc.) is necessary.
93. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, details of landscaping
    are required to be submitted by way of condition concurrent with reserved matters
    applications. A separate related condition is also needed to specify maintenance
    and management responsibility and timeframes. For similar reasons, a condition is
    needed in relation to the protection of trees during the construction phase.
94. In order to protect the living conditions of future occupiers in view of the site’s
    relationship with the road to the north, conditions are needed to specify the
    maximum permissible noise levels for habitable rooms and private amenity spaces.
    For similar reasons, conditions are also needed in relation to the investigation and
    remediation of any identified contaminated land.
95. To maximise the environmental sustainability of the scheme, a condition is needed
    to secure electric vehicle (EV) charging points, including their retention and
    maintenance thereafter. Whilst their provision is required under separate
    legislation, their ongoing retention and usability is not, hence the requirement for
    the condition.
96. In the interests of highway safety and suitability of access, a condition is needed to
    specify then works to the highways and footways. Similarly, a condition is needed
    to secure details of works to be undertaken to PROWS. To avoid harmful impacts
    on the local road network during the construction phase, a condition is required to
    secure compliance with an approved construction traffic management plan.
97. In the interests of protecting the historic environment, conditions are needed in
    respect of archaeological investigations. I have accepted the Council’s position the
    necessity for the conditions as worded on the face of the evidence before me.
98. A condition is required to ensure that all dwellings are connected to the upgraded
    foul drainage network prior to occupation in the interests of environmental quality
    and human health. However, I have not imposed a condition on the provision of
    upgrades to the water supply prior to occupation of the dwellings as this aspect is
    covered by separate legislation.
99. In order to promote sustainable travel, a condition is required to secure adherence
    to a residential travel plan and dissemination of an information pack to future
    residents. I have also imposed a condition specifying that the development shall
    not occur within prescribed distances of the water main which passes through the
    site as it is necessary to avoid it.
Other Matters
100. My attention has been drawn to a recent appeal decision for two self-build
   dwellings on a site close to the appeal site7. The scale and nature of that proposal
   differ considerably from the appeal scheme and a material change in policy
   circumstances has arisen since that appeal was determined. As such, there are
   material differences that limit the relevance of that decision to the case before me.



7
    Appeal ref: 6003709 - Land at Springhill Farm, Southmoor


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  15
Appeal Decision 6005809


Conclusion
101. For the reasons outlined above, the material considerations in this case outweigh
   the conflict with the development plan and indicate that planning permission should
   be granted. The appeal should therefore succeed.



H Nicholls
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
Appeal Decision 6005809


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
    1) No development, or in the case of phased development no phase or sub phase
       of the development, shall be begun until full details illustrating the following
       matters ('the reserved matters') have been submitted to and approved in writing
       by the Local Planning Authority and the development (or where relevant phase
       of development) shall be carried out in accordance with such details:
              •    The layout of the development;
              •    The scale of the development;
              •    The appearance of the development;
              •    The means of access, not approved by this permission; and
              •    The landscaping of the development.
    2) Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be submitted to the Local
       Planning Authority before the expiration of three years of the date of this
       permission or, in the case of phased development, application for approval of the
       reserved matters within the first phase shall be submitted to the Local Planning
       Authority before the expiration of two years of the date of this permission. In the
       case of phased development, all subsequent reserved matters applications shall
       be submitted to the Local Planning Authority before the expiration of five years of
       the date of this permission.
    3) The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of the
       two years from the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be
       approved or, in the case of phased development, before the expiration of two
       years from the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be
       approved in respect of the first phase.

    4) No development shall commence, nor any reserved matters application shall be
       submitted until a Phasing Plan identifying each phase and sub phase has been
       submitted to and been approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
       Phasing Plan shall identify the location and timing of infrastructure and
       community facilities (public open space and play space) to serve the
       development and shall include a scheme for the build out rate of completed and
       fitted out dwellings and details and coordination of housing and infrastructure
       delivery and arrangements to prevent interruption of delivery across sub-phase
       and phase boundaries. The development shall proceed in accordance with the
       agreed Phasing Plan unless an alternative phasing plan following
       commencement is agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
    5) Except as controlled or modified by conditions of this permission, the
       development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the details
       shown on the following approved plans:
              •    Site Location Plan - 3642.100 Rev D
              •    22174-04E (February 2026) Site Access Drawing
              •    22174-04-1E (Feb 26) – Indicative Footway Link and Improvements
              •    22174-06-LS2 Rev A (09/04/26) – Cycle Access Long Section / Bridge
                   Cross Section


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
Appeal Decision 6005809


              •    22174-04-3 Rev A (Feb 2026) – Cycleway Access Proposals
    6) Any reserved matters applications submitted pursuant to condition 1 shall be in
       general accordance with the principles and parameters set out on drawings:
              •    Access & Movement Plan - 3642.P.500 Rev G
              •    Density Plan - 3642.P.501 Rev E
              •    Framework Plan – 3642.P.502 Rev F
              •    Land Use Plan - 3642.P.503 Rev F
              •    Open Space Plan - 3642.P.504 Rev F
              •    Storey Heights Plan (3642.P.505 Rev F)
              •    Green Infrastructure Plan (3642.P.506 Rev F)
    7) Concurrent with the submission of any reserved matter the following information
       shall be provided:
               a. The number and mix (bedroom size) of dwellings to be provided in that
                  phase (market and affordable);
               b. The number of accessible and adaptable homes to be built to Building
                  Regulations Part M4 Category 2 (all affordable housing and 15% of
                  market dwellings) for both market and affordable sectors and Part M4
                  Category 3 wheelchair accessible housing (5% of affordable housing).
         All one and two-bedroom market dwellings shall accord with the Department for
         Communities and Local Government's 'Technical Housing Standards - Nationally
         Described Space Standard March 2015' as amended 19th May 2016 or any
         replacement Government standards.
         15% of market dwellings and all affordable housing shall be constructed to M4(2)
         Category 2 Accessible and adaptable dwellings as set out in the Building
         Regulations Approved Document M: Access and Use of Buildings - Volume 1:
         Dwellings.
         The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved Housing
         Delivery Document as updated and approved in writing by the Local Planning
         Authority.
    8) Surface water drainage construction shall not begin until / prior to the approval of
       first reserved matters; a detailed surface water drainage scheme for the site, has
       been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
       scheme shall subsequently be implemented in accordance with the approved
       details before the development is completed.
         The scheme shall include:
         Site investigation including infiltration testing to BRE 365 and groundwater
         monitoring:
         Full drainage calculations for all events up to and including the 1 in 100 year plus
         40% climate change;
              o Proposed site and floor levels;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   18
Appeal Decision 6005809


              o SUDS features and sections;
              o Drainage Construction Details;
              o A Flood Exceedance Conveyance Plan;
              o Detailed design drainage layout drawings of the Sustainable Drainage
                System proposals including cross-section details;
              o Details of water quality management proposals both during the
                construction phase and in perpetuity:
              o Detailed maintenance management plan in accordance with Section 32 of
                CIRIA C753 including maintenance schedules for each drainage element,
                and;
              o Details of how water quality will be managed during construction and post
                development in perpetuity;
              o Confirmation of any outfall details;
              o Consent for any connections into third party drainage systems; and
              o Maintenance and Management Plan covering all surface water drainage
                and Sustainable Drainage System features.
         No dwelling shall be occupied until the surface water drainage works to serve
         that section of the development have been carried out and completed in
         accordance with the approved details.
    9) Concurrent with the submission of any reserved matters application on land
       within 15 metres of the northern, western or eastern boundaries of the
       application site, a Lighting Strategy for Bats shall be submitted to and approved
       in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The strategy shall be based on the
       draft strategy documents submitted in connection with appeal 6005809 in
       respect of outline permission P24/V2357/O. It shall demonstrate compliance with
       the following parameters, for external and internal light sources:
              1. A dark buffer shall be maintained along the northern, eastern and western
                 site boundaries. This shall measure a minimum of 10 metres in depth,
                 measured from the site boundary or from the edge of the canopy of offsite
                 woody vegetation along the boundary (whichever is closer).
              2. The dark buffer shall comply with the description of “complete darkness”
                 as set out in Section 4.53 of the 2023 Institute of Lighting Professionals
                 /Bat Conservation Trust guidance. Specifically, at 10m from the edge of
                 the canopy or site boundary, illuminance shall be no greater than 0.4 lux
                 in the vertical plane or 0.2 lux in the horizontal plane;
              3. Light sources shall not exceed 2700 Kelvin colour temperature and
                 building-mounted luminaires shall be fitted with Passive Infrared (PIR)
                 sensors set to operate on a 1-minute activation timer.
         Street lighting will operate in accordance with Oxfordshire County Council’s
         Street Lighting Policy.
         Where landscape mitigation measures for lighting are proposed, the strategy
         shall include details of their ongoing maintenance.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   19
Appeal Decision 6005809


         All external and internal lighting, and associated mitigation measures, shall be
         installed and maintained in accordance with the approved Strategy, and retained
         as such thereafter.
    10) No development shall take place within a phase or subphase, including
        vegetation clearance or ground works, unless and until a construction
        environmental management plan for Biodiversity (CEMP: Biodiversity) is
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The CEMP
        (Biodiversity) shall include the following:
              a) Update ecological surveys for relevant habitats and species, in broad
                 accordance with the 2019 CIEEM advice note on the lifespan of
                 ecological reports and surveys but, for the avoidance of doubt to include
                 an update badger survey. Update surveys shall follow national good
                 practice guidelines and the CEMP shall include full details of any
                 additional mitigation measures required as a result of the update surveys.
              b) Risk assessment of potentially damaging construction activities.
              c) Identification of “biodiversity protection zones”.
              d) Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working
                 practices) to avoid, reduce or mitigate the impacts on important habitats
                 and protected species during construction. These shall include measures
                 to (1) protect retained hedgerows and other Priority habitats onsite and
                 offsite; (2) avoid entrapping foraging badger, hedgehog and other small
                 animals in the works area; (3) avoid harming nesting birds during
                 vegetation clearance; and (4) avoid harming reptiles and amphibians
                 during vegetation clearance and removal of brash piles or other debris.
              e) The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
                 features.
              f) The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be
                 present on site to oversee works.
              g) Responsible persons and lines of communication; and
              h) Use of protective fences, exclusion barriers and warning signs.
         The approved CEMP (Biodiversity) shall be adhered to and implemented
         throughout the construction period strictly in accordance with the approved
         details.
    11) Concurrent with the first reserved matters application for appearance and/or
        landscaping in each phase or subphase, details (including specification, position,
        height, orientation) of a scheme of features to be provided for protected and
        priority species, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority. The scheme shall be designed in conjunction with a suitably
        qualified ecologist and bird/bat boxes on buildings shall be integrated into the
        fabric of the development.
         A minimum number of biodiversity enhancement features shall be provided
         across the whole site as follows:
              o 150 integrated bird nest boxes for house sparrow Passer domesticus or
                swift Apus apus;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    20
Appeal Decision 6005809


              o 150 integrated bat boxes or access tile features (with appropriate bat-safe
                roofing membrane);
              o 25 bird nest boxes on retained trees and two hedgehog fence tunnels
                within each plot bounded by close boarded fencing (arranged so that
                each plot is connected to at least two separate adjacent plots or to one
                other plot and open/public space as appropriate).
         Thereafter, the development shall be implemented in accordance with the
         approved details.
         All features shall be provided prior to first use and shall be retained and
         maintained thereafter.
    12) Concurrent with the first reserved matters application for a phase or sub phase a
        Waste Management Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority. The Waste Management Plan shall include bin
        presentation points and haulage routes, bin stores (if applicable) and swept path
        analysis.
         Thereafter the development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
         details.
    13) Concurrent with any reserved matters application for landscaping for a phase or
        sub phase, a maintenance schedule and a long-term management plan (for a
        minimum period of 20 years), for the soft landscaping works (including for the
        link road) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority. The Landscape Management Plan shall include:
               o Details of long-term design principles and objectives;
               o Management responsibilities, maintenance schedules and replacement
                 provisions for existing retained landscape features and any landscape to
                 be implemented as part of the approved landscape scheme including
                 hard surfaces, street furniture within open spaces and any play/youth
                 provision;
               o A plan detailing which areas of the site the Landscape Management Plan
                 covers and also who is responsible for the maintenance of the other
                 areas of the site;
               o Summary plan detailing different management procedures for the types
                 of landscape on site e.g. Wildflower meadows, native or ornamental
                 hedgerows.
         The schedule and plan shall be implemented in accordance with the agreed
         details.
    14) Concurrent with any reserved matters application for landscaping for a phase or
        sub phase, full details of a hard and soft landscaping scheme shall be submitted
        to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. These details shall
        include:
              a) Existing trees, hedgerows and other landscape features to be retained
                 (noting species, location and spread);




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   21
Appeal Decision 6005809


              b) Soft landscaping including a planting plan, to include schedules of new
                 trees and shrubs to be planted (noting species, plant sizes and
                 numbers/densities)
              c) Pit design for tree planting within streets or areas of hard landscaping;
              d) Existing and proposed levels comprising spot heights, gradients and
                 contours, grading, ground modelling and earth works;
              e) Hard landscaping materials;
              f) Locations and specifications for street furniture and minor artefacts
                 including signs, seats, bollards, cycle racks, lighting columns, planters,
                 refuse bins, play areas and equipment;
              g) Existing and proposed services above and below ground;
              h) An implementation programme
         The scheme shall be implemented in accordance with the implementation
         programme and thereafter be maintained in accordance with the approved
         scheme.
         In the event of any of the trees or shrubs so planted dying or being seriously
         damaged or destroyed within 5 years of the completion of the development, a
         new tree or shrub or equivalent number of trees or shrubs, as the case may be,
         shall be planted and properly maintained in a position or positions first approved
         in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
    15) Each and any reserved matters application incorporating buildings shall include
        a detailed scheme for protecting the dwellings from the external noise
        environment of the area has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority.
         The scheme itself shall be designed, specified and constructed so that the sound
         insulation performance of the structure and the layout of the dwellings is such
         that the indoor ambient noise levels do not exceed the values detailed in Table 4
         of BS8233:2014. All houses must have openable windows on a minimum of two
         elevations. Where internal noise levels are likely to be exceeded with open
         windows, appropriate alternative ventilation should be provided.
         Thereafter, the development shall not be carried out other than in accordance
         with such approved scheme which shall be completed for each plot before the
         relevant plot is occupied unless the Local Planning Authority otherwise agrees in
         writing.
    16) Private gardens and amenity areas shall be designed and built with appropriate
        mitigation to achieve the noise limit of 55dBLAeq,16hour.
    17) Each and any reserved matters application(s) submitted shall contain full details
        of active provision of electric vehicle charging points (EVCP) which shall be
        provided as follows:
              o A minimum of 1 per household for each of the houses with on plot
                parking; and
              o A minimum of 1 per every 10 flats (with unallocated parking, or 1 for every
                dwelling if there are allocated spaces or garages).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   22
Appeal Decision 6005809


              The EVCP shall thereafter be retained and maintained for the lifetime of the
              development.
    18) Prior to commencement of any works, details of the accesses and footways
        serving the site and connections to existing on and off-site infrastructure, roads
        and footpaths shall be submitted and approved by the Local Planning Authority.
        Thereafter, prior to occupation of the relevant Reserved Matters Area, the
        means of site access for vehicles and pedestrians for that Reserved Matters
        Area shall be laid out, constructed, lit and drained in accordance with the
        approved plans.
              o 22174-04E (February 2026) Site Access Drawing
              o 22174-04-1E (Feb 26) – Indicative Footway Link and Improvements
              o 22174-06-LS2 Rev A (09/04/26) – Cycle Access Long Section / Bridge
                Cross Section
           o 22174-04-3 Rev A (Feb 2026) – Cycleway Access Proposals
    19) Prior to the commencement of any phase or sub phase of the development
        hereby permitted, a Construction Traffic Management Plan (CTMP) shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority in
        consultation with the Local Highway Authority. Thereafter, the developer shall
        comply with the requirement of the CTMP in all respects.
    20) Concurrent with any reserved matters the details for the treatment and surfacing
        of the Public Rights of Way within any relevant phase or sub phase shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Thereafter,
        prior to occupation of the final unit in that phase or sub phase, the means of
        access to the Public Rights of Way(s) shall be laid out, constructed, lit and
        drained in accordance with the approved plans and remain free from obstruction
        at all times.
    21) Prior to the commencement of a phase or sub phase of the development a risk
        assessment shall be carried out by a competent person in accordance with
        current government and Environment Agency Guidance and Approved Codes of
        Practice such as Land Contamination: Risk Management 2020 and
        BS10175:2011 +A2:2017 Investigation of potentially contaminated sites, and
        shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
    22) Prior the commencement of the development a professional archaeological
        organisation acceptable to the Local Planning Authority shall prepare an
        Archaeological Written Scheme of Investigation, relating to the application site
        area, which shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority.
    23) Following the approval of the Written Scheme of Investigation and prior to the
        commencement of the development (other than in accordance with the agreed
        Written Scheme of Investigation), a programme of archaeological mitigation shall
        be carried out by the commissioned archaeological organisation in accordance
        with the approved processing, research and analysis necessary to produce an
        accessible and useable archive and a full report for publication which shall be
        submitted to the Local Planning Authority within two years of the completion of
        the archaeological fieldwork.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   23
Appeal Decision 6005809


    24) Prior to the commencement of any site works or operations, including site
        clearance relating to the development hereby permitted, an updated
        Arboricultural Method Statement and accompanying Tree Protection Plan shall
        be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
        Arboricultural Method Statement must include the following:
              a) A specification of any pruning or tree surgery works to any trees to be
                 retained, to prevent accidental damage by construction or demolition
                 activities;
              b) The specification and location of temporary tree protective fencing and
                 any ground protection required to protect all retained trees in accordance
                 with the current edition of BS 5837 ''Trees in relation to design, demolition
                 and construction'', and details of the timing and duration of its erection;
              c) The definition of areas for the storage or stockpiling of materials,
                 temporary on-site parking, site offices and huts, mixing of cement or
                 concrete, and fuel storage;
              d) The route and method of installation of drainage or any underground
                 services in the vicinity of retained trees; Consideration will be made to
                 avoid siting of utilities and service runs within the Root Protection Area
                 (RPA) of all trees to be retained. Only where it can be demonstrated that
                 there is no alternative location for the laying of utilities, will encroachment
                 into the RPA be considered. Methodology for any installation works within
                 the RPA will be provided and must be in compliance with the current
                 edition of NJUG 'Guidelines for the planning and installation and
                 maintenance of utility apparatus in proximity to trees'.
              e) The details and method of construction of any other structures such as
                 boundary walls in the RPA of retained trees and how these relate to
                 existing ground levels;
              f) The details of materials and method of construction of any roadway,
                 driveway, parking, pathway or other surfacing within the RPA, which is to
                 be of a 'No Dig' construction method, in accordance with the principles
                 with in Arboricultural Association Guidance Note 12 "The use of cellular
                 confinement systems near trees" and in accordance with current industry
                 best practice; and is appropriate for the type of roadway required in
                 relation to its usage.
              g) Provision for the supervision of ANY works within the RPA of trees to be
                 retained, and for the monitoring of continuing compliance with the
                 protective measures specified, by an appropriately qualified arboricultural
                 consultant, to be appointed at the developer's expense and notified to the
                 Local Planning Authority, prior to the commencement of development;
                 and provision for the regular reporting of continued compliance or any
                 departure there from to the Local Planning Authority.
         Thereafter the development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
         details with the agreed measures being kept in place during the entire course of
         development.
    25) Prior to first occupation within a phase or sub phase, a record of the installed
        SuDS and site wide drainage scheme shall be submitted to and approved in



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    24
Appeal Decision 6005809


         writing by the Local Planning Authority for deposit with the Lead Local Flood
         Authority Asset Register. The details shall include:
              a) As built plans in both .pdf and .shp file format;
              b) Photographs to document each key stage of the drainage system when
                 installed on site;
              c) Photographs to document the completed installation of the drainage
                 structures on site;
              d) Details of any remediation works required following the initial inspection,
              e) Evidence that remedial works have been completed; and
              f) The name and contact details of any appointed management company
                 information.
         For the avoidance of doubt, as-built drawings and photographic evidence could
         be submitted in stages, but must be submitted and agreed in writing prior to the
         residential unit in which the detail relates being occupied.
    26) No development shall be occupied until a detailed foul drainage scheme has
        been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. This
        shall demonstrate that:
              1. Foul water Capacity exists off site to serve the development: or
              2. A development and infrastructure phasing plan has been agreed with the
                 Local Authority in consultation with Thames Water. Where a development
                 and infrastructure phasing plan is agreed, no occupation shall take place
                 other than in accordance with the agreed development and infrastructure
                 phasing plan: or
              3. All Foul water network upgrades required to accommodate the additional
                 flows from the development have been completed, and
              4. Sufficient infrastructure exists on the proposed development to ensure
                 that the site will be adequately drained.
         No dwelling shall be occupied until the foul drainage works have been carried
         out and completed in accordance with the approved details.
    27) Prior to occupation of any dwelling a full and detailed Travel Plan and Travel
        Information Pack relevant to that phase or sub phase shall be submitted to and
        approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Thereafter, the Travel Plan
        shall be implemented in full and the first residents of each dwelling shall be
        provided with a copy of the approved Travel Information Pack.
    28) Any phase or sub phase of the development shall not be occupied until any
        previously approved remediation strategy has been carried out in full and a
        validation report confirming completion of these works has been submitted to
        and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
    29) No more than 249 dwellings shall be constructed on the site.
    30) The developer shall confirm in writing to the Local Planning Authority the
        presence of any unsuspected contamination encountered during the
        development. In the event of any contamination to the land and/or water being
        encountered, no development shall continue until a programme of investigation

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   25
Appeal Decision 6005809


         and/or remedial works to include methods of monitoring and certification of such
         works undertaken. Where land contamination investigation/remedial works are
         required this must be carried out by a competent person in accordance with
         current government and Environment Agency Guidance and Approved Codes of
         Practice such as Land Contamination: Risk Management 2020 and
         BS10175:2011 +A2:2017 Investigation of potentially contaminated sites and
         submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
    31) No construction shall take place within 5 metres of the water main. Information
        detailing how the developer intends to divert the asset / align the development,
        so as to prevent the potential for damage to subsurface potable water
        infrastructure, must be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority in consultation with Thames Water. Any construction must be
        undertaken in accordance with the terms of the approved information.
        Unrestricted access must be available at all times for the maintenance and
        repair of the asset during and after the construction works.
ENDS ----




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   26
Appeal Decision 6005809


APPEARANCES
FOR THE APPELLANT:
Sasha White KC, Counsel for the appellant, he called:
Alan Divall BA MTRPI                                     Walsingham Planning Ltd
David Neame BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI                          Neame Sutton Ltd
Simon Tucker BSc(Hons) MCIHT                             DTA Transport Planning
Also contributing:
Natalie Jarman                                           Walsingham Planning Ltd
Will Varrall                                             Nicholas King New Homes Ltd
Tom Mitchell                                             Nicholas King New Homes Ltd
Haroon Khan                                              Lawyer, Knights Plc – S106


FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:
Emmaline Lambert, Counsel for the Council, she called:
Helen Reid BSc MSc MRTPI MIED                                   Lambert Smith Hampton
Mary-Jane O’Neill BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI FRSA                       Lambert Smith Hampton


INTERESTED PARTIES:
Graham Thompson                                          Local resident and representative of
                                                         Spring Hill Residents Association
Councillor Jill Rayner                                   Local resident and locally elected
                                                         member for Kingston Bagpuize Ward
INQUIRY DOCUMENTS:
ID1                          Engrossment version of S106
ID2                          Appellant opening statement
ID3                          Council opening statement
ID4                          Comments from Mr Graham Thompson
ID5                          Working draft list of planning conditions
ID6                          VOWHDC Council CIL Reg 122 compliance statement
ID7                          Table outlining the planning balances of Divall and O’Neill
ID8                          Updated working draft list of planning conditions
ID9                          Further updated working draft list of planning conditions
ID10                         Archaeology condition email
ID11                         S106 indexation uplift email
ID12                         Council closing statement
ID13                         Appellant closing statement
ID14                         Update from Council on Crab Hill
ID15                         Updated S106


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       27
Appeal Decision 6005809


INQUIRY DOCUMENTS RECEIVED FOLLOWING CLOSE:
ID16                         Email from Sean Quiggin, local resident
ID17                         Email from Council in relation to ID16
ID18                         Email from appellant in relation to ID16
ID19                         Appellant final comments on housing land supply
ID20                         Final S106 dated 9 July 2026




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       28
