Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by AJ Sutton BA (Hons) PGDip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005652
Cud Hill House, Upton Hill, Upton St Leonards, Gloucestershire GL4 8DF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against a refusal
     to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Clements against the decision of Stroud District Council.
•    The application Ref is S.25/2010/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as “Demolition of modern outbuildings, alterations and extensions to an
     existing stone barn and its conversion to residential use with associated works and landscape enhancements.”

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2.     Reference is made to an emerging development plan which is at the examination stage and
       therefore well progressed. I will address this matter later in my decision.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published during this
       appeal process. The main parties have been invited to comment on this matter and
       responses to this are considered below.
Main Issues
4.     The Council’s reason for refusing planning permission included whether the building was of a
       substantial construction. However, based on the information submitted in this appeal, it now
       accepts that the building is permanent and substantial. I see nothing to dispute this finding.
5.     Also, the appeal site is in the zone of influence of the Cotswold Beechwoods Special Area of
       Conservation. Evidence shows that future occupants of just a single new dwelling could add
       to recreational pressure and air quality issues such that likely significant adverse effects
       cannot be ruled out. The appellant has submitted a legal agreement which seeks to address
       this issue, and I will deal with this in ‘Other Matters’ in this decision.
6.     Therefore, the main issues are:
     •     Whether the appeal site would be a suitable location for a dwelling having regard to the
           local spatial strategy; and
     •     The effect of the proposal on the scenic and natural beauty of the Cotswolds National
           Landscape.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005652


Reasons
Suitable location
7.     The appeal site comprises rough grazing land, hosting a two-storey stone and wood clad barn
       with an attached single storey side concrete structure. There are also separate single storey
       stone and concrete structures a short distance to the north of the main barn. These structures
       are surrounded by countryside. There are dwellings in the wider area however these are
       scattered and the nearest village is some distance from the site. This setting therefore has an
       undeveloped rural quality.
8.     Policy CP2 and CP3 of the Stroud Local Plan (Local Plan) set out the settlement hierarchy for
       the district and proposals for new development should be located in accordance with this
       hierarchy. A primary aim of Policy CP3 is to ensure that developments reduce the need to
       travel. Policy CP15 of the Local Plan states exceptions for development outside settlements.
       These include demonstrating that the proposal is enabling development required in order to
       maintain a heritage asset of acknowledge importance.
9.     The barn in question is, as already covered, a substantial structure, but I saw at the site visit it
       is in need of maintenance work. This aside, evidence submitted shows that the main barn has
       prior approval for change of use to commercial uses. I find no compelling evidence that this
       extant permission will not be implemented if this appeal was to be dismissed; indeed, this has
       been presented as a significant full back position for the appellant. This matter attracts
       significant weight given these factors.
10. There is dispute between the parties as to whether the structure is a heritage asset. It
    appears a traditional stone barn in keeping with the Cotswolds vernacular and although it is
    not locally listed, this does not appear to be a requirement of local policy. Regardless of
    whether I agree the building is a heritage asset of acknowledged importance or not, as
    outlined above, there is already permission in place that permits enabling development, such
    that the building will be maintained. This proposal is therefore not required for this purpose,
    and it would not satisfy this requirement of local policy in this respect. Also, the evidence
    suggests that the proposal would not satisfy any other exception set out in this local policy.
11. Local spatial policy also requires development be located where there are choices in the
    mode of transport available and which minimise the distance people need to travel.
    Addressing this, the site is approximately 2km from the nearest settlement that offers some
    local services. The appellant highlights an hourly bus service to three main settlements.
    However, although the main road is just a minutes’ walk from the site, the bus stop is some
    distance along that road, which has no made pavements or significant street lighting.
12. Sharing the road with motorised traffic, this uphill walk, however short, would be unappealing
    to most pedestrians and probably not feasible for those with restricted mobility or young
    children, particularly in winter months. Without reasonably safe access to other transport
    modes, even though it may involve a short drive to nearest settlements, future occupants
    would nonetheless be largely dependent on the car to access a range of services. This
    proposal would conflict with the aims of Policy CP13 of the Local Plan for this reason.
13. I therefore find that the appeal site would not be a suitable location for a dwelling having
    regard to the local spatial strategy. In this respect the proposal would be contrary to Policies
    CP1, CP2, CP3, CP13 and CP15 of the Local Plan.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005652


Landscape
14. The appeal site is located on the mid to higher slope of the Cotswold National Landscape
    escarpment. This landscape character type is typified by largescale, semi-natural exposed
    scarp slope, deciduous woodland, unimproved grasslands, small pastures and traditional
    stone buildings.
15. Cud Hill House, in the wider site has commanding views at the edge of the expansive scarp.
    The appeal site is, however, set back from the scarp edge. Comprising sloping pastureland
    fringed with woodland and hosting a traditional stone building the appeal site contains key
    characteristics and special qualities important to this landscape character type. The appeal
    site is somewhat visually contained by vegetation but can be seen in glimpsed views from the
    main road and from the footpath higher up the scarp. Although partially screened by
    vegetation and the slope for the hill, these special qualities nonetheless contribute positively
    to this part of the National Landscape.
16. As already set out, the main barn subject of the appeal would benefit from some maintenance
    work. However, even in its current state, I agree with the Council’s assessment that it appears
    a strong survivor of the now largely lost farmstead. With traditional stone and form, despite
    now having an untethered quality, it remains in keeping with the prevailing vernacular. The
    single storey building attached and those to the front of the main barn are also rather shabby.
    But as small traditional forms with an agricultural aesthetic, they are relatively neutral features
    in this setting.
17. The proposed changes to the main barn and attached single storey building would be largely
    limited to fenestration, with the creation of sizeable windows at the upper floor level on the
    northeast elevation of the main barn. A good-sized extension would also be attached
    perpendicular to the barn. However, the resultant arrangement of buildings would not be
    dissimilar to that commonly seen at farmsteads in the area and therefore would speak to the
    original use of the building. The addition would be relatively sympathetic in this regard.
18. As the site is in nationally important landscape and given the existing special qualities
    outlined above, the site is sensitive to change. Mindful of this factor, the submitted proposed
    site plan show that the residential unit that would result if this appeal was allowed would not
    only cover the existing barn and extension but would also include much of the existing
    pastureland to the north of the built forms.
19. The redline boundary shown on the location plan is tightly drawn around the existing main
    barn and the attached existing single storey building and does not include the plot of land
    necessary for the proposed extension in this scheme. Another plan is attached to the
    submitted legal agreement with a wider red line area, but this was not part of the plans that
    formed the basis of the Council’s decision, is without a clear reference and does not show the
    proposed layout as shown in the proposed site plan. There is also an image in the appellant’s
    appeal statement showing a consolidated curtilage, but this is not reflected on the proposed
    site plan.
20. The appellant is proposing landscaping improvements to be secured by condition and
    suggest that visual changes would be relatively contained in a small part of the site. But given
    the factors outlined, if I was to allow this appealed based on the submitted proposed plans,
    the existing pastureland would be included in the change of use. During the life of the
    development a significant section of existing undeveloped pastureland could be changed to a
    residential garden or used to accommodate other features incidental to the newly formed
    planning unit; the special qualities that currently exist could be replaced by features that
    would appear domestic and out of character with the current setting.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005652


21. Even if I accept that the changes under this proposal to the existing buildings would be
    limited, the appearance of the sizeable parcel of land providing the immediate setting for the
    new dwelling would be altered. In turn, its current pastoral quality would be considerably
    eroded. The existing special qualities of this site would not be conserved under this scheme.
    The harmful visual effect would be localised, but it would nevertheless be significant. The
    proposal would fail to further the statutory purpose of conserving the natural beauty of this
    part of the National Landscape; there would be conflict with the statutory duty in respect of
    this matter in this case.
22. Conditions on materials, landscaping and lighting could only go so far in controlling the
    changing appearance of the site. Given the resultant sizeable plot for domestic use, I am not
    persuaded that conditions would sufficiently minimise the identified visual harm to this site.
    Moreover, even if I agree with the appellant that the removal of a shed would be a visual
    improvement, this will not compensate for the greater loss of a significant plot of pastureland
    to residential development.
23. Also, while the poor state of the barn would be addressed under this proposal, as already
    covered, there is already permission in place to deal with this such that this benefit attracts
    limited weight. Furthermore, any improvement in the structures would be nullified by the
    visual harm resulting from the changing character of the wider site.
24. The extant permission permits a commercial change of use at the site, and this could include
    a hotel. However, unlike the proposal before me, the permitted change of use is limited to 94
    sqm of the appeal site. It is asserted that changes would occur in the curtilage under that
    permission, but unlike this residential proposal, the approved red line area of that permission
    is tightly drawn around the barn. Alterations allowed under that permission are considerably
    different from this scheme in this regard.
25. The residential development permitted south of Hatton Court Hotel is highlighted. However,
    that development is lower down the escarpment and some distance away, such that changes
    at that location have little visual influence on the appeal site. In any event, schemes found to
    be acceptable elsewhere should not justify harmful development at this location. My findings
    are unaltered.
26. Therefore, I find that the proposal would have a significant harmful visual effect on the scenic
    and natural beauty of the Cotswolds National Landscape. In this regard, the proposal would
    conflict with Policy ES7 of the Local Plan. This Policy requires in all locations, development
    proposals should conserve or enhance the special features and diversity of the different
    landscape character types found within the district.
Other Matters
27. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in accordance
    with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. The Framework
    states that development plan policies which are materially inconsistent with national decision-
    making policies should be given very limited weight.
28. In terms of the most relevant local policies in this case, policies of the local spatial strategy
    aim to locate development to reduce the need to travel and this is largely in keeping with the
    aims of policies of the Framework. However, the Council’s housing land supply stands at just
    3.2 years and is significantly below the five years required. The local spatial strategy does not
    appear to be effective in delivering an adequate supply of homes in the area and this limits
    the weight that local spatial policies should attract.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005652


29. Policy CP14 of the Local Plan requires high-quality sustainable development which is largely
    in keeping with Framework policies that seek well-designed places. Also, Policy ES7 of the
    Local Plan generally reflects Framework policy N4 which states substantial weight should be
    placed on the importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of National
    Landscapes.
30. Relevant to this proposal, Framework policy S5 sets out certain forms of development that
    should be approved outside settlements. This includes the reuse of an existing building. As
    already covered the building is of permanent and substantial construction. The proposal
    seeks to extend the existing buildings but only by a modest amount such that it would not
    result in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the existing building. The
    requirements of S5(1) c appear satisfied in these respects.
31. Framework policy S5(3) defines isolated homes as those lying outside settlements or groups
    of houses. For the reasons already set out this applies in this case. Such proposals should
    not be approved other than in accordance with Framework policy HO11.
32. That national decision-making policy sets out the circumstances where these types of
    proposals should be supported, and this includes disused buildings. However, policy HO11
    goes on to require that the development enhances its immediate setting. It is understood that
    the emerging local plan Policy CP15 (which addresses homes in the countryside) now
    includes developments that re-use redundant or disused buildings, in accordance with
    paragraph 84 of the Framework 2024.
33. Relevant to this matter, the current Framework policy HO11, consistent with paragraph 84 of
    the previous Framework, also requires proposals enhance its immediate setting. For the
    reasons stated above, even with the removal existing sheds, this scheme would not enhance
    this setting. Therefore, this proposal does not find support from local emerging policy or
    Framework policies S5(3) and HO11.
34. The proposal would result in one new dwelling. This would be a small contribution to the local
    housing land supply in the district. However, given the existing significant shortfall and the
    objective of national policy to support the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of
    homes, this benefit attracts considerable weight.
35. The proposal is supported by a legal agreement that would give certainty that the residential
    unit would be provided as a self-build unit consistent with the definition of the Self Build and
    Custom Housebuilding Act 2015. Submitted information indicates that there is need for this
    type of housing locally; the proposal would therefore in small part contribute to meeting the
    evidenced accommodation needs of the community and I attach substantial weight to this
    benefit. However, I am not persuaded that this visually harmful development is the only
    means of securing this benefit at this locale and this reduces the weight of this benefit.
36. As a conversion this new unit could be delivered quickly. Also, there would be some
    economic benefit through the construction phase and through the life of the development.
    However, this would be a small benefit given the scale of the development.
37. It is asserted that this proposal would result in a lower number of vehicle movements than will
    be the case if the prior approval was built out. But no substantive evidence has been
    advanced that this would be so. This aside, the site may be just a few kilometres from
    settlements but as established transport modes other than the car are limited. The
    development would not have particularly good connection to settlements in terms of walking,
    wheeling, cycling and public transport; this would be at odds with national decision-making


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005652


       policy seeking well-designed places. The proximity to large settlements is limited by this
       factor.
38. I give some weight to the reuse of the building although this is tempered by the fact that there
    is already permission in place which offers a similar benefit. Also, in light of that permission, I
    find no compelling evidence that the appeal site is particularly underutilised. This matter
    attracts little weight accordingly.
39. Set against these benefits, this proposal would result in significant visual harm to the statutory
    purpose and special qualities of this part of the Protected Landscape. The failure to conserve
    the natural beauty of the National Landscape weighs substantially against this development.
    Also, Framework policy DP3 requires development proposals should respond to their context
    so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings and as set out that would not be
    achieved in this case; it would not be well-designed in this regard.
40. I therefore find that the benefits in this case would not substantially outweigh the adverse
    effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to promoting sustainable
    patterns of movement. National decision-making policies state the proposal should be
    refused. A decision otherwise than in accordance with the development plan is not indicated
    in this case.
41. Regarding likely significant adverse effects on protected habitats, the submitted legal deed
    includes obligations to make financial contributions to mitigation strategies, approved by
    Natural England, to safeguard these habitats from harmful development. However, as I have
    found other reasons for dismissing this appeal it is not necessary to deal with the matters of
    protected habitats further.
Conclusion
42. For the reasons outlined above, having regard to the development plan and other material
    considerations, including the Framework, the appeal should be dismissed.



AJ Sutton
 INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
