4



Appeal Decision
Inquiry held on 21-23 & 28 July 2026
Site visits made on 20 & 21 July 2026
by Nick Fagan BSc (Hons), DipTP, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005664
Land West of Spratts Farm, Queenborough Road, Southminster, Essex CM0 7AD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Gladman Developments Ltd and DJ Fisher Farms and L&A Barker against
     the decision of Maldon District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00206/OUTM.
•    The development proposed is: Outline planning application for the demolition of number 46
     Queenborough Road and the erection of up to 110 dwellings (including affordable housing), with
     public open space, structural planting, landscaping, sustainable drainage system (SuDS) and
     vehicular access point. All matters to be reserved, except for means of access.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted for the demolition
       of number 46 Queenborough Road and the erection of up to 110 dwellings
       (including affordable housing), with public open space, structural planting,
       landscaping, sustainable drainage system (SuDS) and vehicular access point, all
       matters to be reserved, except for means of access at land West of Spratts Farm,
       Southminster, Essex CM0 7AD subject to the conditions in the attached Schedule
       at the end of this decision.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I conducted an unaccompanied site visit on the day before the Inquiry opened.
       Following the Landscape Round Table Discussion on Day 1 of the Inquiry I went
       back to the site and the adjacent site to the west (the Homefield site – see below)
       to check the relationship between the two sites. This was again an unaccompanied
       visit, because it was agreed between all the parties attending the Inquiry that it
       was unnecessary for me to conduct an accompanied site visit. I was able to see
       everything I needed to at these two visits, including viewing the site from all
       relevant viewpoints.
3.     Three weeks from the last sitting day of the Inquiry was given as the date by which
       a signed and dated tripartite S106 agreement (the S106) – between the
       owners/appellants, the District Council and the County Council – was to be
       submitted. This was actually dated and submitted on 13 August. I refer to the
       obligations in the S106 below as necessary.
4.     Just before this decision was issued, on 17 August, the Government issued the
       new revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). I do not
       consider that there is any need to revert to the main parties regarding this because

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005664


       the new policies for decision making in it do not substantially alter the national
       policies in the previous NPPF version, certainly not that would benefit the Council’s
       or any third party’s cases. Obviously, any reference to the NPPF refers to the
       policies within this new version.
Main Issues
5.     The three main issues are:
           ▪    Whether the proposed development would result in unacceptable landscape
                and visual impacts or harm to the character and appearance of the area.
           ▪    Whether it would be likely to result in unacceptable noise impacts to the
                occupiers of No 48 Queenborough Road.
           ▪    The planning balance of benefits against any harms, when assessed
                against Policy S5 (Principle of development outside settlements) of the new
                revised NPPF.
Reasons
Effect on Landscape & Visual Matters and on Character & Appearance
6.     The middle of the appeal site is within a comfortable walking distance of
       Southminster town centre with its shops, cafes and pubs, GP Surgery, primary
       school, bus stops and railway station to the south. It comprises part of an arable
       field 5.22Ha in area on the northern edge of the town, adjoining but outside the
       defined settlement boundary. The illustrative Development Framework Plan (the
       subject of Condition 5 in the Schedule below) shows 3.77Ha of the site would be
       developed for housing, whilst the rest (the northernmost part of the site and that
       part of the blue land to the north comprising the linear green space and walkway
       next to the brook) would comprise landscaped public open space (POS).
7.     There is residential development to the south of the site at Coombe Road and
       Spells Close; to the east of the site is a builders’ yard and to the south is
       residential development off Queenborough Road (the builders’ yard is accessed
       via a track located along the eastern boundary of the site); to the west is an arable
       field and to the north is farmland. A Public Right of Way (PROW) (FP1-259) runs
       along the site’s southern and western boundaries. Overhead power lines cross the
       site.
8.     The land to the north (within the blue land of the Location Plan also under the
       appellant’s control) continues to fall towards the brook before rising again towards
       Foxhall Road. The eastern edge of this blue land abuts Sheepcotes Lane, also a
       PROW (FP3-259), to the east of which was the site of another proposed housing
       development for 220 dwellings, dismissed on appeal last year1 .
9.     The Landscape Statement of Common Ground2 (the LSoCG) sets out that the site
       is not a valued landscape for the purposes of former NPPF paragraph 187 a),
       although that term has not been used in the new version of the NPPF. The site
       does not lie within a protected landscape governed by new Policy N2. It is agreed


1
  CD8.1 – APP/X1545/W/24/3351697 - Land north of Homefield and west of Tillingham Road, Southminster CM0 7DT, dismissed
26 March 2025
2
  CD12.4


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
Appeal Decision 6005664


       that the methodology of the appellant’s Landscape and Visual Appraisal (LVA)3
       submitted with the application is acceptable in that it complies with GLVIA34. It is
       undisputed that the Viewpoints used in the LVA provide a fair and representative
       range for appraising any visual impact, and that the overall pleasantness of views
       enjoyed by properties next to the appeal site would inevitably change, and that
       residents of such properties may be highly sensitive to such change, albeit there is
       no right to a view.
10. The main parties agree that there will be an adverse effect in landscape character
    terms. The appellant maintains that this would not be significant, as opposed to the
    Council that argues it would be.
11. However, the differences between them are relatively limited, as set out in the
    comparison tables contained in the appendices of the LSoCG. In relation to
    landscape effects, the sole disagreement between them is in relation to the
    magnitude of effect on the site and its immediate context and overall effect at Year
    15 following completion of the development; the appellant considers the effect
    would be moderate-minor adverse whereas the Council considers it would be
    moderate adverse. There would be negligible effects on the wider Landscape
    Character Areas set out in both the Essex Landscape Character Assessment
    (2003) and the Maldon Landscape Character Assessment (2006), and
    consequently on the National Character Area.
12. The Council argues that the POS and structural planting and landscaping within it
    would fail to mitigate the overall effect of the new suburban housing estate on the
    rolling agricultural landscape on the northern edge of the town, which would be
    very apparent even after such planting had matured at Year 15.
13. I agree that the new housing would still be apparent but the structural planting and
    landscaping in the northern section of the site would undoubtedly help mitigate the
    effect of the new suburban housing development on the site’s immediate context. I
    disagree with the Council’s claim that this development would, like that in the
    recent Homefield appeal, ‘be a conspicuous intrusion of settlement into open,
    undulating arable farmland’5 because the much larger development proposed
    there (double the number of dwellings) would have extended way beyond the
    northernmost dwelling on Tillingham Road and Sheepcotes Lane. Whereas in this
    scheme the built development would not extend beyond that or beyond the
    builder’s yard on the site’s eastern boundary.
14. Consequently, the northerly extension of the town proposed by this scheme would
    therefore be sensitive and proportionate, whereas the Homefield scheme clearly
    wasn’t, for the reasons given by the Inspector in that decision.
15. For these reasons I conclude, given the landscape is here undoubtedly influenced
    by existing built development on the settlement edge, that there would only be a
    moderate-minor adverse landscape effect at Year 15 post-completion of the
    development.
16. In relation to visual effects, there are two areas of disagreement between the main
    parties. The Council considers that users of both PROWS FP1 and FP3 would still

3
  CD1.06
4
  Guidelines for Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment, 3rd edition, 2013, Landscape Institute & Institute of Environmental
Management and Assessment
5
  Ibid CD8.1, para 20


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6005664


       be subject to a moderate adverse effect at Year 15 because the effectiveness of
       the northern planting and landscaping in the POS would be moderated by its siting
       at a lower level than the housing above it to the south.
17. The planting and landscaping would be on a lower level than the housing due to
    the northward slope of the land and would not therefore screen it entirely in views
    from these footpaths to the north and west. But it would not be significantly lower
    than the houses because the slope is not steep, it would still have some screening
    effect and would be an improvement on the lack of any such landscaped screen to
    the current housing at Hillside Road or Coombe Road. The northwestern corner of
    proposed housing would also be inset away from FP1 to accommodate the SUDS
    feature, and the view from FP3 would be an angled view some distance away from
    the new dwellings, with the proposed POS and adjacent woodland to Sheepcotes
    Lane providing at least a partial screening effect. For these reasons I consider, at
    worst, that there would only be a moderate-minor adverse effect on the users of
    footpaths FP1 and FP3.
18. There would also be – undisputed by the appellant – minor adverse effects at Year
    15 on the views of residents at Queenborough Road and Hillside Road and
    moderate adverse effects on about 20 sets of residents in Coombe Road and
    Spells Close, given that their rear windows would look onto the new development
    rather than onto an open field.
19. In summary, in landscape character terms, at worst there would be a moderate
    adverse visual effect (in terms of the visual effect on residents on approximately
    20 dwellings in Coombe Road and Spells Close), but generally only a moderate-
    minor adverse visual effect (on the users of FP-1 and FP-3) and a moderate-
    minor adverse landscape effect solely in relation to the site and its immediate
    context at Year 15 post-completion of the development. Such effects, although
    adverse, would not comprise significant or unacceptable landscape harm.
20. Regarding assessing whether there would be any adverse harm to the character
    and appearance of the area, I concern myself here only with the Council’s
    argument that the timber acoustic fence on the boundary with No 48
    Queenborough Road would be alien to the area’s character and appearance.
21. At present there is a 1.8m high close boarded timber fence on the boundary
    between Nos 46 and 48 Queenborough Road, although I accept that it drops to
    approximately 1.2-1.4m in the front gardens of these properties. Condition 26 in
    the Schedule below reserves the location and scale (height) of the acoustic
    (timber) fence as well as the exact route of the access road into the proposed
    development, the agreed position being that the fence would be sited as close as
    possible to the access road, in order to maximise its acoustic shielding effect on
    noise from car engines on that road to the occupiers of No 48.
22. I assess the noise issue below. But, given that I am allowing the appeal and
    granting permission for the development, Condition 26, which reserves the siting
    and height of the acoustic fence, is agreed between the main parties. The height of
    the fence including near to Queenborough Road would be under the control of the
    Council. It would have to balance the merits of any noise screening effect on No
    48 against any perceived harm to the area’s character and appearance. Though
    given the change to this corner of Queenborough Road that would result from the
    demolition of No 46 and the access road junction, my view is that a 1.8m fence


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005664


       extending as far south as Queenborough Road itself would not result in any
       significant harm to the area’s character or appearance.
23. The development plan is the Maldon District Local Development Plan 2014-2029,
    adopted in July 2017 (the MLP). Policy S1 (Sustainable Development) sub-para
    12) requires development proposals to maintain the rural character of the District
    without compromising the identity of its individual settlements. For the above
    reasons the proposed development would do so. Policy S8 (Settlement
    Boundaries and the Countryside) requires the countryside to be protected
    including for its intrinsic character and beauty. Clearly, building a housing
    development on part of the countryside would fail to protect it, and so there is
    conflict with this policy, although I address the weight that should be given to it in
    the Planning Balance below.
24. Policy D1 (Design Quality and Built Environment) requires all development to
    respect and enhance local character and context, which I am satisfied the
    proposed development would be capable of doing at reserved matters stage for
    the above reasons. Likewise, Policy H4 (Effective Use of Land) requires
    development to be design-led and optimise the use of land considering the
    location and setting of the site and existing character and density, which I am
    confident the scheme would be able to do. I am satisfied that, in terms of
    landscape character and character/appearance terms, the proposal would
    comprise sustainable development in accordance with the NPPF.
Noise to No 48 Queenborough Road
25. In assessing the likely noise effects of the proposed development on the living
    conditions of No 48’s residential occupiers, in particular the likely noise from
    vehicles on the access road to the site off the northwestern corner of
    Queenborough Road, I have taken into account all the relevant policy and
    guidance referenced in evidence. This includes the Wardell Armstrong Noise
    Screening Report (CD1.15), all the documents in CD11 (the Noise folder), and
    NPPF paragraph 187 e), which states that planning policies and decisions should
    prevent new development from contributing to unacceptable levels of pollution,
    including noise pollution.
26. New NPPF Policy P3 is also relevant, which states that development proposals
    should, under sub-paragraph 2 a), provide healthy living conditions for occupiers
    and users avoiding exposure to pollution including from noise which could have an
    unacceptable adverse effect on health and the quality of life. Also relevant is the
    Explanatory Note to the Noise Policy Statement for England, 2010 (NPSE,
    CD11.2). I have of course also taken into account the comments of Mr Aggarwal
    and his family members who live at No 48.
27. As the NPSE states (in its paragraph 2.9), there are currently no national or
    European wide noise limits which must be met. The sole relevant question here is
    whether traffic noise of vehicles entering and leaving the new development would
    be likely to cause sleep disturbance at night to No 48’s occupiers (between the
    hours of 2300 and 0700), because such disturbance could give rise to adverse
    health effects.
28. The NPSE sets out (in para 2.20) the relevant concepts, including those applied by
    the World Health Organisation, to noise levels: NOEL – No Observed Effect Level,
    below which level there is no detectable effect on health or quality of life; LOAEL –

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005664


       Lowest Observed Effect Level, above which level adverse effects can be detected;
       and SOAEL – Significant Observed Adverse Effect Level, above which level
       significant adverse effects occur. As para 2.21 states: ‘It is not possible to have a
       single objective noise-based measure that defines SOAEL that is applicable to all
       sources of noise in all situations. Consequently, the SOAEL is likely to be different
       for different noise sources, for different receptors and at different times.’ The aim is
       to avoid noise levels above SOAELs and to mitigate and minimise noise levels
       above LOAELs. ‘Level’ in terms of these concepts refers not just to decibel (dB)
       level but includes factors such as the number of times the noise impact occurs, the
       duration of the impact, and the time of day the impact occurs.
29. These noise effect levels are also addressed and explained in Planning Practice
    Guidance (PPG) - Noise (CD11.1), specifically in the Noise Exposure Hierarchy
    Table. An adverse effect is one which causes a change in the noise receptor’s
    behaviour or response, for example the need to close a window. A significant
    adverse effect would cause a material change in behaviour, such as keeping
    windows closed for most or all of the time, for instance to prevent sleep
    disturbance. Noise exposure above the SOAEL would indicate that a development
    generating such noise should be refused permission or amended to avoid such an
    effect.
30. The Wardell Armstrong (WA) Report did not assess the likely noise effect of the
    proposed access road on the rear windows of No 48, only on the front and side
    windows, but the main parties accept that this is necessary. As the Council makes
    clear (in its Closing Submissions, paragraph 19), the dispute between the main
    parties is a narrow but significant one: whether the noise generated by vehicles on
    the access road at night (i) should be assessed by reference to maximum (rather
    than average) noise levels, and (ii) if so, the level above which a significant
    adverse effect is likely to result. It is agreed between them that there is no concern
    regarding noise during the daytime to habitable rooms nor to the 8-hour average
    nighttime noise levels in No 48 with windows partially open, nor to its garden area,
    nor indeed at any time in relation to No 48’s western, southern and eastern
    facades.
31. Neither BS8233 2014 (the Noise BS, CD11.3) nor the Design Manual for Roads
    and Bridges (the DMRB, CD11.6) set out that intermittent maximum noise events
    should be used to assess noise on residential occupiers. But, in principle, I don’t
    see why they should not be used because, clearly, such an individual noise event
    (for example the revving of a car or motorbike) could clearly wake up a sleeping
    person; infrequent but loud noises against a relatively quiet background
    environment, such as nighttime traffic in suburban residential areas, could have
    such an effect. Note 4 to Table 4 of the Noise BS mentions that regular noise
    events such as scheduled aircraft or passing trains can cause sleep disturbance
    (my underlining). So could a one-off incident of a revving car, but it is reasonable
    to assess how likely and how often such an incident would take place.
32. In the context of the proposed access road, it would be designed to cater for
    vehicle speeds of 20mph; it is likely to have a sharp if not ninety degree bend in it
    before a vehicle heading out of the site would need to give way at the junction with
    Queenborough Road, which would ensure that vehicle speeds and therefore the
    noise generated by such vehicles would be less than those passing on
    Queenborough Road, where the speed limit is 30mph and surveyed speeds
    around 29mph; at least some of the vehicles (an increasing number as time goes

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005664


       by) are likely to be electric vehicles, which are much quieter than combustion
       engine vehicles; neighbours using it at night (2300 to 0700) would likely incline to
       be neighbourly and therefore desist from revving their engines etc; and the time
       that a vehicle would take to negotiate it would be less than the 10-30 second time
       that a plane or train would take (the examples given in the Noise BS and in the
       World Health Organisation Guidelines for Community Noise, 1999 or WHO
       Guidelines – CD11.4, page 28).
33. Therefore, in the circumstances of the proposed development, where in any case it
    is agreed that only 32 vehicle movements are predicted to access or leave the site
    between these nighttime hours, it is not unreasonable to use average rather than
    maximum predicted noise levels. As agreed, there is no concern by the Council
    regarding the predicted average nighttime noise levels to No 48’s rear windows.
34. However, even assuming that maximum rather than average nighttime noise levels
    should be used, the question is whether the predicted maximum levels would be
    unacceptable – whether they would give rise to a significant adverse effect
    resulting in No 48’s occupiers having to completely close their rear windows for
    most of the time, which could result in overheating, especially in heatwaves like
    those we have recently had.
35. The WA Report survey from monitoring point ML1 (within the site near
    Queenborough Road in the vicinity of the access road’s likely location) revealed
    maximum external decibel (dB) levels on a range between 51-68dB. The Cass
    Allen model used by Mr Bryant for the Council showed a close correlation to this
    (within 1-2dB), such that Table 5 of Mr Bryant’s Proof suggested a maximum of
    70dB.
36. The Council argue that, assuming a partially open bedroom window will reduce
    noise by 15dB, giving an internal 55dB within the bedrooms on No 48’s north
    elevation, this would mean an exceedance of the 45dB LAmax noise level, which
    the WHO Guidelines and the Noise BS state should not be exceeded more than
    10-15 times a night for a good night’s sleep.
37. However, even if all 32 vehicles movements at night resulted in 70dB noise levels
    – which is very unlikely for all the above reasons – I am unclear why this would
    constitute unacceptable noise to No 48’s occupiers. The appellant cites the
    Acoustics Ventilation and Overheating Residential Design Guide, 2020 (AVOG,
    CD11.5) and specifically Table 3-3 (on pages 23-24), on the basis that this is the
    most up-to-date guidance on noise in relation to dwellings, including in relation to
    overheating, which is a possible concern here. This is the guidance documents
    produce by the Institute of Acoustics, of which both noise experts are members.
38. The Council argues that the AVOG guidance should be discounted because it
    concerns new dwellings rather than existing ones. I can see no sense in that; I do
    not accept that one-off noise events would be more tolerable to the occupiers of a
    newly built dwelling if it woke them up from sleeping compared to the occupiers of
    an existing dwelling; sleep disturbance to both types of dwelling occupiers could
    give rise to adverse health effects if this happened every night. Consequently, I
    accept the AVOG Guidance in Table 3-3 as relevant, especially as it is relatively
    recent, compared to that in the 1999 WHO Guidelines.
39. Table 3-3 adopts the same outcome-focussed criteria as in the PPG’s Noise
    Exposure Hierarchy Table. Note 4 to this Table indicates that the LAmax indicator

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005664


       associated with the upper category is intended for road traffic. Individual noise
       events that exceed 65dB LAFmax is indicated as having to keep windows closed
       most of the time.
40. But No 48’s rear windows are unlikely currently to be open all year round anyway,
    especially in the winter, due to colder temperatures. Even if all 32 nighttime vehicle
    movements resulted in 70dB external noise levels, partially open windows would
    reduce the internal noise levels to 55dB, which is the level only above which Part
    O of the Building Regulations considers that bedroom windows would have to be
    closed (if that internal noise level occurred more than 10 times a night). There may
    be occasions in summer heatwaves where occupiers may want to fully open
    bedroom windows to the point where they have no significant sound reduction
    effect internally at all, but such nights are likely to be relatively few in terms of the
    whole year, even this hot year and even accepting climate change predictions.
    Realistically the extent of how fully bedroom windows will be open at night at No
    48 (or in any dwelling) is based on nighttime temperatures, such that on cold
    winter nights they may not be open at all stretching through the range of partially
    open (common in spring/autumn) to potentially fully open in summer heatwaves.
41. To conclude, it is unlikely that residents at No 48 would want to keep their rear
    windows fully open all year round. It may be that during summer heatwaves, when
    they would prefer to keep them fully open at night, that vehicles generating 65dB+
    noise levels may generate noise nuisance. But it is very unlikely that all 32
    average nightly vehicle movements would do so. It is far more likely that partially
    open rear windows in No 48’s rear elevation, likely to occur for much of the year,
    would suitably reduce internal noise levels within the rear bedrooms sufficient not
    to cause significant sleep disturbance from the proportion of vehicles exceeding
    70dB noise levels. It is therefore unlikely there would be a SOAEL, a significant
    observed adverse effect level that would cause a material change (my emphasis)
    in occupiers’ behaviour, in this case trigger the need to fully close all rear windows
    for most of the time.
42. I conclude this having regard to the indicative (dotted red line of) the proposed
    access road in drawing 1727/10 Rev B. As Mr Healey for the appellant sets out in
    6.6 of his Proof, there are alternative options for the access road and acoustic
    fence layout, which would take it further away from No 48’s boundary, having a
    correspondingly beneficial effect in terms of minimising any noise to its window
    and door openings. Therefore, even if my above conclusion is incorrect, Condition
    26 in the Schedule below reserves the final siting and layout of the access road
    and the 1.8m high acoustic fence (to the Council’s discretion) and, importantly,
    specifies that 60dB LAFmax is not exceeded external to any bedroom window,
    assessed at a distance 1m perpendicular to the centre of the window between
    2300-0700 (more than 10-15 times per night). I have no doubt that this Condition
    would successfully ensure that there would be no unacceptable noise impacts to
    the occupiers of No 48 Queenborough Road.
43. Consequently, MLP Policy D1 4) which requires the amenity of areas surrounding
    development to be protected from harm including noise and Policy D2 6) which
    requires all forms of pollution including noise to be minimised would be complied
    with, as would new NPPF Policy P3.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6005664


The Planning Balance
44. The proposed development would comply with new NPPF Policy S5 because the
    Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites
    (5YHLS). It says it has a 4.04 YHLS, whereas the appellant argues there is only a
    3.6 YHLS. Regardless of this, such a marginal difference being unimportant, this
    lack of a 5YHLS means that NPPF Policy S5 is engaged.
45. Sub-paragraph 1 h) of Policy S5 makes clear that residential development
    physically well-related to a settlement (which this is) of a scale which could be
    satisfactorily accommodated by necessary infrastructure (which this scheme would
    be through S106 obligations and conditions) would be acceptable. Sub-paragraph
    1 j) states that development which would address an evidenced unmet housing
    need (as in this case) where there is no 5YHLS and that is well-related to an
    existing settlement with necessary infrastructure is acceptable in principle. Sub-
    paragraph 2 of this Policy sets out the circumstances in which the benefits of
    approving development in line with the criteria in sub-paragraph 1 are restricted to
    national decision-making policies which state such proposals should be refused
    only in specific circumstances, none of which apply here.
46. The spatial strategy policies relied on by the Council in its refusal reasons are out-
    of-date. That is because the Council’s spatial strategy in MLP seeks to deliver only
    4,650 dwellings during its plan period (310 per year), way below the current need
    identified by the standard method set out in PPG, which is uncontested to be 586
    dwellings per annum, almost double the previous requirement.
47. I have identified above the at-worst moderate landscape harm to the site and its
    immediate context, which would not be significant or unacceptable. The Council’s
    argument that such moderate harm is nonetheless significant is illogical and not
    credible. The development would infringe MLP Policy S8 because building a
    suburban housing development on part of an open field would not ‘protect’ the
    countryside. However, NPPF Policy N2 (as per previous paragraph 187 b) of the
    2024 NPPF) does not ‘protect’ the countryside for its landscape or intrinsic
    character and beauty, which Policy S8 specifically endeavours to do; it merely
    ‘considers’ the environmental qualities of land proposed for development including
    the natural beauty of the countryside, which is not the same as protecting it. This
    means that even if this level of harm was considered significant and unacceptable,
    I would attribute only limited weight to the conflict with MLP Policy S8.
48. Added to that is the harm to the Council’s spatial strategy in its development plan –
    to MLP Policies S1, S2 and S8 – because the appeal site lies outside
    Southminster’s settlement boundary. But I give only limited weight to such harm
    because, if these policies were to be applied with the vigour of full weight, the
    Council would clearly be unable to meet its current housing needs, contrary to the
    NPPF, specifically to Policy HO1, which prescribes the use of the standard method
    (set out in Annex D) to establish housing need in the area.
49. I also add to these harms the agreed heritage harm: the harm to the setting, and
    thus significance, of the Grade II listed Spratt’s Farmhouse (now known as Mead
    House, 52 Queenborough Road) by virtue of the agreed ‘less than substantial
    harm’6 – at the lowermost end of the spectrum – in terms of the change to its

6
 The term used in paragraph 215 of the previous (December 2024) version of the NPPF, upon which the parties assessed such
harm.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              9
Appeal Decision 6005664


       northern agricultural setting. I give such harm considerable importance and weight,
       although the Council acknowledges that the public benefits of the proposal,
       notably the delivery of market and 30% affordable housing, outweigh such harm.
       As such, the proposal would comply with new NPPF Policy HE6, which specifically
       indicates that is the way in which any harm should be assessed to designated
       heritage assets.
50. In summary, the harms from the proposed development would be at-worst
    moderate landscape harms and very limited harm to the significance of the Grade
    II listed Spratt’s Farmhouse acknowledged by the Council to be outweighed by its
    public benefits. I have concluded that there would be no unacceptable noise
    impacts to the occupiers of No 48 Queenborough Road. Even if I was wrong in
    this, the Council only attribute such harm moderate weight7 because only the
    occupiers of one dwelling would be affected.
51. The (public) benefits of the scheme are numerous. I attribute substantial weight
    to the scheme’s delivery of both market and affordable housing. The Council
    argues that only significant weight should be given to both because, first, the
    shortfall of housing has improved since the Homefield decision (when it was only
    2.7 YHLS) and is likely to have improved beyond the current 4.04 YHLS as a result
    of the recent appeal decision at land west of the cemetery at London Road,
    Maldon, which allowed 275 new dwellings8. Secondly, in relation to affordable
    housing (AH), it argues it is the percentage and quantum that is important; 100%
    AH or a greater quantity than this scheme would deliver, such as the 110 AHs that
    will be delivered from the above appeal scheme, should be given a higher
    weighting.
52. I don’t accept such arguments because it is a national requirement for Local
    Planning Authorities to have a 5YHLS, which Maldon doesn’t have and it has a
    shortfall of AH units that it should have delivered to date under the MLP.
    Therefore, on both counts, it is reasonable to attribute substantial weight to the
    delivery of both market and AH.
53. I agree with the Council that moderate weight (rather than significant weight)
    should be attached to the scheme’s economic benefits (construction employment
    and spend and the expenditure of economically active future residents) on the
    basis that other schemes, such as commercial schemes, would generate more
    such benefits.
54. I also agree that only limited weight should be attached to the POS and green
    infrastructure (GI) proposed because this is a policy requirement and because it is
    located at the northern extent of the site and therefore less likely to be used by
    other members of the public, or, alternately, that the footpaths including that
    adjacent to the brook is already used by locals for dog walking etc and so the
    proposed POS/GI would not add anything of consequence for them. In terms of
    biodiversity net gain (BNG), again, this would only warrant limited weight
    because a minimum of 10% BNG is a statutory requirement and the scheme would
    deliver very little above that requirement.



7
  The scale of weighting both for planning harms and benefits is agreed between the main parties (in descending order):
substantial, significant, moderate, limited, neutral. I adopt this same scale.
8
  CD9.12 – 6004910, allowed 6 July 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 10
Appeal Decision 6005664


55. There are other arguable benefits of the proposal. These are set out in the S106
    and in Conditions 12 and 13 below, which require pedestrian dropped kerbs and
    tactile paving to be provided prior to first occupation at various local road junctions.
56. The S106 has obligations requiring prior to commencement or occupation or other
    appropriate trigger: 30% AH provision (at a mix of 75% rented and 25%
    intermediate housing), management and maintenance of the POS/GI and
    permissive footpath adjacent to the brook, the payment of appropriate financial
    contributions in respect of the Essex Coast Recreational Disturbance Avoidance &
    Mitigation Strategy (RAMS), healthcare, early years, primary and secondary
    education, secondary school transport, libraries, PROW contribution towards the
    cost of diverting FP1, a £310,000 Sustainable Transport Contribution towards
    improving bus links between the site and local area including Maldon and
    Burnham-On-Crouch, as well as the payment of both Councils’ monitoring and
    legal costs.
57. I accept that some of these benefits, especially the improved bus links and the
    junction improvements, will benefits existing local residents as well as proposed
    residents of the scheme. But these benefits have only been provided because they
    are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms, are directly
    related to the development, and are fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind,
    as required by regulation 122(2) of the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations
    2010. Consequently, I attribute only limited weight to the improved bus links and
    junction improvements and neutral weight to the other S106 obligations/
    contributions.
58. New NPPF Policy S3 sets out the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development (previously set out in paragraph 11 of the 2024 NPPF). This states in
    1 c) ‘Outside settlements, Policy S5 should be applied’. I have set out above how
    the proposed development would comply with new Policy S5. Although it would not
    comply with all relevant policies in the development plan, I have reduced the
    weight of Policies S1, S2 and S8, because they are out-of-date. The other relevant
    policies in the plan – D1, D2 and H4 – would be complied with. For these reasons
    alone the proposal would be sustainable development, which should be granted
    planning permission.
59. Further to this, the scheme’s harms, even if they were to be at the level argued by
    the Council, would come nowhere near to significantly and demonstrably
    outweighing the above benefits. Whilst this was the old test in NPPF 2024
    paragraph 11, the fact that it is passed only adds to the reasons for allowing this
    appeal.
Other Matters
60. I acknowledge the 342 objection letters/comments at the application stage from
    local people and the 8 objection letters/comments at the appeal stage from locals,
    including from Sir John Whttingdale, the local MP. In particular I acknowledge all
    the correspondence from Mr Aggarwal and his family members at No 48
    Queenborough Road.
61. The Aggarwal family objects to the development for a number of reasons,
    including noise to their property, which I have addressed in detail in main reason
    two above. They also object to the access to the new development being proposed


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6005664


       where Queenborough Road is narrow and floods and consider that cars would
       have insufficient visibility accessing and exiting the site.
62. The County Council as the Local Highway Authority does not object to the access
    road on either of these grounds. The flooding issue in this part of Queenborough
    Road – set out in Mr Aggarwal’s submitted photographic evidence – appears to be
    because of blocked drains on the road. That is a matter that Mr Aggarwal is
    apparently pursuing with the Council’s highway maintenance team and is clearly
    its responsibility.
63. All the other matters raised in the above multiple objections, including that there is
    insufficient local infrastructure to service the new residential occupiers of the
    scheme, I have addressed above. I am satisfied that there are no valid planning
    harms to warrant refusal of this scheme, which would be sustainable development.
Conditions
64. The conditions in the Schedule below are agreed between the main parties. I
    agree that they all meet the tests for conditions in the NPPF and PPG and that
    they are all necessary for the individual reasons appended to each condition in the
    Schedule. Also attached simply by way of information, at the end of the Schedule,
    is an Informative setting out the need for compliance with the statutory biodiversity
    net gain condition as required by paragraph 13 of Schedule 7A to the Town and
    Country Planning Act 1990.
Conclusion
65. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

Nick Fagan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6005664


Schedule of Conditions

Submission of Outstanding Reserved Matters
1.   Details of appearance, landscaping, layout and scale, (hereafter called "the
     reserved matters") shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
     planning authority before any development takes place and thereafter the
     development shall be carried out in accordance with the details approved.
         REASON: The application as submitted does not give particulars sufficient for
         consideration of the reserved matters.

Time Limit for the Submission of the Outstanding Reserved Matters
2.    Applications for the approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
      planning authority before the expiration of three years from the date of this
      permission.
         REASON: To comply with the requirements of Section 92(2) of the Town &
         Country Planning Act 1990 as amended by Section 51 of the Planning and
         Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.

Time Limit for the Commencement of the Outline Planning Permission
3.    The development hereby permitted shall be begun within two years from the
      date of the final approval of the reserved matters. The development shall be
      carried out as approved.
         REASON: To comply with the requirements of Section 92(2) of the Town &
         Country Planning Act 1990 as amended by Section 51 of the Planning and
         Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.

Approved Plans
4.   The reserved matters shall be submitted in accordance with the details set out in
     the following approved plans:
    •    11096-L-01 P04 – Location Plan
    •    1727/10 Rev B – Proposed Access Arrangements
    •    1727/11 – Proposed Wall Pillar
         REASON: For the avoidance of doubt and to ensure that the development is
         carried out in accordance with the details as approved.

Plan to Influence the Reserved Matters
5.    The details submitted pursuant to Condition 1 (the reserved matters) shall be
      broadly in accordance with the Development Framework Plan (drawing ref:
      11096-L-02 Rev P23).
         REASON: To ensure that the development is carried out in broad accordance
         with the Development Framework Plan.

Housing Mix
6.   The layout matter to be submitted under condition 1 shall include a housing mix
     having regard to Maldon District Council’s latest Local Housing Needs
     Assessment. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in
     accordance with the approved details.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6005664


         REASON: In order to ensure that an appropriate housing mix is provided for the
         proposed development taking into account the objective of creating a
         sustainable, mixed community contained in Policy H2 of the approved Maldon
         District Development Local Plan and the guidance contained in the National
         Planning Policy Framework.

Maximum Height for the Development
7.   The development shall be a maximum of two storeys in height.
         REASON: In the interests of visual amenity of the area in accordance with policy
         D1 of the adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Levels
8.    No development shall commence until details of finished site and external
      surface levels, as well as the finished floor level of the dwellings have been
      submitted to and approved by the local planning authority. The development
      shall be implemented in accordance with the agreed details.
         REASON: In order to safeguard the amenities of neighbouring occupiers and in
         the interests of visual amenity of the area in accordance with policy D1 of the
         adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Tree and Hedge Retention
9.    The trees and hedges identified for retention on the approved plan drawing
      number(s) 11096-T-02 Rev F from the Arboricultural Impact Assessment shall
      be protected during the course of the development. The trees and/or hedges
      shall be protected by chestnut paling fencing for the duration of the construction
      period at a distance equivalent to not less than the spread from the trunk. The
      protective fencing and ground protection shall be erected before the
      commencement of any clearing, demolition and building operations and shall be
      maintained until all equipment, machinery and surplus materials have been
      removed from the site. Within the fenced protection zone(s) no materials shall be
      stored, no rubbish dumped, no fires lit and no buildings erected inside the fence,
      nor shall any change in ground level be made within the fenced area unless
      otherwise first agreed in writing by the local planning authority. If within five
      years from the completion of the development a tree or hedge shown to be
      retained is removed, destroyed, dies, or becomes, in the opinion of the local
      planning authority, seriously damaged or defective, a replacement shall be
      planted within the site of such species and size, and shall be planted at such
      time, as specified in writing by the local planning authority.
         REASON: To secure the retention of the trees/hedges within the site in the
         interests of visual amenity and the character of the area in accordance with
         policy D1 of the adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Visibility Splays
10.    Prior to the first occupation of the development, the site access on
       Queenborough Road shall be constructed and provided in accordance with
       visibility splays as shown in Ashley Helme Associates’ Drawing no 1727/10 Rev
       B and these visibility splays shall be maintained clear and free from obstruction
       at all times thereafter.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6005664


         REASON: To provide adequate inter-visibility between vehicles using the site
         access and those in the existing public highway, in the interest of highway safety
         and in accordance with policy T2 of the adopted Maldon District Local
         Development Plan.

Site Access
11.   Prior to the first occupation of the development and as shown in principle in
      Ashley Helme Associates’ Drawing no 1727/10 Rev B, the site access and the
      area around it shall be constructed and provided in accordance with the
      following:
    •    Dropped kerb crossing together with tactile paving at the bellmouth of the
         proposed new junction;
    •    A 2 metre footway on either side of the proposed access road;
    •    Dropped kerb crossing together with tactile paving on Queenborough Road at a
         point approximately 70m south of the proposed access junction.
         The site access shall be carried out in accordance with these details and once
         constructed the above requirements shall be maintained and retained at all times
         thereafter.
         REASON: To provide safe access for both pedestrians and the mobility impaired
         in the interest of accessibility in accordance with policies D2 and T2 of the
         adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Pedestrian Crossing Point
12.  Prior to the first occupation of the development, the kerbing at the junction of
     Queenborough Road with High Street shall be improved and include a dropped
     kerb and tactile paving crossing as shown in principle in Drawing 1727/08 Rev B
     of the Transport Assessment.
         REASON: To improve inter-visibility between vehicles on High Street and
         Queenborough Road, in the interests of the safety of pedestrians and the
         mobility-impaired, and in accordance with policies D2 and T2 of the adopted
         Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Off Site Pedestrian Crossing Points
13.    Prior to the first occupation of the development, pedestrian dropped kerbs and
       tactile paving shall be provided with the precise locations and details of these
       shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority for
       the following locations:
          • The bellmouth of Coombe Road at its junction with Queenborough Road;
          • The bellmouth of Regents Close at its junction with Queenborough Road;
          • The bellmouth of Pump Mead Close at its junction with Queenborough Road;
            and
          • The bellmouth of North Street at its junction with North End.
         The pedestrian dropped kerbs and tactile paving shall be carried out in
         accordance with these details as approved and once constructed they shall be
         maintained and retained at all times thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
Appeal Decision 6005664


         REASON: To provide safe access for both pedestrians and the mobility impaired
         in the interest of accessibility in accordance with policies D2 and T2 of the
         adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Footpath Provision
14.  The reserved matters for the approval of layout shall include a scheme of works
     to provide a footpath at or near the southern boundary of the site as shown
     indicatively on the Development Framework Plan drawing no. 11096-L-02 Rev
     P23. The details shall include appropriate surfacing, construction and confirmed
     alignment. The approved footpath shall be completed prior to the first occupation
     of the development and shall be retained and maintained as such thereafter.
         REASON: In the interests of pedestrian accessibility and in accordance with
         policies D2 and T2 of the adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Alternative Access Route to the Builders Yard
15.   The reserved matters for the approval of layout shall include details of an
      alternative access route to the builder’s yard from the internal site access road
      shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. This
      shall include an agreed method to prevent vehicles from using the existing
      private access track. The alternative access route shall be completed prior to the
      first occupation of the development and shall be retained and maintained as
      such thereafter.
         REASON: To reduce the potential for conflicting movements between users of
         the builder’s yard and the new development at the junction with Queenborough
         Road, in the interests of safety and in accordance with policy T2 of the adopted
         Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Updated Travel Plan
16.  Prior to the first occupation of the development, an updated residential travel
     plan shall be submitted to and approved by the local planning authority. The
     approved travel plan shall be actively implemented for a minimum period from
     first occupation of the development until 1 year after final occupation.
         REASON: In the interests of reducing the need to travel by car and promoting
         sustainable development and transport in accordance with policies D2 and T2 of
         the adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Residential Travel Information Pack
17.  Prior to the first occupation of each dwelling, a Residential Travel Information
     Pack for sustainable transport to each dwelling shall be provided the details of
     such a Pack shall be submitted to and approved by the local planning authority
     but shall include six one day travel vouchers for use with the relevant local public
     transport operator).
         REASON: In the interests of reducing the need to travel by car and promoting
         sustainable development and transport in accordance with policies D2 and T2 of
         the adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
Appeal Decision 6005664


Cycle Parking
18.   The reserved matters for the approval of layout, appearance and scale shall
      include details of bicycle and powered two wheel storage facilities for each
      dwelling.
         The bicycle and powered two wheel storage facilities shall be constructed and
         made available for such purposes in accordance with the approved scheme and
         retained as such thereafter.
         REASON: In the interests of highway safety and to ensure that adequate car
         parking provision is available in accordance with policies D2 and T2 of the
         adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Surface Water Drainage Scheme
19.   No development except demolition shall take place until a detailed surface water
      drainage scheme for the site, based on sustainable drainage principles and an
      assessment of the hydrological and hydro geological context of the
      development, has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
      planning authority. The scheme shall include:
             a) Verification of the suitability of infiltration of surface water for the
                 development. This should be based on infiltration tests that have been
                 undertaken in found in chapter 25.3 of The CIRIA SuDS Manual C753.
             b) Limiting discharge rates to 9.2l/s for all storm events up to and including
                 the 1 in 100 year plus 45% allowance for climate change storm event
                 subject to agreement with the relevant third party/all relevant permissions
                 to discharge from the site into any outfall should be demonstrated.
             c) Provide sufficient storage to ensure no off site flooding as a result of the
                 development during all storm events up to and including the 1 in 100 year
                 plus 45% climate change event.
             d) Demonstrate that all storage features can half empty within 24 hours for
                 the 1 in 30 plus 45% climate change critical storm event.
             e) Final modelling and calculations for all areas of the drainage system.
             f) The appropriate level of treatment for all runoff leaving the site, in line with
                 the Simple Index Approach in chapter 26 of the CIRIA SuDS Manual
                 C753. Permeable paving must be provided within the shared roads and
                 driveways.
             g) Detailed engineering drawings of each component of the drainage
                 scheme.
             h) A final drainage plan which details exceedance and conveyance routes,
                 FFL and ground levels, and location and sizing of any drainage features.
             i) An updated drainage strategy incorporating all of the above bullet points
                 including matters already approved and highlighting any changes to the
                 previously approved strategy.
         The scheme shall subsequently be implemented prior to occupation. It should be
         noted that all outline applications are subject to the most up to date design
         criteria held by the LLFA.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
Appeal Decision 6005664


         REASON:
         • To prevent flooding by ensuring the satisfactory storage of/disposal of
           surface water from the site.
         • To ensure the effective operation of SuDS features over the lifetime of the
           development.
         • To provide mitigation of any environmental harm which may be caused to the
           local water environment.
         • Failure to provide the above required information before commencement of
           works may result in a system being installed that is not sufficient to deal with
           surface water occurring during rainfall events and may lead to increased
           flood risk and pollution hazard from the site.
         • In accordance with policy D5 of the adopted Maldon District Local
           Development Plan.

Maintenance Plan for Surface Water Drainage Scheme
20.   Prior to the first occupation of the development a maintenance plan detailing the
      maintenance arrangements including who is responsible for different elements of
      the surface water drainage system and the maintenance activities/frequencies,
      shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
      Should any part be maintainable by a management company, details of long
      term funding arrangements shall be provided.
         REASON: To ensure appropriate maintenance arrangements are put in place to
         enable the surface water drainage system to function as intended to ensure
         mitigation against flood risk. Failure to provide the above required information
         prior to occupation may result in the installation of a system that is not properly
         maintained and may increase flood risk or pollution hazard from the site. In
         accordance with policy D5 of the adopted Maldon District Local Development
         Plan.

Foul Drainage Strategy
21.   No development shall commence until details of the proposed foul drainage has
      been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. This
      should identify the connection point to the 225mm sewer at MH7003 located in
      Queenborough Road at National Grid reference (NGR) TL 95744 00023. The
      foul water drainage works shall have been carried out in accordance with the
      approved scheme.
         REASON: To reduce the impacts of flooding and potential pollution risk in
         accordance with policy D5 of the adopted Maldon District Local Development
         Plan.

Biodiversity Construction Environmental Management Plan
22.   A Construction Environmental Management Plan (CEMP: Biodiversity) shall be
      submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The CEMP
      (Biodiversity) shall include the following:
              a) Risk assessment of potentially damaging construction activities.
              b) Identification of “biodiversity protection zones”.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   18
Appeal Decision 6005664


             c) Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working
                practices) to avoid or reduce impacts during construction (may be
                provided as a set of method statements).
             d) The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
                features.
             e) The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be
                present on site to oversee works.
             f) Responsible persons and lines of communication.
             g) The role and responsibilities on site of an ecological clerk of works
                (ECoW) or similarly competent person.
             h) Use of protective fences, exclusion barriers and warning signs.
         The approved CEMP: Biodiversity shall be adhered to and implemented
         throughout the construction period strictly in accordance with the approved
         details.
         REASON: To conserve protected and Priority species and allow the LPA to
         discharge its duties under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
         2017 (as amended), the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and s40
         of the NERC Act 2006 (as amended), and in accordance with policy N2 of the
         adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy
23.   Prior to the commencement of development, a Biodiversity Enhancement
      Strategy for protected, Priority and threatened species, prepared by a suitably
      qualified ecologist in line with the recommendations of the (Ecology Impact
      Assessment, FPCR Ltd, February 2025), shall be submitted to and approved in
      writing by the local planning authority. The content of the Biodiversity
      Enhancement Strategy shall include the following:
            a) Purpose and conservation objectives for the proposed enhancement
                measures;
            b) detailed designs or product descriptions to achieve stated objectives;
            c) locations of proposed enhancement measures by appropriate maps and
                plans (where relevant);
            d) persons responsible for implementing the enhancement measures; and
            e) details of initial aftercare and long-term maintenance (where relevant).
         The works shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details shall
         be retained in that manner thereafter.
         REASON: To enhance protected, Priority and threatened species and allow the
         LPA to discharge its duties under paragraph 187d of the NPPF (2024) and s40
         of the NERC Act 2006 (as amended), and in accordance with policy N2 of the
         adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Lighting Strategy
24.   Prior to the first occupation of the development, a “lighting design strategy for
      biodiversity” in accordance with Guidance Note 08/23 (Institute of Lighting
      Professionals) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
      planning authority. The strategy shall:


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   19
Appeal Decision 6005664


             a) identify those areas/features on site that are particularly sensitive for bats
                and that are likely to cause disturbance in or around their breeding sites
                and resting places or along important routes used to access key areas of
                their territory, for example, for foraging; and
             b) show how and where external lighting will be installed (through provision
                of appropriate lighting contour plans and technical specifications) so that it
                can be clearly demonstrated that areas to be lit will not disturb or prevent
                the above species using their territory or having access to their breeding
                sites and resting places.
         All external lighting shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and
         locations set out in the scheme and maintained thereafter in accordance with the
         scheme. Under no circumstances should any other external lighting be installed
         without prior consent from the local planning authority.
         REASON: To allow the LPA to discharge its duties under the Conservation of
         Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended), the Wildlife &
         Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and s40 of the NERC Act 2006 (as
         amended), and in accordance with policy N2 of the adopted Maldon District
         Local Development Plan.

Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan
25.   Prior to the first occupation of the development, a Habitat Management and
      Monitoring Plan (HMMP) for significant on-site enhancements, prepared in
      accordance with the approved Biodiversity Gain Plan shall be submitted to and
      approved in writing by the local planning authority, this shall include:
      a)      the roles and responsibilities of the people or organisation(s) delivering
              the HMMP;
      b)      the planned habitat creation and enhancement works to create or
              improve habitat to achieve the on-site and off-site significant
              enhancements in accordance with the approved Biodiversity Gain
              Plan;
      c)      the management measures to maintain habitat in accordance with the
              approved Biodiversity Gain Plan for a period of 30 years from the
              completion of development;
      d)      the monitoring methodology in respect of the created or enhanced
              habitat to be submitted in writing to the local planning authority; and
      e)      details of the content of monitoring reports to be submitted in writing to
              the local planning authority, including details of adaptive management
              which will be undertaken to ensure the aims and objectives of the
              Biodiversity Gain Plan are achieved.
      Notice in writing shall be given to the Council when the initial enhancements, as
      set in the HMMP, have been implemented; and habitat creation and
      enhancement works, as set out in the HMMP, have been completed after 30
      years.
      The created and/or enhanced habitat shall be managed and maintained in
      accordance with the approved HMMP.

         REASON: To allow the LPA to discharge its duties under the Conservation of
         Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended), the Wildlife &
         Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and s40 of the NERC Act 2006 (as



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   20
Appeal Decision 6005664


         amended), and in accordance with policy N2 of the adopted Maldon District
         Local Development Plan.

Acoustic Fence
26.  The reserved matters for the approval of layout, scale and appearance shall
     include details of the site access road and the design of any associated acoustic
     fence that shall be located within the site. The submitted details shall include an
     assessment of noise arising from traffic accessing the development upon
     existing noise sensitive receptors adjacent to the site such that the free-field
     sound levels at a location external to any bedroom or living room window,
     assessed at a distance 1m perpendicular to the centre of the window do not
     exceed the following values:

         Living rooms – 50 dB LAeq,0700-2300hrs
         Bedrooms – 50 dB LAeq,0700-2300hrs and 45 dB LAeq,2300-0700hrs; 60dB
         LAFmax,2300-0700 (more than 10-15 times per night).
         Prior to the first occupation of the development, the acoustic fence as approved
         through the reserved matters shall be installed and shall then be maintained and
         retained in its approved location at all times thereafter.
         REASON: To ensure the amenities of the occupiers of 48 Queensborough Road
         are not subject to excessive noise and disturbance from activity and passing
         traffic using the access road in accordance with policy D1 of the adopted Maldon
         District Local Development Plan.

Archaeology
27.  No development or preliminary groundworks of any kind shall take place until:
    •    Part 1 – A programme of archaeological investigation has been secured in
         accordance with a written scheme of investigation which has been submitted by
         the applicant and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
    •    Part 2 – The completion of the programme of archaeological evaluation identified
         in the WSI defined in Part 1 and has been confirmed in writing by the local
         planning authority’s archaeological advisors.
    •    Part 3 – A mitigation strategy detailing the excavation / preservation strategy has
         been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority
         following the completion of the archaeological evaluation.
    •    Part 4 – The satisfactory completion of fieldwork, as detailed in the mitigation
         strategy in Part 3 has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
         planning authority.
    •    Part 5 – The applicant has submitted a post excavation assessment which has
         been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. This
         shall be done within 6 months of the date of completion of the archaeological
         fieldwork.
    •    Part 6 – Suitable provision has been for the completion of post excavation
         analysis, preparation of a full site archive and report ready for deposition at the
         local museum, and submission of a publication report.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   21
Appeal Decision 6005664


         REASON: To ensure that investigation and recording of any remains takes place
         prior to commencement of development in accordance with policy D3 of the
         adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Phase 2 Contamination and Risk Assessment
28.  No development shall commence until a phase 2 intrusive site investigation and
     risk assessment has been carried out and the findings submitted to and
     approved in writing with the local planning authority. The report of the findings
     must include:
         1. A survey of the extent, scale and nature of contamination;
         2. An assessment of the potential risks to:
            a) Human health
            b) Property (existing or proposed) including buildings, crops, livestock, etc,
               woodland and service lines and pipes,
            c) Adjoining land
            d) Groundwaters and surface waters
            e) Ecological systems
            f) Archaeological sites and ancient monuments
         An appraisal of the remediation options shall include timescales and phasing of
         remediation works. This shall be conducted in accordance with the Essex
         Contaminated Land Consortium’s ‘Land Affected by Contamination: Technical
         Guidance for Applicants and Developers’ and the Environment Agency’s ‘Land
         Contamination Risk Management’ guidance.
         REASON: To ensure that risks from land contamination to the future users of the
         land and neighbouring land are minimised, together with those to controlled
         waters, property and ecological systems, and to ensure that the development
         can be carried out safely without unacceptable risks to workers, neighbours and
         other offsite receptors in accordance with policies D1 and D2 of the adopted
         Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
29.  The reserved matters for the approval of layout and appearance shall include
     details of energy efficient and renewable energy installations for each dwelling.
         The energy efficient and renewable energy installations as approved shall be
         provided prior to the first occupation of each dwelling they serve and shall be
         permanently maintained and retained at all times thereafter.
         REASON: In the interests of residential amenity and to ensure that the
         development can be integrated within its immediate surroundings in accordance
         with policies D1 and D2 of the adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Refuse and Recycling
30.  The reserved matters for the approval of layout and appearance shall include full
     details of the number, size, location, design and materials of bin and recycling
     stores to serve the development, together with details of the means of access to
     bin and recycling stores for residents and refuse operatives, including collection
     points if necessary.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   22
Appeal Decision 6005664


         The bin and recycling stores as approved shall be provided prior to the first
         occupation of each dwelling and shall be constructed and permanently retained
         at all times thereafter.
         REASON: In the interests of residential amenity and to ensure that the
         development can be integrated within its immediate surroundings in accordance
         with policies D1 and D2 of the adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Superfast Broadband Strategy
31.  No development shall commence until a strategy to facilitate superfast
     broadband for future occupants of the site has been submitted to and approved
     in writing by the local planning authority. The strategy shall seek to ensure that
     upon occupation of a dwelling, either a landline or ducting to facilitate the
     provision of a broadband service to that dwelling from a site-wide network, is in
     place and provided as part of the initial highway works and in the construction of
     frontage thresholds to dwellings that abut the highway, unless evidence is put
     forward and agreed in writing by the local planning authority that technological
     advances for the provision of a broadband service for the majority of potential
     customers will no longer necessitate below ground infrastructure. The
     development of the site shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
     strategy.
         REASON: In order to ensure that suitable infrastructure is provided at the site for
         the benefit of occupiers, in accordance with paragraph 119 of the NPPF.

Construction Environmental Management Plan
32.  No demolition or construction works shall commence until a Construction
     Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) has been submitted to and approved
     in writing by the local planning authority in writing. The CEMP should contain or
     address the following matters:
              a) Hours for the construction of the development
              b) Hours and duration of any piling operations,
              c) Location and size of on-site compounds [including the design layout of
                 any proposed temporary artificial lighting systems];
              d) Details of any temporary hardstandings;
              e) Details of temporary hoarding;
              f) Details of the method for the control of noise with reference to BS5228
                 together with a monitoring regime;
              g) Measures to reduce vibration and mitigate the impacts on sensitive
                 receptors together with a monitoring regime;
              h) Measures to reduce dust with air quality mitigation and monitoring,
              i) Measures for water management including waste water and surface water
                 discharge;
              j) A method statement for the prevention of contamination of soil and
                 groundwater and air pollution, including the storage of fuel and chemicals;
              k) Details of a procedure to deal with any unforeseen contamination, should
                 it be encountered during development;
              l) A Site Waste Management Plan,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   23
Appeal Decision 6005664


           m) Details of security lighting layout and design; and
           n) Contact details for site managers including information about community
               liaison including a method for handling and monitoring complaints.
           o) Construction vehicle routing
           p) the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors
           q) loading and unloading of plant and materials
           r) areas for storage of plant and materials used in constructing the
               development
           s) wheel and underbody washing facilities
           t) a scheme to minimise the risk of offsite flooding caused by surface water
               run-off and groundwater during construction works
         Works on site shall only take place in accordance with the approved CEMP.
         REASON: In order to minimise any adverse impacts arising from the
         construction of the development in accordance with policy D1 and D2 of the
         adopted Maldon District Local Development Plan.

Informative

Biodiversity Net Gain
The effect of paragraph 13 of Schedule 7A to the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
is that planning permission granted for the development of land in England is deemed
to have been granted subject to the condition “(the biodiversity gain condition”) that
development may not begin unless:
           a) a Biodiversity Gain Plan has been submitted to the planning authority,
              and
           b) the planning authority has approved the plan.
The planning authority, for the purposes of determining whether to approve a
Biodiversity Gain Plan if one is required in respect of this permission would be Maldon
District Council.
There are statutory exemptions and transitional arrangements which mean that the
biodiversity gain condition does not always apply. These are listed in paragraph 17 of
Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and the Biodiversity Gain
Requirements (Exemptions) Regulations 2024.
Based on the information available this permission is considered to be one which will
require the approval of a biodiversity gain plan before development is begun because
none of the statutory exemptions or transitional arrangements are considered to apply.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   24
Appeal Decision 6005664


APPEARANCES

FOR THE APPELLANT: Christian Hawley (of No 5 Chambers) instructed by the
appellant called:
-Gary Holliday, BA (Hons), M Phil, FLI, Director of FPCR Environment & Design Ltd –
Landscape & Visual matters
-James Healey, BSc (Hons), MIOA, Director of Peninsula Acoustics – Noise
-Jason Tait, BA (Hons), DipTP, MRTPI, Director of Planning Prospects Ltd – Planning

FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY: Kimberley Ziya (of Landmark Chambers)
called:
-John-Paul Friend BA (Hons) PGDip LA CMLI, Director of LVIA Ltd – Landscape &
Visual matters
-Sam Bryant MPhys CEng MIOA, Director of Cass Allen Associates Ltd – Noise
-Geoff Megarity BA (Hons) MRTPI, Associate at Bell Cornwell LLP – Planning

INTERESTED PARTIES:
- Cllr Adrian Fluker, elected Member for this Ward
- Mr Shalab Aggarwal, the owner/occupier of No 48 Queenborough Road


DOCUMENTS

All the Core Documents, including any documents introduced at the Inquiry itself and
the finalised S106 agreed subsequently can be found by clicking on the following link to
the relevant SharePoint file on the PINS website, at least until the end of the High Court
challenge period.

MajorCasework - Documents - 6005664 - All Documents




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   25
