Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by D R Kay BA Dip.Arch RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005913
Land to Rear of 1A Fancy Road, Poole BH12 4QZ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Oliver & Mr Stanley against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch
    and Poole Council.
•   The application Ref is P/25/04202/FUL.
•   The development proposed is Demolition of a garage and several outbuildings, and the development
    of 1 dwelling with associated bin and bike store.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of a
   garage and several outbuildings, and the development of 1 dwelling with
   associated bin and bike store, to the rear of 1A Fancy Road, Poole, Dorset BH12
   4QZ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref P/25/04202/FUL, subject
   to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr Oliver and Mr Stanley against
   Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole Council. That application is the subject of a
   different decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026, which made certain revisions to aspects of national planning
   policy. Having examined the revised Framework in respect of the matters relied on
   by the main parties, I have not reverted to the parties for their comments as to the
   effects of the revised Framework on their respective cases, as I have not found the
   changes to have significant effect on the issues within the case. I have, however,
   determined the appeal in accordance with the revised Framework.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the development on the living conditions of existing
   and future occupiers with particular regards to overlooking and privacy.
Reasons
5. The appeal site consists of a rectangular shaped parcel of land situated to the rear
   of and formed by the separation of, a portion of garden land of an existing
   bungalow at 1A Fancy Road (No 1A). The existing property has rooms within its
   roof space, served by a bedroom window in the gable which faces the appeal site,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005913


     and with a flat roofed dormer to its roof slope which faces north-east, to the rear of
     the neighbouring property at 3a Fancy Road.
6. The appeal site houses a large double garage, together with a greenhouse which
   previously served the property at No 1A. The site takes its access, via a concrete
   surfaced lane, from Fancy Road. This lane also provides vehicular access to the
   rear of properties on the adjacent Old Wareham Road. The site is enclosed by a
   mix of head height masonry walls, or head height shiplap timber fencing.
7. The proposal would introduce a pitched and hipped roofed 2-bedroom bungalow
   which would be located centrally within the plot. A parking forecourt would be
   present at its south-eastern side, taking vehicular access from the lane, whilst a
   small garden would be present to the north-western side of the proposed bungalow,
   providing external amenity space for future occupants.
8. The Council consider that due to the single storey nature of the proposal, its
   pitched and hipped roof, the location of windows within its external elevations, and
   the height and permanence of the surrounding boundary treatments, that the
   proposal would not affect the privacy or access to light of surrounding residents.
   They further consider that given the varied nature and scale of the surrounding
   properties, the proposal would be sympathetic to the character and appearance of
   the area. Having examined the evidence before me, I have no reason to find
   otherwise.
9. However, the Council find that the bedroom window within the gable wall of the
   host property at No 1A, which would face the rear living room accommodation of
   the appeal proposal, and which would overlook its garden, would represent an
   unacceptable level of overlooking with consequential loss of privacy to future
   occupants of the appeal property.
10. Having examined the evidence before me and at my visit, I find that the separation
    distance between the host dwelling’s upper floor bedroom window and the appeal
    proposal’s rear garden and primary living space would be relatively restricted.
    However, it would be little different to the situation which currently exists between
    views from this window in the host dwelling, and the living accommodation and rear
    gardens of number’s 1 and 3 Fancy Road or with number 24a Old Wareham Road.
11. Whilst the Council suggest such views would be oblique, I find that they would be
    significantly less than 45 degrees to the plane of the rear elevation of the host
    dwelling, and as such, the views would not be significantly different, relative to that
    which would be experienced by occupants of the appeal property. As the first-floor
    window to the host dwelling would be associated with a bedroom, which is a
    dormitory area, I find that the level of potential for overlooking and therefore loss of
    privacy would be likely to be significantly reduced.
12. Interactions between occupants of the host and appeal properties whilst using their
    primary living accommodation, would have adequate separation at ground level to
    maintain their privacy. Any potential noise between use of the respective garden
    areas, would be little different to that experienced currently with surrounding
    neighbouring properties, such that this would not be sufficiently harmful to warrant
    dismissal.
13. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the relationship between the upper
    floor rear window of the host dwelling and the appeal proposal would not result in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005913


     harmful levels of overlooking and loss of privacy to the future occupiers of the
     appeal proposal. It follows that I therefore find it would not be contrary to Policy
     PP27 of the Poole Local Plan (2018) (the Local Plan), which requires development
     to reflect or enhance local patterns of development and neighbouring buildings in
     terms of layout, siting, height and scale and which provides satisfactory external
     and internal amenity space for both new and existing occupiers.
Other Matters
14. I have had regard to all other matters before me and note the lack of objection to
    the proposal from occupiers of surrounding properties, and from consultees.
Habitat sites
15. The appeal site lies within the vicinity (beyond 400m but within 5km) of the Dorset
    Heathlands SPA (Special Protection Area), Dorset Heathlands Ramsar Site and the
    Dorset Heaths SAC (Special Area of Conservation) These Habitat Sites are all
    recognised for their national and international importance for nature conservation.
    They host protected priority habitats and species including Hen-harrier, Merlin,
    European nightjar, Woodlark and Dartford warbler, as well as other typical species
    of forest and heath areas.
16. The appeal site also lies within the vicinity of the Poole Harbour SPA, SSSI and
    Ramsar Site’s. These Habitat Sites are recognised for their national and
    international importance for nature conservation. They host protected priority
    habitats and species including Little egret, Eurasian spoonbill, Common shelduck,
    Pied avocet, Black-tailed godwit, Mediterranean gull, Sandwich tern and Common
    tern, as well as other typical species of tidal mudflats and saltmarshes, reedbeds,
    freshwater marshes and wet grasslands.
17. Evidence shows that these protected Habitat Sites are under significant pressure
    from an increasing number of people living nearby. As the population grows,
    urbanisation and increased visitor number effects from human pressures and
    damage caused by domestic pets have the potential to cause ongoing adverse
    effects on the protected habitats and species.
18. The Dorset Heathlands Planning Framework 2020-2025 – Supplementary Planning
    Document (SPD), sets out a strategy for the avoidance and mitigation of impacts of
    new residential development upon the Dorset Heathlands, through financial
    contributions from developers for mitigation schemes within the area. The SPD
    defines the mitigation process and contribution requirements for different forms of
    development.
19. Similarly, the Poole Harbour Recreation 2019-2024 – Supplementary Planning
    Document (SPD), sets out a strategy for the avoidance and mitigation of impacts of
    new residential development upon Poole Harbour, including tourism development,
    through financial contributions from developers for mitigation schemes within the
    area. The SPD defines the mitigation process and contribution requirements for
    different forms of development.
20. The appeal development would create an additional residential dwelling. It would,
    without mitigation and in combination with other development proposed in the area,
    be likely to have a significant effect on the nearby European Habitat sites. It would
    therefore be subject to the requirements of the SPD’s for a financial contribution


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005913


     towards mitigation. The Dorset Heathlands SPD identifies that an additional
     dwelling would require a contribution of £575 plus a 5% administration fee (subject
     to a £75 min.) for the mitigation measures, whilst the Poole Harbour SPD identifies
     a contribution figure of £187 plus a 5% admin fee (subject to a £25 min.) for the
     mitigation measures.
21. The main parties agree that a tariff style contribution towards the above-mentioned
    mitigation measures would be appropriate and would accord with the SPD’s. The
    appellant submitted a signed and dated unilateral undertaking pursuant to Section
    106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 at the time of the application. It is
    further confirmed that the appellant has paid the contributions required to mitigate
    the effects of development on the Habitat sites.
22. Natural England has been consulted as part of this appropriate assessment and is
    content that the financial contribution secured by the S106 Agreement, which aligns
    with the Council’s adopted strategy, would address the adverse effects associated
    with the proposed development and would thereby relieve pressure on the Habitat
    sites. Given their specialist knowledge, this attracts considerable weight.
23. As competent authority for the purposes of this appeal, I am satisfied that the S106
    Agreement would secure and ensure delivery of mitigation, sufficient to address the
    harm likely to be caused by the development. I therefore find that, subject to the
    proposed mitigation, the proposal would not have any harmfully adverse Likely
    Significant Effect (LSE) on the integrity of the Habitat sites, in accordance with both
    regulation 63 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 and
    with Policies PP32 and PP39 of the Local Plan.
Planning Balance
24. The Council cannot demonstrate a 5-year Housing Land Supply (5YHLS) as
    required by the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The Council
    have stated that as of 1 April 2024, they had a housing land supply figure of
    2.1years, allowing for a 20% buffer, which is an acute deficit.
25. The site is within the zone of influence of European Habitat Sites. Policy N6 of the
    Framework is therefore of relevance. However, as I have found that any LSE to
    these Habitat Sites can be adequately mitigated, and this has been secured by a
    signed and dated S106 agreement and mitigation payments have been made, it
    would comply with Policy N6, and therefore, not provide a strong reason for
    refusing the proposed development.
26. Policy S3 of the Framework identifies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S4(1) of the Framework identifies that for proposals within
    settlements, they should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
27. Having examined the relevant decision-making policies in the framework outlined in
    Policy S4(2), I find that the proposal would accord with these requirements.
    Therefore, the benefits of approving the proposal would not be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005913


28. I have also found the proposal would not result in harm to the privacy of future
    occupants of the appeal proposal. It would, therefore, accord with the development
    plan in this regard.
Conditions
29. I have had regard to the 9 conditions suggested by the Council and the comments
    provided by the appellant. Where necessary I have amended the wording, in the
    interests of precision and clarity, and in order to comply with the advice in the
    Planning Practice Guidance and the Framework.
30. In addition to the standard time limit for implementation, in the interests of certainty,
    I have attached a condition specifying the approved plans.
31. Pre-commencement conditions are necessary to establish a Construction and
    Environment Management Plan, together with Contaminated Land Risk
    Assessment, Management and Monitoring procedures, in the interest of public and
    site worker safety. The appellant has agreed these pre-commencement conditions
    following issue of a Regulation 2(4) notice.
32. I have attached conditions to secure the proposed access, turning and parking
    facilities, together with a condition for the provision of the proposed cycle parking
    and bin storage facilities, in the interest of highway and public health safety.
33. Conditions are also necessary for the control of vegetation stripping works to being
    outside of bird nesting season, and for the provision of a bee brick/hotel in the
    interests of protection and preservation of wildlife.
34. I have also attached conditions relating to the provision of porous hard surfaces in
    the interests of preventing excess surface water run-off, and for the provision of
    renewable energy sources in the interest of reducing the effects of carbon on the
    climate.
Conclusion
35. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal proposal would accord
    with the development plan, read as a whole, and that there are no material
    considerations that would justify determining other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal should be allowed.



David Kay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005913


                                           Schedule of Conditions

       1 The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
         the date of this decision.
       2 The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
         following drawings:
            Plan Reference                 Description                        Dated
            Un-numbered                    Location Plan                      17.10.25
            01 Rev A                       Proposed Block Plan                July 2025
            03 Rev A                       Proposed Site Plan                 July 2025
            04                             Proposed Plans                     July 2025
            05                             Proposed Bin & Bike Store          July 2025
       3 Prior to commencement of any works on site, including any demolition works,
         a Construction and Environment Management Plan (CEMP) must be
         submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and shall
         be implemented and remain in place throughout the development. The CEMP
         shall address at least the following matters: Control of Air Quality, Dust, Water
         Quality, Lighting, Noise and Vibration, Pollution Prevention and Control, and
         Monitoring Arrangements. Construction working hours shall be between 8am
         to 6pm Monday to Friday and between 8am to 1pm on Saturdays. There shall
         be no working on Sundays, Public or Bank Holidays. There shall be no burning
         of materials on site.
       4 No development shall commence until an assessment of the risks posed by
         any contamination shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by the
         local planning authority. This assessment must be undertaken by a suitably
         qualified contaminated land practitioner, in accordance with British Standard
         BS 10175: Investigation of potentially contaminated sites - Code of Practice
         and the Environment Agency - Model Procedures for the Management of Land
         Contamination (CLR 11) (or equivalent British Standard and Model Procedures
         if replaced), and shall assess any contamination on the site, whether or not it
         originates on the site.
            The assessment shall include:
                      i. a survey of the extent, scale and nature of contamination; and
                     ii. the potential risks to:
                            1. human health;
                            2. property (existing or proposed) including buildings, crops,
                                livestock, pets, woodland and service lines and pipes;
                            3. adjoining land;
                            4. ground waters and surface waters;
                            5. ecological systems; and
                            6. archaeological sites and ancient monuments.
       5 No development shall take place where (following the risk assessment) land
         affected by contamination is found which poses risks identified as
         unacceptable in the risk assessment, until a detailed remediation scheme shall
         have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
         The scheme shall include an appraisal of remediation options, identification of
         the preferred option(s), the proposed remediation objectives and remediation
         criteria, and a description and programme of the works to be undertaken
         including the verification plan. The remediation scheme shall be sufficiently

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       6
Appeal Decision 6005913


            detailed and thorough to ensure that upon completion the site will not qualify
            as contaminated land under Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990
            in relation to its intended use. The approved remediation scheme shall be
            carried out and upon completion a verification report by a suitably qualified
            contaminated land practitioner shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
            the local planning authority before the development is occupied.
       6 Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the
         approved development that was not previously identified shall be reported
         immediately to the local planning authority. Development on the part of the site
         affected shall be suspended and a risk assessment carried out and submitted
         to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. Where unacceptable
         risks are found remediation and verification schemes shall be submitted to and
         approved in writing by the local planning authority. These approved schemes
         shall be carried out before the development is resumed or continued.
       7 The development hereby permitted shall not be brought into use until the
         access, turning space, vehicle parking and cycle parking shown on the
         approved drawings have been constructed, and these shall thereafter be
         retained and kept available for those purposes at all times thereafter.
       8 Prior to occupation of the development hereby permitted, at least one bee
         brick/hotel, must be installed, located in a warm sunny spot, south facing, with
         no vegetation in front of it. Ideally placed at least 1 metre from the ground with
         no upward limit. It shall be retained thereafter.
       9 No works for the clearance of vegetation on the site should take place during
         the bird breeding season of 1st March to 31st August inclusive, unless it can
         be sufficiently determined and confirmed in writing, by a qualified ecologist,
         that no nesting birds are present on the site.
       10 Notwithstanding the submitted plans, prior to the commencement of any
          construction works above the ground floor slab level of the new dwelling
          hereby approved, details of the use of on-site renewable energy sources to
          meet a minimum of 10% of predicted energy use of the residential
          development, shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local
          Planning Authority. The approved renewable energy sources shall
          subsequently be implemented, retained and maintained thereafter.
       11 Prior to the commencement of landscaping works, a scheme detailing the
          provision of porous materials for use in all ground hard surfaces, or for
          provision to be made to direct run-off water from the hard surfaces to a
          permeable or porous area or surface within the site, shall be submitted to and
          approved in writing by the local planning authority. The hard surfaces shall be
          installed in accordance with the approved scheme and shall be retained as
          such thereafter.
       12 Prior to the occupation of the dwelling hereby approved, the cycle parking and
          bin storage facilities, indicated on approved drawing 05 - Proposed Bin & Bike
          Store shall be provided. These facilities shall be permanently retained and
          maintained for those purposes thereafter.
                                           *** End of Schedule***



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     7
