Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by Carla Livingstone MA(SocSci) (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6005528
Former Gardens to Knells House, The Knells, Carlisle CA6 4JG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Kyngesheen Estates Ltd, against the decision of Cumberland Council.
•    The application Ref is 24/0230.
•    The development proposed is the development of 6 detached dwellings on the former gardens to
     Knells House.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     The appellant Kyngesheen Estates Ltd has submitted an application for an award
       of costs against Cumberland Council; this is subject to a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework ('the Framework') on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
   amendments against the December 2024 version before the parties for their
   evidence. Although there have been significant amendments to its layout and
   formatting such that previously cited paragraph references are no longer relevant,
   other changes are not substantive or determinative to the outcome of this appeal. I
   have therefore not gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the proposed development is in a suitable location
       having regard to the housing policies of the development plan.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site is located within The Knells, which is a small settlement,
       comprising a sporadic group of dwellings, which include barn conversions, in the
       former garden ground of The Knells country house; a former mansion that is now
       in use as a residential care home.
6.     The proposal is for the erection of six detached dwellings within the former garden
       ground of The Knells, which is now overgrown. The application site is not on land
       allocated for housing and as such it falls to be considered against Policy HO 2 of
       the Carlisle District Local Plan 2015-2030 (CDLP). In order to ensure the delivery
       of sustainable development and support the vitality of communities the Council
       supports housing on unallocated sites only where it meets the five criteria listed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005528


         under Policy HO 2 of the CDLP. The Council considers that the proposal would
         conflict with criteria 1,2,3 and 4 of Policy HO 2.
7.       Criterion 1 requires that the scale and design of the proposed development is
         appropriate to the scale, form, function and character of the existing settlement.
         The proposed scheme comprises six detached dwellings arranged around a
         central courtyard. This layout is at odds with the established development in the
         area which is characterised by a more informal organic pattern that reflects
         incremental development over time. Six additional dwellings would result in a
         substantial increase in the density of the built environment in the vicinity, the scale
         of which would not be comfortably accommodated within the existing settlement
         which, as detailed above, is characterised by development spread over a large
         area.
8.       The number of dwellings proposed, coupled with their more formal layout would
         not be appropriate addition to the group of dwellings at the Knells in regard to
         scale, form, function and character of the existing settlement. As such the appeal
         scheme would conflict with Criterion 1 of Policy HO 2 of the CDLP in this regard.
9.       The Council raised no concerns regarding the scale and design of the dwellings
         themselves. Based on the submitted plans there is no reason to disagree with the
         Council. However, an absence of harm in this regard is a neutral factor weighing
         neither for nor against the development. Furthermore, it does not resolve my
         concerns in regard to the scale and layout of the development as a whole in
         relation to The Knells.
10. Criterion 2 requires that the scale and nature of the development will enhance or
    maintain the vitality of the rural community within the settlement where the housing
    is proposed. There are no community services or facilities within The Knells, such
    as schools, shops, or public houses that would benefit from additional dwellings
    within the settlement. Therefore, the proposal would conflict with Criterion 2.
11. Criterion 3 requires that housing development sites on the edge of settlements
    should be well contained within existing landscape features, be physically
    connected, integrate with the settlement, and not lead to an unacceptable intrusion
    into open countryside. There is debate within the main parties in relation to the
    status of the appeal site. The Council considered it as open countryside and the
    appellant states that as the appeal site was originally garden ground associated
    with Knells House it should be considered as previously developed land. Case
    law1 has established that land within the curtilage of a permanent structure that is
    not in a built up area can be considered as previously developed land.
12. The appeal site is a large area of overgrown grasses and weeds with a number of
    mature trees. The area is not maintained as typical garden ground, and it appears
    to be separated from Knells House due to past housing developments. Still, there
    is no evidence before me to suggest that the use of the land has changed, and it is
    reasonable to consider it as previously developed land.
13. Notwithstanding this, the appeal site is formed of part of a large open area and is
    not contained within existing landscape features. Furthermore, while the appeal
    site shared a boundary with existing housing, the development does not integrate
    with the existing settlement as it forms a separate group with a shared access off

1
    Dartford Borough Council -v- SSCLG and ors. [2017] EWCA Civ 141 (Case No:C1/2016/1664


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6005528


       the highway. As such the proposal conflicts with Criterion 3. My concerns in regard
       to this matter are not resolved by proposed boundary treatments or planting.
       Furthermore, the site is not within a Green Belt therefore Grey Belt considerations
       do not apply in this instance.
14. Criterion 4 supports housing development rural areas where there are either
    services in the village where the housing is being proposed, or there is good
    access to one or more other villages with services, or to the larger settlements of
    Carlisle, Brampton and Longtown.
15. As detailed above there are no services in the existing settlement. The closest
    village is Houghton where there are a number of facilities, including schools, and a
    village store and post office. This settlement is approximately a 20min walk away,
    which is a significant distance for children and the elderly. In addition, there is no
    cycle or footpath for a significant portion of the route linking the appeal site to
    Houghton; which is also unlit in places. This would make traveling from the appeal
    site to Houghton unsafe for most pedestrians and cyclists, particularly in the hours
    of darkness. Although it is acknowledged that there is a pedestrian crossing over
    the A689, this does not resolve my concerns regarding an absence of a lit footpath
    for the entirety of the route.
16. In terms of public transport, the supporting information states that there is a bus
    stop on the A696 close to the appeal site. However, at the time of my site visit I did
    not see a formal bus stop or sign on the A696 close to the appeal site. There are
    bus stops in Houghton, but as detailed above there is no pedestrian link from the
    appeal site to this settlement, which is at least a kilometre away.
17. My attention has also been drawn to a bus service that runs past the appeal site
    twice a week, but there is no evidence before me that this is a regular or formal
    arrangement, or that the bus would stop at the appeal site.
18. Based on the evidence before me there are no bus or other public transport links
    within the group or, bearing in mind a lack of paved footpaths, within an easily
    walkable distance from the appeal site. It is therefore highly likely that future
    occupants would access shops, services and facilities by private car rather than
    walking, cycling or via public transport as part of their everyday life. Therefore, in
    this instance, it cannot be considered that there is good access from the appeal
    site to other settlements with services.
19. For the reasons detailed above the proposed development is not in a suitable
    location having regard to the housing policies of the development plan. Therefore,
    it would conflict with Policy HO 2 of the CDLP which defines the Council’s spatial
    strategy and supports housing on unallocated sites only in specific circumstances.
20. The requirements of Policy HO 2 are consistent with the Framework, which
    requires that development proposals that would generate a significant amount of
    movement, in the context of the area within which they would be situated, should
    be in locations which are sustainable.
Other Matters
21. I note the content of several letters of support in relation to the proposed scheme,
    some of the points raised are addressed in the reasons section above. It is
    acknowledged that the appeal site would be an attractive place to live and the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005528


        scheme may provide high quality housing. However, given the scale of the
        development I afford only limited weight to these benefits which would be largely
        limited to future occupants. While the appellant and several representations assert
        that the proposed scheme would improve the appearance of the appeal site, I’m
        not certain that the development of the site for housing is the only way to achieve
        this.
22. Several representations highlight the good reputation of the builder, but this is not
    a planning matter.
23. My attention has been drawn to an approval for the conversion of farm buildings
    within The Knells to eight dwellings2. The conversion of existing buildings brings a
    different set of considerations when compared to new-build developments. Where
    sustainable travel requirements are balanced against the benefits of conversion. In
    addition, based on the evidence before me I am not certain that this scheme was
    considered against the same development plan, as such I cannot be certain that
    the circumstances are the same as the scheme before me.
24. I also note planning permission was granted for four dwellings in a rural paddock3.
    Based on the evidence before me this development site was adjacent to a
    forthcoming urban fringe development, which future occupants could travel to on
    foot. This is different to the appeal scheme which is not connected to neighbouring
    development, or nearby settlements by a suitable footpath.
25. The Government is seeking to significantly boost the supply of housing. It is
    recognised that small sites can make an important contribution to the Council’s
    housing supply. Although the proposed development is for just six dwellings, this
    would contribute positively to the Council’s housing land supply and would provide
    social and economic benefits. As a windfall site on what is currently unused
    garden ground the development would result in a more efficient use of the land. It
    is also acknowledged that small sites can be delivered quickly and efficiently; and
    they also support small house building businesses. In this instance the
    development would provide high quality housing, which is an important factor in
    addressing climate change. There would also be economic benefits in terms of the
    generation of economic activity during the construction of the houses and the
    provision of homes to residents who would contribute to the local economy. Still,
    due to the small scale of the proposed development, these benefits would be
    moderate.
26. The Council raised no concerns in regard to the scale and design of the houses
    themselves, residential amenity, highway safety in regard to the proposed access,
    trees and nutrient neutrality; as well as the effect of the development on the
    Hadrian’s Wall World Heritage Site buffer zone. Based on the evidence before me
    I have no reason to disagree with the Council on these matters. Nonetheless, an
    absence of harm in these respects is a neutral factor weighing neither for nor
    against the development.
27. Cumulatively, while the other considerations put forward in favour of the proposed
    development have moderate weight, they do not outweigh the significant harm that
    would result from the identified conflicts with the Development Plan which includes
    the requirement that development is located in sustainable locations, with the aim

2
    12/0768
3
    20/0692


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005528


       that future occupants do not rely on the private car and have a genuine choice of
       transport modes for residents.
Conclusion
28. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
29. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



Carla Livingstone
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
