Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 July 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005119
Galowras Farm, St Ewe, St Austell, Cornwall, PL26 6EW
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs P Whitelaw against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•      The application Ref is PA25/00620.
•      The development proposed is the redesign of the dwelling permitted under extant planning
       permission referenced PA22/08946.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
         was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
         parties with an opportunity to provide comments on the new Framework as part of
         the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
         decision.
Main Issue
3.       Based on the Council’s decision notice, the main issue is whether the proposed
         development would be in a suitable location, taking account of the Council’s spatial
         strategy and the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
         area, including the scenic beauty of the Cornwall National Landscape.
Reasons
4.       The appeal site forms part of the open countryside and is therefore subject to the
         provisions of Policy 7 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030
         (the LP).
5.       Policy 7 sets out the circumstances in which housing in the countryside could be
         acceptable. Part 1 states that replacement dwellings may be appropriate. In this
         instance, the site benefits from an extant planning permission to construct a small
         one and a half storey, two bedroom dwelling1. While permission has been
         implemented, it is apparent that the dwelling has not been constructed. The
         proposal does not technically therefore constitute a replacement dwelling.
6.       However, even if one were to consider this matter further, the policy clearly
         requires that a replacement dwelling be broadly comparable in size, scale and bulk

1
    Council ref: PA22/08946

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005119


       to the home being replaced. In this instance, the proposal would clearly be much
       larger than the permitted scheme, both in terms of floorspace and overall mass,
       and therefore it would inevitably fail against this requirement.
7.     The final aspect of LP Policy 7(1) is to require new homes to be of an appropriate
       character for their location. This requirement is also replicated within other design
       related policies within the LP. In this instance, the appeal site is located in a highly
       rural area which is predominantly characterised by a gently rolling landscape
       which contains a scattering of buildings that are generally formed of traditional
       materials, including stone or rendered walls and slate roofs.
8.     The proposal before me would make significant use of metal within the roof and for
       part of the cladding, while aluminium would be utilised for the windows and roof
       lights. There would also be extensive areas of glazing, particularly within the
       southern elevation, and sliding shutter panels. In essence, despite the use of stone
       and wood for part of the exterior, it is abundantly clear from the approved plans
       that the proposed dwelling would have a highly modern appearance.
9.     While such designs are not harmful in all circumstances, it is obvious that the
       appearance of the dwelling in this instance would be completely at odds with the
       predominant character of the rural surroundings. Indeed, its appearance would be
       quite different to rural barns and the like where use of metal as an external
       material is common. It would therefore be seen as being incongruous and highly
       out of place, and as such, it would therefore inevitably detract from the appearance
       of the area to a significant extent.
10. The appeal site is situated at the corner of a lane in a highly visible location. It is
    also apparent that there is a public right of way close to the site. As a result, the
    described harm would be readily apparent from public vantage points.
11. It is also notable that the site forms part of the Cornwall National Landscape (the
    NL). Policy N4 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be placed
    on the importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of such areas.
    Furthermore, the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023 requires decision
    makers to actively seek to further the statutory purposes of NL’s. Given the harm
    to character and appearance that I have already described, it is inevitable that I
    must also conclude that the proposal would also harm the scenic beauty of the NL.
    The fact that the site is close to the edge of the boundary of the NL does not
    reduce this harm in any meaningful way.
12. In contrast, while the previously permitted dwelling would also contain floor to
    ceiling glazing, it would have a much more subtle appearance overall, including by
    having a less modern design and by being more sympathetic to the rural character
    of the area. In particular, the exterior of the approved dwelling would be
    predominantly formed of timber, while there would also be a slate roof. Moreover,
    the much larger size of the proposed dwelling would mean that it would be a more
    obvious and intrusive feature during the hours of darkness than the permitted
    scheme, despite the reduced glazing on the western elevation. The proposed
    sliding shutters would mitigate this impact to some degree but not sufficiently to
    avoid resulting in additional harm.
13. As such, whether one is assessing the proposed development before me in
    isolation, or within the context of the fallback position, it would lead to an
    unacceptable level of harm. I do acknowledge that the permitted scheme would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005119


         lead to domestic paraphernalia, such as patio furniture, being more visible from the
         lane compared to the proposed scheme. In addition, the permitted scheme
         includes the provision of a septic tank in an adjacent field. However, these aspects
         are heavily outweighed by other considerations when comparing the two designs
         overall.
14. In conclusion, the proposal would not be in a suitable location, taking account of
    development plan policies and its effect on character and appearance, including
    the scenic beauty of the NL. It would therefore conflict with LP Policies 2, 7, 12 and
    23 as well as Policy C1(7) of the Climate Emergency Development Plan
    Document. Taken together, the relevant aspects of these policies seek to ensure
    that new housing is built in sustainable locations and that it is well designed and
    conserves character and appearance. There would also be conflict with the
    aspects of the Cornwall Design Guide (2021) which also seek development
    proposals to be well designed.
Other Matters
15. The Council’s second reason for refusal sets out that the proposal has not been
    secured as self build and that the statutory requirements for biodiversity net gain
    therefore apply. I note that the appellant has now completed the Council’s self
    build pro-forma. Therefore, while the Council has noted that the description of
    development would also need to be updated to include reference to self build, their
    appeal statement seems to suggest that the completion of the relevant pro-forma
    means that the issue is not a matter of dispute between the parties.
16. I have some concerns that the pro-forma is not, in itself, sufficient to secure the
    proposed dwelling as self build. However, it is likely that this matter could have
    been resolved had I otherwise been minded to allow the appeal. The issue is
    therefore not a determinative feature of my decision.
17. The site falls within the zone of influence of the Fal and Helford Special Area of
    Conservation. A financial contribution has been secured to mitigate the impacts of
    the proposal upon the SAC. However, as I am dismissing the appeal for other
    reasons, an appropriate assessment is not required in this instance.
18. The appellant has sought to draw my attention to several other appeal decisions.
    Some of these relate to the way in which the proposal could be considered in
    relation to paragraph 11(d) of the previous version of the Framework. Clearly such
    arguments are no longer of relevance, and I have instead given careful
    consideration to the comments provided in relation to the updated Framework. A
    further appeal decision was cited in relation to the impact of development on the
    NL2. However, the Inspector in that appeal noted that development must be
    sympathetic and well designed. I have set out why that would not be the case in
    relation to the scheme before me.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
19. The proposed development would result in harm in relation to its location and its
    effect on character and appearance, including the scenic beauty of the NL. In this
    instance the harm would be significant and enduring. The proposal would therefore
    conflict with the development plan when considered as a whole. The provision of a

2
    Appeal ref: APP/D0840/W/20/3261477


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005119


       single self build dwelling would add to local housing stock and would provide
       economic benefits, both during the construction phase and post occupation. Other
       benefits, when compared to the fallback position, include greater sustainability
       features, an accessible layout, work from home space and the provision of a
       sewerage treatment plant. However, given the small scale nature of development,
       the benefits would only be limited, even when considered in combination. As such,
       the harm substantially outweighs the benefits in this case.
20. Policy S5 of the Framework sets out various principles in relation to development
    outside of settlements. Part (c) of the policy allows for the replacement of an
    existing building. Even if this clause were considered to be activated in this
    instance, the proposal would not conform with it on the basis that the proposed
    dwelling would clearly be disproportionately larger than the previously permitted
    dwelling which has not yet been built.
21. It is noted that the Council cannot currently demonstrate a five year supply of sites.
    As such, Policy S5(j)(i) of the Framework must be considered. However, in such
    circumstances, the policy sets out that it applies to development schemes that
    would be physically well related to an existing settlement. Given the location of the
    appeal site within the open countryside, that clearly would not be the case here.
22. Accordingly, I find that there are no material considerations, either individually or in
    combination, that outweigh the identified harm and associated development plan
    conflict. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
