Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by S Sharp BSc(Hons) BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005740
18 Church Road, Caversham, Reading RG4 7AD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Williams against the decision of Reading Borough Council.
•    The application reference is PL/25/1597.
•    The development proposed is the construction of a 1.5-storey side extension and a double-storey
     rear extension, and the removal of a masonry upstand/short brick wall and replacing it with glass
     guarding and the regrading of existing garden steps.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the construction of a
       1.5-storey side extension and a double-storey rear extension, and the removal of a
       masonry upstand/short brick wall and replacing it with glass guarding and the
       regrading of existing garden steps, at 18 Church Road, Caversham, Reading RG4
       7AD in accordance with the terms of the application, reference PL/25/1597,
       subject to the conditions set out in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have made a minor amendment to the description of the development taken from
       the application form in the interests of clarity. The elements describing the
       proposed development remain unaltered.
3.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
       appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
       consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework. References hereafter are to
       the August 2026 version.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
           •    the character and appearance of the host dwelling and the St. Peter’s
                Conservation Area; and,
           •    protected species, specifically bats.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal site (the site) lies within the St. Peter’s Conservation Area (CA). It
       comprises of a detached dwelling within a row of other dwellings on the north side

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005740


       of the River Thames. The Council’s Conservation Area Appraisal (CAA) identifies
       the common two-storey built form, coherent use of materials, and the treed setting
       provided by the views of them from the Thames Promenade, as values that
       contribute to the area’s character and appearance and the CA’s significance.
6.     The host dwelling is not identified in the CAA as being a building of townscape
       merit. Overall, it is unobtrusive, and its form, siting and soft landscaped grounds
       open to the River Thames are complementary to the character and appearance of
       the CA. The timbered projecting gable at the rear of the dwelling is redolent of the
       building’s overall Arts and Crafts style, albeit the position and massing of other
       dwellings within the row results in them being noticeably more prominent in the
       views from the Thames Promenade.
7.     Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act (1990)
       (LBCA) requires that, in my decision, special attention shall be paid to the
       desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a
       conservation area.
8.     The proposed side extension would be sympathetically accommodated within an
       extension to the existing roof, replicating the pitch, plain clay tiles, red facing brick,
       hipped gable, ridge and eaves heights. The Arts and Crafts character and
       appearance of the host dwelling would be retained, and the bulk and massing
       reduced significantly by the design elements proposed.
9.     The 2-storey rear extension, incorporating the first-floor gabled projection and
       wider ground floor, would deviate from the existing dwelling’s style due to the form,
       extent of glazing and facing steel proposed. It would also mask some of the
       original Arts and Crafts detailing such as the timbered rear gable. However, its
       effect on the character and appearance of the area would be tempered
       significantly by the design’s characteristics. Most of the volume would be restricted
       to the ground floor, and the extent of glazing would reduce the visual mass and
       bulk.
10. The relatively restricted width of the site would also mean that the extent of
    projection of both floors would not be readily apparent. Views of it, including from
    the Thames Promenade, would be largely restricted to its rear elevation rather
    than the sides. Furthermore, it would be no nearer to the River Thames, nor as
    visually dominant as the neighbouring dwelling, Mulberry House.
11. I reach a similar finding when assessing the proposed development’s effect
    relative to existing dwellings towards Caversham Bridge. Specifically, the extended
    dwelling at the site would not be as visually prominent as the conservatory at the
    property labelled as No 3 on the submitted existing block plan, the rendered main
    building at that property, or the rendered rear elevation of 18A Church Road.
12. As such, the extended dwelling at the site would remain unobtrusive, without
    appearing as having excessive mass and bulk. The loss of some of the original
    architectural detail would be minor in effect. Overall, it would not constitute an
    incongruous and over dominant development and the character and appearance
    of the host dwelling, and the CA would be preserved. I find that there would be no
    harm to the significance of this designated heritage asset.
13. For these reasons, the proposed development would accord with policies H9,
    CC7, EN1 and EN6 of the Reading Borough Local Plan (2019) (RBLP). These

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005740


       policies seek, amongst other things, to ensure that the design of developments is
       informed by and responds to context, reinforcing local character and preserving
       the historic environment. Policy EN3 of the RBLP states that development
       proposals within conservation areas must make a positive contribution to local
       character and distinctiveness. There is a degree of tension with this policy as the
       proposal’s preserving of the character and appearance of the CA is a neutral
       rather than positive effect.
14. However, I find that the lack of conflict with the other RBLP policies means that
    there is not conflict overall with the development plan in relation to this matter. In
    reaching this finding I have had regard to policies HE4, HE5 and HE6 of the
    Framework and find that policies EN3 and EN6 of the RBLP are consistent with
    them.
Protected species
15. From the evidence before me, the protected species that could be affected by the
    development proposed are bats. A 2022 survey, as part of a Bat Risk Assessment
    (BRA) completed by a suitably qualified and licenced ecologist on behalf of the
    appellant, found evidence of a single bat dropping within the host dwelling’s roof
    area. The BRA recommended three emergence or pre-dawn re-entry surveys be
    undertaken because of the potential for bat roosts.
16. A subsequent Preliminary Bat Roost Assessment (PBRA) in September 2024
    found no direct evidence of bats roosting within the dwelling and nor did two
    subsequent emergence surveys completed on 1st and 29th May 2025. A further
    Emergence Survey Report (ESR) detailed the findings from these surveys.
17. It is clear from the evidence before me that a 3rd emergence survey has not been
    completed. However, because of the lack of bats reported in the 2024 PBRA and
    2025 ESR respectively, I find that two emergence surveys are proportionate in this
    instance, especially given that the more recent surveys do not indicate that a roost
    is present. Furthermore, bats are afforded protection under the Wildlife and
    Countryside Act (1981) and the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    (2017). As such, if bats are discovered during the construction phase, protection
    would still apply.
18. The proposed development includes provisions for bat roosts as per the
    recommendations of the PBRA and ESR. Such a provision can be secured by an
    appropriately worded condition, and as such I am satisfied that appropriate
    protection and mitigation has been provided.
19. Therefore, I find that the proposed development would not adversely affect
    protected species, specifically bats, and consequently it would accord with the
    provisions of policy EN12 of the RBLP. This policy seeks to protect and, wherever
    possible, enhance features of biodiversity interest on and adjacent to the
    application site, incorporating and integrating them into development proposals
    wherever practicable. This policy has consistency with policy N2 of the Framework
    in relation to this matter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005740




Other Matters
Listed buildings
20. The map within the CAA identifies that the site is within the wider setting of several
    listed buildings on Church Road. These are No 20 (The Rectory) including Garden
    Walls, Buckside, Buckside Cottage, and various buildings at Caversham Court.
21. Section 66 of the LBCA requires that I have had special regard to the desirability of
    preserving these buildings or their setting or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which they possess. The setting of the Thames and Church Road
    contribute to the significance of all of these listed buildings.
22. The modest scale of the proposed development and presence of other
    undesignated buildings of prominence, such as Mulberry House, within the views
    of the listed buildings from the Thames Promenade and Church Road, mean that
    the setting of these buildings will be preserved. There will be no harm to their
    significance. The proposal would accord with policy EN1 of the RBLP which is
    consistent with policies HE4, HE5 and HE6 of the Framework.
Tree replanting/replacement
23. An olive tree would need to be moved because of the proposed development.
    Whilst this tree does not contribute to the treed character of the CA, its replanting
    or replacement planting would be necessary to secure a balance between the
    natural and built environment. This can be secured by a condition, and, as result,
    the development would accord with policy EN12 of the RBLP’s criterion that new
    tree planting should be provided. This policy has consistency with policy N2 of the
    Framework in relation to this matter.
Other material considerations
24. In reaching my findings on the effects of the proposed development to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and the CA, I have had regard to
    the provisions of the Council’s Design Guide to House Extensions Supplementary
    Planning Document (2021). This did not affect my findings on this matter and my
    assessment of the proposed development against the development plan and
    duties within the LBCA.
Conditions
25. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans, for the
    avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty.
26. I have also imposed a condition requiring the planting of a tree to compensate for
    the loss of the olive tree in its current location, or to secure its replanting. This has
    amended wording to that suggested by the Council as the general landscaping
    requirements included within their wording would go beyond the extent of what is
    necessary and reasonable.
27. A condition has also been imposed, as suggested by the Council, in relation to
    flood mitigation given the location of the site within an area of high probability of
    river flooding. A condition is also required to secure the provision of a bat box,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005740


       brick or tile within the proposed development for the reasons I have already given
       in this decision.
28. There are some details of facing materials included on the plans. The detail has
    been sufficient for me to determine that the character and appearance of the host
    dwelling and the CA would be preserved. Nevertheless, for clarity, further details
    are necessary and I have imposed a condition accordingly.
29. The Council has suggested a condition limiting the use of the roof area of the
    proposed rear extension. This roof would afford some limited views of
    neighbouring gardens. However, without further alterations, the roof would only be
    accessible by climbing out of one of the first-floor windows or over the glazed
    balustrading of a Juliet balcony. As such, the probability of accessing the roof is
    unlikely and it would be unreasonable to impose such a condition.
30. The Council have also suggested a condition restricting permitted development
    rights for alterations to the host dwelling other than those shown on the proposed
    plans. The suggested reason is in the interests of the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers, specifically in relation to their privacy. Given the limited
    opportunities for overlooking that I observed at the site, due to the positioning and
    elevational treatments of neighbouring properties and the existing boundary
    screening and vegetation, I find that such a condition is neither necessary nor
    reasonable.
Conclusion
31. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

S Sharp
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005740


                                           Schedule of Conditions


     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing nos 283.007A Proposed Ground Floor Plan, 283.008 Proposed First
              Floor Plan, 283.009A Proposed Lower Ground Floor and Roof Plans,
              283.010B Proposed Elevations 1 of 2, 283.011C Proposed Elevations 2 of 2,
              283.02.019A Proposed Block Plan.
     3)       No development shall commence above foundation level until a schedule of
              the materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out
              and thereafter maintained in accordance with the details approved.
     4)       Prior to first occupation of the development hereby permitted, details of
              biodiversity enhancements, to include a minimum of one bat box, brick or tile
              built into the walls of the new extensions shall be submitted to and approved
              in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The biodiversity enhancements
              shall be installed as approved and retained thereafter for the lifetime of the
              development.
     5)       Prior to first occupation of the development hereby permitted, all flood
              mitigation and protection measures, as contained within the Flood Risk
              Assessment dated September 2025, shall be implemented in full and
              maintained in perpetuity for the lifetime of the development.
     6)       Prior to first occupation of the development hereby permitted a tree shall be
              planted in accordance with a specification previously submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The specification shall
              include the size, species, and position of the tree, and how it will be planted
              and protected. If the tree, within a period of 5 years from the date of planting,
              dies, is removed or becomes seriously damaged or diseased, it shall be
              replaced in the next planting season with a tree to the approved specification.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         6
