Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 June 2026
by P Terceiro BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005881
Land Rear of 49-51 Cheapside, Luton LU1 2HN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Danshe Limited against the decision of Luton Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01027/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the demolition of the existing single-storey structure and the
     construction of three mews dwelling houses (Class C3), consisting of three 2-bedroom, 3-person
     dwellings, each with its own individual entrance, private amenity space, and dedicated cycle storage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     For clarity I have used the site address as provided on the decision notice and
       appeal form as this is more precise than that provided in the application form.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
       •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area,
            including whether it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance
            of the Plaiters Lea Conservation Area;
       •    whether the proposal would provide a satisfactory mix of housing;
       •    whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living conditions
            for future occupiers, with regard to outlook, privacy and the provision of private
            outdoor space; and
       •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the
            occupiers of adjoining properties, with particular reference to outlook, privacy
            and potential for noise and disturbance.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.     The site lies within the Plaiters Lea Conservation Area (CA). Section 72(1) of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires that special
       attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character
       or appearance of a Conservation Area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005881


5.     The CA was designated in 1991, and the area was historically associated with
       straw and felt hat making, with most of the surviving buildings having been used
       for the production, storage, sale and distribution of hats. This is in addition to
       related trades, such as dyeing and bleaching, ribbon making, box making and
       transportation.
6.     The area has a distinctive urban and industrial character, with tight urban grain
       and streets lined by modest-scale factories, warehouses and workshops, often
       intermixed with commercial and residential properties. The roofscape
       predominately includes pitched, gabled and hipped roof forms. As such, the
       significance of the CA derives, in part, from the area’s links to Luton’s hatting
       industry and from the range of architectural styles and storey heights, which
       provides examples of vernacular industrial architecture.
7.     The site lies to the rear of 49-51 Cheapside (Nos 49-51) and abuts Barbers Lane,
       which is a narrow pedestrian route between Guildford Street and Silver Street.
       Barbers Lane offers views towards the rear of the buildings facing Cheapside,
       many of which have been enlarged, and include predominantly pitched roofed
       forms with the occasional flat roof form. The site is a modest parcel of land with an
       angled side boundary which accommodates a single-storey outbuilding with flat
       roof alongside an area of hardstanding. Given the flat roof design and appearance
       of the building, the site detracts from the significance of the CA.
8.     The appeal scheme would comprise the construction of a row of three mews
       dwellings within the site. Two dwellings would have a pitched roof, while the corner
       dwelling would have a flat roof with a canted elevation that would follow the site’s
       side boundary. Whilst the flat roof would assist in preserving views towards the
       back of the buildings facing Cheapside, the proposed terrace with differing roof
       forms would appear awkward and contrived and result in a form of development
       that would harm the surrounding street scene and local character.
9.     I appreciate that the site, in its current condition, is a visually poor plot. However, it
       does not necessarily follow that the proposed development would successfully
       integrate with its surroundings. Consequently, albeit localised, the proposal would
       have a detrimental effect in the part of the CA which the site lies within.
10. The footprint of the proposed development would occupy a large proportion of the
    plot. However, the surrounding pattern of development is predominantly tight in
    character, and because of its scale and height, the proposal would appear visually
    subservient to Nos 49-51. As such, the proposal would not appear unduly
    cramped. Moreover, appropriate materials could be secured by condition, were I
    minded to allow the appeal. However, these aspects would not address the harm
    arising from the unsuitable roof form and canted wall as I have identified above.
11. Given the above, I find the harm to be less than substantial in this case, and at the
    lower end of that spectrum. Even so, the National Planning Policy Framework (the
    Framework) informs us that great weight should be given to a heritage asset’s
    conservation and that any harm to heritage assets requires clear and convincing
    justification. Where a development proposal would lead to less than substantial
    harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset, this harm should be
    weighed against the public benefits of the scheme.
12. The Council advises that it is unable to demonstrate a 5-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites. The appellant advances that the figure is 3.36-years, which is not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005881


       disputed by the Council. The scheme would make an important contribution to
       addressing this shortfall and would deliver three new dwellings in an accessible
       location. It would improve activity and natural surveillance within Barbers Lane.
       There would be some economic benefits accrued from the construction process, as
       well as longer term expenditure in the local economy. The site is small, so the
       development could be built-out relatively quickly. Further, the proposal would re-
       use developed and underutilised land. These public benefits attract significant
       weight but fall short of overcoming the great weight I give to the harm that would
       arise to the designated heritage asset.
13. Consequently, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, and it would fail to preserve the character or appearance
    of the Plaiters Lea CA, contrary to Policies LLP1, LLP25 and LLP30 of the Luton
    Local Plan 2011-2031 (2017) (LP). Amongst other things, these policies require
    development to be high-quality design, contribute to enhancing a sense of place,
    and seek to protect Luton’s unique and rich heritage.
Housing mix
14. LP Policy LLP15 sets out that provision will be made for new dwellings in the
    borough to help meet the housing needs of Luton and the Luton Housing Market
    Area, ensuring the size, type and tenure provided reflects the identified housing
    need requirements of the area in the Strategic Housing Market Assessment
    (SHMA). The requirements are monitored through the publication of the Strategic
    Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA).
15. The proposal is for three dwellings that would have one double bedroom and one
    single bedroom each. The evidence before me indicates a need for 1,300 2-bed
    dwellings, and that delivery between 2011/12 and 2018/19 of such dwellings was
    1,285. This is a substantial provision in the early years of the plan which runs the
    risk of housing development failing to meet the established needs in the Borough.
    Moreover, the evidence indicates that there is a greater housing need for larger
    dwellings than for two-bedroom dwellings.
16. In addition, the appellant on their evidence have stated that the average household
    size in the Borough is approximately two adults. While this may be the case, it fails
    to robustly demonstrate that there is a need for two-bedroom dwellings. Therefore,
    while the delivery of housing in this windfall site may influence the size of the units
    proposed, I am not persuaded on the evidence before me that the scheme would
    deliver a mix of housing that would reflect the identified need requirements of the
    area.
17. The proposal would therefore fail to provide a suitable mix of housing to meet the
    needs of the Borough. It would be contrary to LP Policies LLP1 and LLP15 which
    seek to ensure that housing delivery meets the needs of the area including with
    respect to size.
Living conditions – future residents
Outlook and privacy
18. The proposed terraces would sit to the rear of 49-51 Cheapside (Nos 49-51), and it
    is noted that No 51 has been extended to the rear. The kitchen / living space within
    Unit 3 would have glazed doors that would face towards the existing built form.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005881


       However, the gap between the rear elevation of unit 3 and No 51’s rear elevation
       would be appropriate to provide a satisfactory outlook from those glazed doors,
       which in addition would look directly onto the unit’s private garden space.
19. There are a few windows on the elevations of Nos 49-51 that face towards the site.
    The evidence indicates that these windows serve a mix of commercial and
    residential uses. On the first floor, the rear windows are proposed to be obscure
    glazed which would assist in protecting the privacy of future residents. Due to the
    distances involved and position of existing windows, views towards the inside of
    the proposed dwellings would be most likely at oblique angles and only relate to a
    small part of any rooms. Given the tight urban area that the proposal would lie
    within, a degree of potential overlooking is in most cases inevitable, and in this
    case, it would not be harmful to the living conditions of future occupants.
Private outdoor space
20. LP Policy LLP25 requires new housing to be delivered in accordance with external
    amenity space standards set out in LP Appendix 6. This appendix requires 2-
    bedroom dwellings to be provided with an enclosed rear garden with an area that
    shall not be smaller than 45m2. Further, the appellant directs me to the Luton
    Town Centre Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document 2023 (SPD),
    which encourages the provision of outdoor space in excess of 5m2. Given that the
    site lies within Luton Town Centre, I attach significant weight to the provisions of
    the SPD in this regard.
21. Each unit would be provided with its own private garden space. While the area of
    each garden would fall below 45m2, it would exceed 5m2 and therefore accord with
    the SPD. The proposed outdoor space for each dwelling would have a suitable
    shape and be private, usable and functional. Further, site is located close to Hat
    Gardens, a public park that provides accessible open space. Overall, I find that the
    proposed garden spaces would be acceptable.
22. Thus, the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for future occupiers,
    with regard to outlook, privacy and the provision of private outdoor space. In this
    regard, the proposal would accord with LP Policies LLP1 and LLP25 which support
    buildings and spaces of high-quality design and seek to protect living conditions,
    amongst other things.
Living conditions – adjoining neighbours
Outlook and privacy
23. The scale and mass of the existing outbuilding is present in views from the
    windows in Nos 49-51 that face towards the site. The proposed development
    would be taller and visually more obvious than the existing building. As such, it
    would alter the outlook from neighbouring properties.
24. That said, the gap between the proposed development and the rear windows in
    Nos 49-51 would leave an appropriate spatial separation, so the outlook from
    these neighbours would not be unduly constrained. Thus, the effect on outlook
    would not be so intrusive as to making living in these neighbouring properties
    untenable.
25. The first-floor rear windows within the proposed terrace would be obscure glazed,
    which would prevent views towards the neighbouring windows. The rear glazed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005881


         doors would be at ground floor level and therefore unlikely to offer meaningful
         views towards the residential uses located within the upper floors of Nos 49-51.
         Therefore, the proposal would protect the privacy of these neighbours.
Noise and disturbance
26. The site lies within a Town Centre environment where a degree of activity and
    movement is inherent and expected. The proposed number of units would be
    small, and given that each unit would have 2-bedrooms, overall the number of
    future occupants would likely be limited. As such, it is unlikely that the proposal
    would give rise to noise and disturbance levels over and above what is expected in
    this urban area.
27. Consequently, the proposal would have an acceptable effect on the living
    conditions of the occupiers of adjoining properties, with particular reference to
    outlook, privacy and potential for noise and disturbance. In this regard, the
    proposal would accord with LP Policies LLP1 and LLP25 which support buildings
    and spaces of high-quality design and seek to protect living conditions, amongst
    other things.
Other Matters
28. Section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires that, in considering whether to grant planning permission for development
    which affects a listed building or its setting, special regard must be given to the
    desirability of preserving the building, or its setting, or any features of special
    architectural or historic interest which it possesses.
29. 53 Cheapside is a Grade II listed building which is located near the site designated
    for its special architectural and historic interest. The building was constructed in
    1882 as the Cowper Arms, a temperance tavern. Its significance derives, in part,
    from its well-preserved and architecturally ambitious façade, and its role as a
    purpose-built temperance tavern, representing a specific social movement. The
    proposal would allow for views towards the rear of the listed building to be
    retained. The Council finds that the appeal scheme would have an acceptable
    effect on the setting of the listed building and, on the evidence before me, I find no
    reason to disagree with the Council’s conclusion on this matter.
30. The appellant directs me to two planning permissions granted by the Council.
    These pertain to the construction of a four-storey building1 at 43-45 Guildford
    Street and 61-65 Cheapside, and to a mixed-use scheme including a block of flats,
    commercial units and gym at 39-47 Cheapside2. However, these developments
    would be of a different nature to the proposal before me which comprises a terrace
    of three dwellings. As such, these permissions are of limited influence in my
    decision.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
31. Given my findings above, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    when read as a whole. While the absence of a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites draws me to paragraph 11 of the Framework, I have already found
    that the harm to the Plaiters Lea CA means that the application of the heritage

1
    LPA Ref: 23/00092/FUL
2
    LPA Ref: 21/00047/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005881


       related policies within the Framework provides a strong reason for refusing the
       development proposed. Paragraph 11 d) ii) of the Framework is therefore not
       engaged.
32. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.

P Terceiro
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
