Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Claire Coles MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005081
Albury Dairy, Honey Lane, Selborne, Alton, Hampshire GU33 6BX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
    planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) for
    the development of land without complying with conditions subject to which a previous planning
    permission was granted.
•   The appeal is made by Dr William Selborne of the Blackmoor Estate against the South Downs
    National Park Authority.
•   The application Ref is SDNP/25/04098/CND.
•   The application sought planning permission for change of use of agricultural building to Class B8
    Storage Use without complying with conditions attached to planning permission Ref
    SDNP/23/01293/FUL dated 28 May 2024.
•   The conditions in dispute are Nos 4,5, 6, 7 and 8 which state that:
    Condition 4: The premises hereby permitted shall not be used and deliveries shall not be received or
    dispatches made from the site outside the hours of 08:00 to 17:00 Monday to Friday, 8:00 to 13:00
    Saturdays and at no time on Sundays or Public/Bank Holidays.
    Condition 5: Mobile plant/equipment and vehicles operating on site at all times shall use white noise
    reversing alarms. Reversing bleeper type alarms shall not be permitted on site all any time.
    Condition 6: All plant used for the associated loading and unloading of goods shall be electric at all
    times. No diesel-powered or gas/LPG powered plant shall be permitted on site all any time.
    Condition 7: The rating level of the noise emitted from plant and activities at the site shall not at any
    time exceed the existing background level (LA90,1 hour) at any premises or garden used for
    residential purposes when measured and corrected in accordance with British Standard BS 4142:
    2014.
    Condition 8: Unless otherwise agreed in writing with the Local Planning Authority, there shall be a
    maximum number of 10 HGV vehicular movements per week to and from the approved site. The Site
    operator shall maintain a record of the HGV vehicular movements to and from the site and shall
    make this record available to the Local Planning Authority upon prior written request.
•   The reasons given for the conditions are:
    Condition 4: To ensure that the amenity of the area is not detrimentally affected by the use of the
    site.
    Condition 5: To ensure that the amenity of the area is not detrimentally affected by the use of the
    site.
    Condition 6: To ensure that the amenity of the area is not detrimentally affected by the use of the
    site.
    Condition 7: To ensure that the amenity of the area is not detrimentally affected by the use of the
    site.
    Condition 8: To ensure that the development remains within the general levels of activity specified in
    the planning application in the interests of highway safety and general amenity. To facilitate
    monitoring of HGV movements.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of
   agricultural building to Class B8 storage at Albury Dairy, Honey Lane, Selborne,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005081


     Alton, Hampshire GU33 6BX in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
     SDNP/25/04098/CND, varying condition 4 and without compliance with condition 6
     previously imposed on planning permission Ref SDNP/23/01293/FUL dated 28 May
     2024 and subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was adopted on 17
   August 2026 replacing all previous versions of the document. I have not sought
   comments from the main parties in respect of the effect of the changes in relation to
   this appeal as the changes do not materially affect the main issues in this case.
Background and Main Issue
3. The appeal property is part of the Blackmoor Estate and comprises a range of
   agricultural buildings which were previously in use in association with the sites
   operation as a dairy farm which has now ceased. The surrounding area is rural in
   character and lies outside the settlement boundary and within the South Downs
   National Park (SDNP).
4. There are a number of residential properties to the north and west of the site and to
   the east of the access track.
5. Planning permission was granted (SDNP/23/01293/FUL) for the change of use of
   the front part of two agricultural buildings to Class B8 Storage Use. The two
   buildings have a low profile, and are front open sided and face each other with a
   small courtyard area in between. The buildings are served by an existing
   agricultural track.
6. The appellant seeks permission to vary condition 4 of SDNP/23/01293/FUL to allow
   the premises to be used and for deliveries to be received and dispatches made
   from the site between the hours of 07.30 hours to 18.00 hours Monday to Friday,
   and for the removal of conditions 5, 6, 7 and 8.
7. The variation to condition 4 would extend the use (including deliveries and
   dispatches) earlier in the morning by 30 minutes and later in the evening by an hour
   Monday-Friday.
8. The appellant seeks the removal of conditions 5, 6, 7 and 8. Condition 5 requires
   mobile plant/equipment and vehicles operating on site at all times to use white
   noise reversing alarms only. Condition 6 requires all plant used for the associated
   loading and unloading of goods to be electric at all times. Condition 7 requires the
   rating level of the noise emitted from plant and activities at the site not to exceed
   the existing background level (LA90, 1 hour) at any premises or garden used for
   residential purposes when measured and corrected in accordance with British
   Standard BS 4142:2014. Condition 8 limits the number of HGV vehicular
   movements to and from the approved site to 10 per week and for a record of the
   movements to be kept.
9. The conditions were imposed on the appeal site to protect the living conditions of
   the occupants of neighbouring properties and the tranquillity of the SDNP from
   noise and disturbance associated with the use of the barns for storage and the
   access track. Third party representations have been received raising concerns over
   the impact of the proposed alterations to the conditions on their living conditions in
   terms of noise and disturbance from the users of the site and access road. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005081


     appellant agreed the original conditions with the Authority when the application was
     originally considered.
10. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the variation of condition 4 and the
    removal of conditions 5, 6, 7 and 8 on the living conditions of the occupants of
    neighbouring properties and the tranquillity of the SDNP.
Reasons
11. The appellant contends that the conditions imposed do not comply with the
    guidance in the Framework in terms of the six tests for imposing planning
    conditions (necessary, relevant to planning and to the development to be permitted,
    enforceable, precise and reasonable in all other respects). The Framework adopted
    17 August 2026 has not changed the six tests.
12. Policy SD5 and SD54 of the South Downs National Park Local Plan (SDLP) seek to
    protect the amenities of neighbouring properties and the character of the
    landscape, including experiential and amenity qualities. Policy SD7 of the SDLP
    seeks to conserve and enhance relative tranquillity. The nearest residential
    properties are located approximately 55 metres and 85 metres (using the
    appellants calculations) from the site with shared boundaries with the site
    comprising mature planting. Identified sources of noise and disturbance include
    noise from the operations on the site, vehicular movements along the access track
    and dust nuisance from vehicles using the track.
13. Policy N4 of the Framework places substantial weight on the importance of
    conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of protected landscapes such as
    National Parks. The Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 also places a duty on
    relevant authorities to further the purposes of conserving and enhancing the natural
    beauty of National Parks.
14. In respect of condition 4, it is the appellants view the condition is not necessary or
    reasonable. The hours proposed are considered to be unduly restrictive and to
    have deterred at least six prospective tenants from moving to the site. The existing
    agricultural use of the site is unfettered which the appellant considers justification
    for relaxing the hours of operation of the site Monday to Friday by an extra 1.5 hrs
    per day as the unfettered agricultural use would have a greater potential for
    disturbance than a storage use with some controls. The appellants Noise Impact
    Assessment submitted with the original application also recommended hours of
    operation between 07:00 and 19:00.
15. A restriction on hours of operation is considered necessary and reasonable in order
    to protect the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties and the
    tranquillity of the SDNP from noise and disturbance generated on the site and
    accessing the site. Whilst agricultural activities may take place without restriction, a
    B8 use is materially different and the Authority is entitled to impose conditions
    necessary to make an otherwise unacceptable development acceptable.
16. My attention has been drawn to an enforcement investigation at the site following
    noise and disturbance from unlawful activity that resulted in nuisance. This
    unlawful activity has now ceased but identified the potential for harm from noise
    and disturbance to the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties
    and the tranquillity of the SDNP due to unrestricted activities on the site.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005081


17. It has also been brought to my attention that the current operating hours are the
    same as attached to the adjoining premises granted permission under reference
    (SDNP/15/05764/FUL). Whilst I have not been provided with evidence to verify
    this, neither has it been disputed by the appellant and therefore I have no reason
    to believe the hours of operation are different on the adjacent premises. Despite
    this, I have no further information regarding the adjacent site to ascertain whether
    the issues arising from the site would be the same as for this appeal. In any event,
    each case must be determined on its own merits.
18. In conclusion, I have had regard to the reasons the appellant wants a relaxation to
    the operating hours of the site, but note that commercial reasons are not material
    planning considerations. However, the proposed hours would not significantly
    extend the hours of operation or extend the hours of operation into antisocial hours
    (early mornings, evenings and nights). The Authority Environmental Health Officer
    (EHO) also raises no objection to the extension to the operating hours of the site.
    As a result, provided there are other controls over noise and disturbance emanating
    from the site, I do not consider the variation of hours to cause significant harm to
    the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties or to the tranquillity
    of the SDNP and therefore the proposal would not conflict with policies SD54, SD5
    or SD7 of the SDLP.
19. The appellant contends that condition 5 is neither necessary, enforceable or
    reasonable as it requires the tenant to have complete control over the vehicles that
    visit the site.
20. The appeal site is small in size and it is likely any proposed tenant would have
    knowledge of who would be visiting the site, therefore would have some control
    over the facilities on visiting vehicles. Whilst not all vehicles may be fitted with white
    noise reversing sensors, there are other ways to safely manoeuvre on site without
    the use of reversing beepers, such as the use of banksman, which should allow
    vehicles to reverse on site without requiring significant modification or expense,
    allowing for smaller enterprises. Health and Safety outside the site is not a matter
    for consideration as part of this appeal.
21. The Authority EHO raises objection to the loss of this condition and I agree that in
    an area of relative tranquillity the noise and disturbance to the living conditions of
    the occupiers of neighbouring properties from reversing bleepers which is a sharp,
    unpredictable noise is likely to be keenly felt. Reversing beepers would also disturb
    the relative tranquillity of the SDNP. As a result, I consider it necessary to retain
    control over the use of reversing bleepers. I also give significant weight to the
    recommendations in the appellants Noise Impact Assessment which explicitly
    recommends the use of broadband alarms as a mitigation measure to reduce noise
    impacts.
22. In conclusion, the condition is necessary, relevant to the site and reasonable, is
    precise and capable of being enforced as it sets out a clear requirement regarding
    the type of reversing alarm to be used. I have not been provided with substantive
    evidence that would lead me to a different view. The loss of condition 5 would
    conflict with policies SD54, SD5 and SD7 of the SDLP.
23. The appellant considers condition 6 to be not necessary, enforceable or
    reasonable. The condition requires all plant associated with the loading and
    unloading of goods to be electric. Electric plant would cause less noise and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005081


     disturbance to the occupiers of the adjacent residential properties and on the
     tranquillity of the SDNP. However, I accept that the requirement for all electric plant
     could be more onerous to a small business than allowing other forms of power
     generated plant, when other controls exist over the hours of operation and limits
     over the noise levels emanating from the site, which would limit overall exposure to
     potential disturbance. The noise from plant is also more of a background noise
     when compared with that from reversing bleepers and therefore the effect on noise
     and disturbance would be more limited. The Authority EHO agrees with the removal
     of condition 6 and I have no substantive evidence to take a different approach. The
     removal of condition 6 would therefore comply with policies SD54, SD5 and SD7 of
     the SDLP.
24. The appellant considers condition 7 to not be necessary, enforceable or reasonable
    as it requires control over third party plant and machinery and monitoring from third
    party land. The condition is considered to be necessary in order to minimise noise
    and disturbance to the living conditions of neighbouring properties and to safeguard
    the tranquillity of the SDNP. Whilst some degree of noise from permitted activities
    on the site is anticipated, this should be kept to a reasonable level and therefore
    control over this is necessary.
25. Monitoring from a sensitive receptor is enforceable as is the ability to control the
    plant and machinery used on the site by the tenant and to predict noise levels from
    site operations. The condition could not be used as a ‘hostage to fortune’ as if the
    monitoring did not detect a breach of the condition, no further action would be
    taken. I therefore do not consider there should be any changes to condition 7 to
    ensure compliance with policies SD54, SD5 and SD7 or the SDLP.
26. The appellant considers condition 8 is not necessary, enforceable, precise or
    reasonable as there is no need to control the number of deliveries to and from the
    site as the scale of the yard would mean the number of deliveries would be low. In
    this respect I would suggest there would be no need to remove the condition as it
    would be unlikely to severely restrict the operation of the business. It is noted the
    agricultural use has unrestricted HGV access, however, this is for a B8 use on a
    site where noise and disturbance from vehicular movements and activities has
    already been recognised as a potential issue with regards to the effect on the living
    conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties. If the appellant wanted to
    adjust the number of HGV movements in the future it remains open to the appellant
    to seek to do this rather than removing the condition in its entirety.
27. Noting a list of deliveries may add to the administration of a business, but due to
    the scale of any business operating from the site, this is unlikely to be a
    considerable burden. There are also methods other than a site foreman noting the
    movements that would allow movements to take place without a staff presence,
    such as CCTV or delivery logs maintained off site.
28. The Authority do however agree the condition could be more precise in respect of
    the definition of vehicle movements to and from the site and in relation to the
    definition of HGVs. Whilst I note the concerns raised from interested parties
    regarding the definition of movements and that movements should be counted as
    each individual movement (i.e. one movement is a vehicle entering the site and
    another movement would be a vehicle leaving the site) this would be unduly
    restrictive. The Authority EHO has suggested that a single vehicle movement would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005081


     be a vehicle entering and then leaving the site. I consider this to be a reasonable
     response.
29. In respect of the definition of HGV, the Authority EHO has suggested this should be
    defined as anything over 7.5 tonnes. Whilst I note this is larger than the occupiers
    of the neighbouring properties would wish, I have not been provided with
    substantive evidence a 7.5 tonne HGV would cause significantly more noise and
    disturbance to the living conditions of the occupiers of the neighbouring properties
    than a 3.5 tonne HGV, especially with other limits on the site such as hours of
    operation and restrictions on the overall level of noise and disturbance permissible.
30. Issues raised regarding lager HGV accessing site by rural lanes are outside the
    control of the Authority. If the scale of the unit does not justify the use of larger
    HGVs then it would be unlikely they would be used as it would be uneconomic.
    Likewise, if the site is not large enough for the vehicles they would not be used as it
    would serve no purpose. I consider the definition of HGV to be limited to anything
    exceeding 7.5 tonnes would be appropriate in this instance. For these reasons, an
    amendment to condition 8 would make the condition more precise and tighten the
    enforceability of the condition, which is considered necessary and reasonable to
    comply with policies SD54, SD5 and SD7 of the SDLP.
Other Matters
31. I note the appellants agreements to the original conditions. However, this does not
    preclude the subsequent submission of applications to remove or vary conditions.
32. Each application is determined on its own merits and conditions imposed would be
    relevant to the case in hand at the time of determining the application, even where
    there are similarities between sites.
Conditions
33. The guidance in the Planning Practice Guidance makes clear that decision notices
    for the grant of planning permission under section 73 should also restate the
    conditions imposed on earlier permissions that continue to have effect. As I have
    no substantial information before me about the status of the other conditions
    imposed on the original planning permission, I shall impose all those that formed
    part of the original application. In the event that some have in fact been discharged,
    or are no longer relevant, that is a matter which can be addressed by the parties.
Conclusion
34. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the planning permission should be
    varied as set out in the formal decision.



Claire Coles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005081




                                           Schedule of Conditions
       1) The development hereby permitted shall be begun before 28 May 2027.
       2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following plans:
           Plans - Location Plan 1394 P 000
           Plans - Proposed Floor Plan 1394 P 004
           Plans - Proposed Elevations 1394 P 005
           Plans - Proposed Roof Plan 1394 P 006
           Plans - Block Plan 1394 P 007
           Design and Access Statement (including Noise Assessment and Ecosystems
           Services Statement)
           Noise Assessment - Infinity Acoustics - Reference: A101BE (December 2023).
       3) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
          Permitted Development) Order 2015 (or any order revoking, re-enacting or
          modifying that Order) the buildings hereby permitted shall be used only for B8
          storage purposes as defined in the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes)
          Order 1987, or in any provision equivalent to that Class in any statutory
          instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with or without modification)
          and the site used for associated loading/unloading activities only. No other use
          of machinery or industrial activities shall be carried out at the site at any time.
       4) The premises hereby permitted shall not be used and deliveries shall not be
          received or dispatches made from the site outside the hours of 07:30 to 18:00
          Monday to Friday, 8:00 to 13:00 Saturdays and at no time on Sundays or
          Public/Bank Holidays.
       5) Mobile plant/equipment and vehicles operating on site at all times shall use
          white noise reversing alarms. Reversing bleeper type alarms shall not be
          permitted on site all any time.
       6) The rating level of the noise emitted from plant and activities at the site shall
          not at any time exceed the existing background level (LA90,1 hour) at any
          premises or garden used for residential purposes when measured and
          corrected in accordance with British Standard BS 4142: 2014.
       7) Unless otherwise agreed in writing with the Local Planning Authority, there
          shall be no more than 10 Heavy Goods Vehicle (HGV) trips to and from the site
          in any calendar week (Monday to Sunday). For the purposes of this condition,
          an HGV is defined as a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight exceeding 7.5
          tonnes, and a trip shall comprise of a single vehicle entering and subsequently
          leaving the site. The site operator shall maintain a log of all HGV trips, including
          the date and time of entry and exit, and shall make this log available to the
          Local Planning Authority upon written request.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       7
Appeal Decision 6005081


       8) Notwithstanding any indication shown on the approved plans and
          notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
          Permitted Development) Order 2015 (or any order revoking, re-enacting or
          modifying that Order) the open external areas on the site, outside the existing
          structures as shown on the approved 1394 P 004 Proposed Floor Plan, shall
          not at any time be used for storage.
       9) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
          Permitted Development) Order 2015 (or any order revoking, re-enacting or
          modifying that Order) no gate, fence, wall or other means of enclosure shall be
          erected on site without the consent in writing of the Local Planning Authority.
       10) No external lighting shall be installed on or within the buildings or within the site
           unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
       11) Prior to first use of the development hereby permitted the ecosystem service
           measures shall be carried out in accordance with the approved Ecosystem
           Services Statement set out in the approved Design and Access Statement and
           1394 P 000 Location Plan and retained thereafter, unless details of other
           suitable ecosystems services proposals are otherwise agreed in writing by the
           Local Planning Authority.
                                           End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
