Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by K Mee BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005744
2 Bridge Street, Batley WF17 5NU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Savile Enterprise Ltd against the decision of Kirklees Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/93525.
•    The development proposed is described as: 4 No. flats proposed on the ground floor.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The description of development in the banner heading above has been amended
       to omit superfluous wording relating to the relevant plans.
Background and Main Issue
3.     Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development)
       (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the GPDO) permits a change of use of a
       building and any land within its curtilage from a use falling within Class E
       (commercial, business and service) of Schedule 2 to the Use Classes Order to a
       use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of that Order.
4.     Paragraph MA.1. (1) and (2) of the GPDO set out the requirements to qualify for
       permitted development under Class MA. There is no dispute between the main
       parties that the proposed development would qualify for permitted development
       under paragraph MA.1.
5.     In respect of prior approval matters, the provisions of Class MA.2. (2) of the GPDO
       require the local planning authority to assess the proposed development on the
       basis of numerous matters, but the main issue in this appeal solely relates to
       whether the proposal would provide adequate natural light to all habitable rooms of
       the proposed dwellinghouses.
Reasons
6.     The proposed change of use of the ground floor of the building would result in 4
       dwellings being provided. The scope of Class MA of the GPDO is limited to the
       change of use itself. It does not authorise associated external alterations, such as
       the creation of new openings or changes to window and door fenestration, which
       would all require separate planning permission.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005744


7.     Paragraph W.(2A) of Part 3 of the GPDO requires that prior approval must be
       refused in relevant applications if adequate natural light is not provided in all the
       habitable rooms of the dwellinghouse. Part 3, paragraph X of the GPDO defines
       habitable rooms as “any rooms used or intended to be used for sleeping or living
       which are not solely used for cooking purposes, but does not include bath or toilet
       facilities, service rooms, corridors, laundry rooms, hallways or utility rooms”.
8.     The Council has not identified any concerns with regard to adequate natural light
       for dwellings 1 and 2, as identified on the submitted plans, and there is no
       evidence before me that would lead me to reach a different conclusion. The
       concerns therefore relate to natural light levels for future occupiers within dwellings
       3 and 4.
9.     The appellant contends that the external alterations included within the submitted
       plans, such as changes to the fenestration of doors serving the main living areas
       of dwellings 2, 3 and 4 and the insertion of a new window to the bedroom of
       dwelling 4, could be undertaken pursuant to a separate planning permission
       (reference 2025/93526). However, no evidence has been provided to demonstrate
       that such permission has been granted. Moreover, there is no mechanism before
       me to secure the completion of these building operations prior to the occupation of
       the dwellings. Consequently, it cannot be reasonably assumed that the external
       alterations shown on the submitted plans would be carried out.
10. Accordingly, my assessment must consider whether future occupiers of the
    proposed dwellings would benefit from adequate natural light to all habitable
    rooms, based on the current external building conditions. No technical evidence
    has been submitted to demonstrate that the proposal would provide adequate
    natural light to the occupiers of the new dwellings. My assessment therefore
    requires the exercise of planning judgement.
11. In relation to dwelling 3, although the existing large doorway is not glazed, each
    habitable room would be served by a window within the side elevation providing
    adequate natural light for future occupiers. In contrast, while the open-plan living
    area within dwelling 4 would receive natural light through the existing partially
    glazed door, the proposed bedroom would not be served by a window and would
    therefore not achieve adequate natural light for future occupiers.
12. Accordingly, based on the evidence presented and my site observations, I
    conclude that the proposal would not provide adequate natural light in all habitable
    rooms, and for this reason prior approval is not granted in this case.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.

K Mee
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
