Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 June 2026
by D Ellis MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005594
Contec House, East Street, Farnham, Surrey GU9 7SX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jugnandan Ramana against the decision of Waverley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is WA/2025/01751.
•    The application sought planning permission for the change of use from Class A1 (retail) to Class A5
     (hot food take-away) together with the installation of an extraction system without complying with a
     condition attached to planning permission Ref WA/2013/0844, dated 15 January 2014.
•    The condition in dispute is No 5 which states that: “The premises shall not be open for business, nor
     shall supplies be delivered thereto, outside 0800hrs to 2300hrs on Mondays to Saturdays and
     0900hrs to 2230hrs on Sundays and public holidays”.
•    The reason given for the condition is: “in the interests of residential amenity”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
       2024. This latest version of the Framework has introduced plan-making and
       national decision-making policies and is effect from the day of publication. The
       appellant and the Council have had the opportunity to comment on the new
       Framework.
Background and Main Issue
3.     The disputed condition specifies the opening hours for the business. The appellant
       seeks to alter the operational hours to 1000hrs to 0200hrs on Sundays to
       Thursdays and 1000hrs to 0300hrs on Fridays and Saturdays.
4.     There is a discrepancy between the appellant’s cover letter for the planning
       application and their appeal statement regarding the delivery-only hours on
       Sundays and public holidays. I have proceeded on the basis of the hours given on
       the planning application form and cover letter as these were the proposed hours
       before the Council when they made their decision.
5.     The main issue is the effect that varying the disputed condition would have on the
       living conditions of the occupiers of nearby residential properties, with particular
       regard to noise and disturbance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005594


Reasons
6.     The appeal property is within Romans Business Park. Notwithstanding the
       presence of other commercial uses in the vicinity of the site, the area on the
       opposite side of East Street is predominantly residential and there are also
       residential properties to the west of the site. This is therefore a sensitive location
       for late opening establishments.
7.     It is proposed for the takeaway to remain open to all customers until midnight,
       when it will become a ‘dark kitchen’ for deliveries only. The nature of a hot food
       takeaway means that some customers are likely to consume food in the vicinity of
       the premises whilst it is still hot. Extending the opening hours to midnight for all
       customers would result in a greater propensity for people to stay in the area for
       longer into the early hours of the morning, with associated disturbance from people
       congregating outside, talking loudly especially if boisterous, as well as noise from
       car doors slamming and engines revving.
8.     The Papa John’s Farnham - Late-Night Delivery Driver Policy sets out the
       standards for its delivery drivers during extended late-night hours and includes
       measures to limit noise and disturbance. However, I am not persuaded that some
       of the measures are sufficiently precise or enforceable, such as vehicle doors and
       boots being opened and closed ‘gently’ and requiring ‘smooth’ acceleration and
       ‘careful’ braking (my emphasis). As such, based on the evidence before me I am
       not satisfied that a condition requiring compliance with the Late-Night Delivery
       Driver Policy would meet the tests for conditions as set out in the Framework.
9.     Notwithstanding this, extending the operating hours for deliveries would
       undoubtedly result in more vehicle movements at the appeal site. The associated
       noises, even with the Late-Night Delivery Driver Policy in place, would be
       significantly more noticeable given the increased quietness of the early hours of
       the morning. Moreover, the Late-Night Delivery Driver Policy would not alter the
       increase in noise and disturbance from the extended opening hours for customers
       visiting the outlet.
10. The later opening and operating hours would therefore result in a significant
    likelihood of increased disturbance at unsocial hours when most nearby residents
    would be sleeping. Although the takeaway would open later in the morning, this
    would be when the takeaway is likely to be less busy and would be at a time when
    nearby residents are more likely to be awake. I therefore do not consider that this
    would justify the introduction of later opening hours that would intensify localised
    problems of noise and disturbance. Moreover, the disputed condition does not
    prevent the takeaway from opening at 1000hrs.
11. I note that extended opening hours until 0300hrs for both collections and deliveries
    were trialled for three separate periods in April 2025. However, even if these no
    complaints were received following these temporary events, this would not justify a
    permanent introduction of later opening hours and the significant likelihood of
    increased disturbance at unsocial hours.
12. I acknowledge that a Premises Licence has been issued for the later opening
    hours and that there are no objections from Environmental Health, but planning is
    a separate legislative regime. Whereas there might not be a statutory nuisance
    under environmental health legislation, it does not follow that the impacts would be
    acceptable in planning terms. In addition, section 38(6) of the Planning and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005594


         Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires me to have regard to the development
         plan and make my decision in accordance with it unless material considerations
         indicate otherwise.
13. The appellant asserts that the longer opening hours are necessary to enhance the
    economic sustainability of the business. However, it would appear that the
    business has been operating for some time and there is no tangible evidence
    before me to demonstrate that any jobs would be at risk or that the business would
    cease should the appeal fail.
14. My attention has been drawn to Papa Johns outlets in Andover and Basingstoke
    where late night operations take place. Although a Premises Licence has been
    granted for the Andover outlet to operate until 0200hrs, condition 6 of the planning
    permission1 sets the opening hours as between 1100hrs and 2300hrs. I have no
    evidence before that this condition has been amended or that planning approval
    has been granted for opening hours beyond 2300hrs. Although planning
    permission has been granted for the Basingstoke outlet to remain open until
    0300hrs on Sundays to Thursdays and 0500hrs on Fridays and Saturdays2, the
    outlet is located in a small parade of shops in an otherwise residential area,
    whereas the appeal site is located on a busy road and is within a business park.
    As such I am therefore not persuaded that the Andover or Basingstoke outlets are
    directly comparable to the scheme before me, which has nonetheless been
    determined on its own merits.
15. I therefore find that the proposed opening hours would have an unacceptable
    impact on the living conditions of neighbouring residents resulting from increased
    noise and disturbance. This would conflict with Policy TD1 of the Waverley
    Borough Local Plan Part 1: Strategic Policies and Sites February 2018, Policy
    DM1 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 2: Site Allocations and
    Development Management Policies March 2023 and Policy FNP1 of the Farnham
    Neighbourhood Plan (April 2020), insofar as they require development to the
    maximise the quality of life and avoid harm to the amenity of current and future
    residents, including by not causing unacceptable levels of noise.
16. I have no evidence before me that the appeal site is within walking distance of a
    school or other place where children and young children congregate, or that there
    is a concentration of hot food takeaways which is having an adverse impact on
    local health, pollution or anti-social behaviour. As such the proposal would not
    conflict with Policy HC5 of the Framework.
17. However, paragraph 1 of Policy P3 of the Framework states that development
    proposals should be appropriate for their location, taking into account the likely
    effects of pollution on living conditions, and that consideration should be given to
    the potential sensitivity of the site as well as that of the population in the
    surrounding area. Paragraph 2 of Policy P3 sets out that development proposals
    should not give rise to, or contribute to, an unacceptable level of noise on or
    beyond the site, and that adverse impacts of this nature should be avoided where
    possible or else mitigated to an acceptable degree.
18. As explained above, a condition requiring compliance with the Late-Night Delivery
    Driver Policy would not meet the tests for conditions as set out in Policy DM6 of

1
    Planning application ref. 13/01253/FULLN
2
    Planning application ref. 25/00792/ROC


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
Appeal Decision 6005594


       the Framework and, in any event, such a condition would not mitigate the noise
       and disturbance that would be caused by the increase in noise and disturbance
       from the extended opening hours for customers visiting the outlet. As the proposal
       would give rise to an unacceptable level of noise on or beyond the site that would
       cause harm to the population in the surrounding area, the proposal would conflict
       with Policy P3 of the Framework.
Other Matters
19. I note the appellant’s concerns regarding the Council’s handling of the application
    however this would be a matter for the Council in the first instance. In determining
    this appeal, I have had regard solely to the planning merits of the scheme.
Other Considerations
20. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. For
    development within settlements, such as the appeal proposal, Policy S4 of the
    Framework states that development proposals should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
21. The proposal would allow the business to invest, expand and/or adapt and as such
    I afford substantial weight to the economic benefits of the scheme in accordance
    with Paragraph 1 of Policy E2 of the Framework.
22. However, the proposal would have an unacceptable impact on the living conditions
    of neighbouring residents resulting from increased noise and disturbance and as
    such would fail to comply with Policy P3 of the Framework. These adverse effects
    are matters of considerable importance.
23. In the circumstances of this case, I conclude that the benefits of the scheme would
    not outweigh the harm that would be caused to the living conditions of
    neighbouring residents. Consequently, I am satisfied when having regard to
    paragraph 1 of Policy S4 of the Framework that the benefits of the scheme would
    be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
24. I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan and that material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

D Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
