Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 April 2026 by T Morris BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005603
7 Hornfield Cottages, David Street, Meopham, Gravesend, Kent DA13 0BU
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Ms Danielle Regan against the decision of Gravesham Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is 20250952.
•      The development proposed is 1st floor addition to side of house, ground floor addition to rear of
       house, conversion of attic to bedroom, new front porch and formation of 2 car parking bays within
       front garden.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The application subject of this appeal and considered by the Council sought
   approval for works which deviated from a previous approval by the Council1. This
   included changes to the proposed first floor side extension so that it would be built
   in line with the existing front elevation and the roof ridge of the host dwelling. These
   changes were implemented without planning permission and at the time of my site
   visit, they had been mostly completed. Therefore, the proposal is partly
   retrospective. The Council dealt with the application on that basis and so shall I.
4. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a new National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). Having reviewed the changes to the Framework, I am
   satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues in the appeal.
   Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further
   consultation with the main parties.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
       i)        whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
                 having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan policies;
       ii)       the effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt;
1
    Application reference 20240708

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005603


    iii)      the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the host
              dwelling and the surrounding area; and
    iv)       if the proposal is inappropriate development, whether the harm by reason of
              inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by other
              considerations so as to amount to the very special circumstances required to
              justify the proposed development.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Whether or not inappropriate development
6. The appeal site comprises a two-storey semi-detached dwelling located in the
   Green Belt. The Framework identifies that the objective of Green Belt policy is to
   prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. Policy GB6 1. of the
   Framework states that development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls
   within one of the categories in policy GB7. One such category, at policy GB7 1.b.,
   is for any extension of an existing building which will not result in a disproportionate
   increase in size compared to the original building. The Framework defines an
   original building as a building as it existed on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed after this
   date, as it was built originally.
7. The Framework does not define the specific meaning of disproportionate in relation
   to the category outlined at policy GB7 1.b. In terms of the Council’s development
   plan, the Council refer to saved policy C13 of the Gravesham Local Plan First
   Review (2014) (LPFR). Although this relates to extensions to dwellings in the
   countryside rather than the Green Belt specifically, it places an overall limit on
   extensions to dwellings in the countryside of one third of the gross floor area of the
   original dwelling, unless the increased floor space has no overall effect on the
   existing bulk and appearance of the dwelling. It also requires that the massing,
   scale and form of an extension are appropriate to the existing dwelling as well as
   the Green Belt setting.
8. The proposed extensions would increase the floor area of the dwelling by 71.69%.
   This is significantly more than a third of the gross floor area of the dwelling,
   contrary to policy C13 of the LPFR. Whilst I accept that policy C13 does not
   specifically relate to the Green Belt and that the Framework does not define the
   meaning of disproportionate in this context, I am satisfied that the extensions would
   significantly increase the bulk of the dwelling, thus increasing its overall size to a
   considerable extent. Therefore, the extensions would amount to a disproportionate
   increase in size compared to the original building. Consequently, the proposal does
   not meet with the exception as set out at policy GB7 1.b. of the Framework.
9. For the above reasons, the proposal would be inappropriate development in the
   Green Belt. It would be contrary to policy CS02 of the Gravesham Local Plan Core
   Strategy (2014) (CS) and policy C13 of the LPFR, which amongst other matters,
   require that developments maintain the open character of the Green Belt and are
   compatible with national policies for protecting the Green Belt.
Openness
10. The Framework sets out that the essential features of the Green Belt is their
    openness and permanence. Openness has a spatial and a visual dimension.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005603


11. Taken together, the proposed extensions would introduce a considerable amount of
    additional built form and mass to the host dwelling. Therefore, the development
    would inevitably reduce the openness of the Green Belt from a spatial perspective.
    From a visual perspective, given that the extensions would increase the bulk and
    mass of the dwelling at the first floor and the roof level, it would appear visually
    larger when viewed in the street scene. Consequently, the proposal would also
    result in a loss of the visual openness of the Green Belt.
12. The proposal would therefore cause harm to the openness of the Green Belt. The
    level of harm would be moderate given the overall scale and siting of the proposed
    extensions to the dwelling. Nevertheless, in accordance with policy GB6 2. of the
    Framework, substantial weight is given to this harm. This is in addition to the harm
    caused by reason of inappropriateness.
Character and appearance
13. The appeal property is located in an area which features pairs of semi-detached
    dwellings. Although the pairs are differentiated from one another in terms of their
    roof form and external materials, the overall scale and width of the dwellings in the
    group is consistent. Furthermore, extensions and alterations are mostly limited to
    modest ground floor works. The consistent scale of the dwellings together with the
    absence of conspicuous extensions contributes positively to a sense of balance
    and coherence in the street scene. Notwithstanding the works which have already
    taken place, the existing plans and elevations demonstrate that the host dwelling
    and the adjoining property also formed a coherent and symmetrical pair and thus
    also contributed positively to the character and appearance of the area.
14. I have had regard of the Council’s Householder Extensions/Alterations Design
    Guide Supplementary Planning Document (2021) (SPD). This advises that
    extensions should respect the original character of the existing dwelling and
    complement and correspond with the character of neighbouring properties and the
    local area. In terms of two-storey side extensions, it advises that these should
    generally aim to appear subservient to the host building by lying behind the main
    front building line, and that roofs should be subservient to the main property’s roof.
15. Due to the proposed first floor side extension’s lack of set-back at the first floor and
    lack of set-down at the roof level, it would appear as a bulky and conspicuous
    addition to the host dwelling. Therefore, it would not appear subservient to the host
    building, contrary to the guidance in the SPD. The extended dwelling would also
    appear excessively wide in comparison to the adjoining property and would erode
    the symmetry of the pair. Consequently, the proposal would appear as an
    incongruous addition to the host dwelling and would undermine the sense of
    coherence and order in the street scene.
16. The SPD is a material consideration rather than being part of the Council’s
    development plan. The wording in relation to two-storey side extensions also
    indicates that a flexible approach might be possible. However, I see no good
    reasons why the proposal should not, in this instance, follow the SPD advice in
    terms of achieving subservience. This is especially the case given the positive
    contribution that the well-balanced pairs and the absence of conspicuous
    extensions make to the locality.
17. The use of white render on the external surfaces of the dwelling would not be
    sufficient to ensure that the proposal would respect the original character of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005603


     building. Nor would the lower position of the first-floor window on the front elevation
     or the position of the dormer window on the original roof result in the extension
     achieving a visual subservience.
18. The appellant believes that there are limited views of the dwelling from David Street
    and in the surrounding streets. However, this contrasts with my observations from
    my site visit, where the property was in clear view from David Street due to the
    open driveway. In any case, a lack of visibility does not obviate the requirement for
    good design. Indeed, the objectives of the policies in chapter 14 of the Framework
    are partly to promote high-quality places and to that extent, policy DP3 1. of the
    Framework states that developments should integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings.
19. I have also considered the other developments referred to by the appellant and I
    viewed the variety of development in the area on my site visit. However, I have not
    been provided with the full planning background of the examples in order to give
    them significant weight in the appeal. From the evidence before me, there is little
    detail of the extensions at 4 and 6 David Street in order to make a direct
    comparison with the appeal scheme. Furthermore, the photographs of the former
    Amazon and Tiger Free House indicate that this was a more comprehensive
    development which unlike the appeal proposal, does not result in an unbalanced
    pair of dwellings. Overall, the variety of houses and extensions in the area does not
    justify the harm to the host dwelling and its locality. Accordingly, none of the
    examples referred to lead me to a different conclusion on this main issue.
20. Consequently, the proposal would be harmful to the character and appearance of
    the host dwelling and the surrounding area. This would be contrary to policy CS19
    of the CS, which amongst other matters, requires that developments are visually
    attractive and contribute positively to the street scene and the character of the area.
    For the same reasons, the proposal would conflict with the SPD, which advises that
    extensions should respect the original character of the existing dwelling and
    complement and correspond with the character of neighbouring properties.
Other Considerations
21. Policy GB6 2. of the Framework states that inappropriate development is, by
    definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very
    special circumstances. Such circumstances will not exist unless the harm to the
    Green Belt by way of inappropriateness and any other harm, is clearly outweighed
    by other considerations.
22. The development in this case amounts to inappropriate development in the Green
    Belt and the Framework requires that substantial weight is attached to the harm in
    that regard. It would also cause moderate harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
23. However, I am conscious of the extensions to the dwelling which the Council have
    already granted planning permission for. This constitutes a fallback position to
    which the appeal scheme can be compared against. From the evidence before me,
    there is little difference between the overall scale of the previous approval and the
    development subject of this appeal. They would not result in a materially different
    increase to the size of the original building or effect on the openness of the Green
    Belt. Accordingly, I find that the fallback position provided by the existing planning
    permission addresses the harm of the proposal by reason of its inappropriateness,
    as well as the harm to the openness of the Green Belt.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005603


24. Nevertheless, the difference between the fallback scheme and the appeal scheme
    in terms of character and appearance is substantial. This is because the fallback
    scheme included a dropped ridge and a setback, in accordance with the guidance
    in the SPD. The current development does not incorporate these design features,
    contrary to the SPD, and resulting in harm to the character and appearance of the
    host dwelling and the surrounding area. Consequently, the fallback position does
    not justify the harm of the appeal scheme in terms of the character and appearance
    main issue.
25. With regards to further considerations, although the proposal presents an
    opportunity to modernise the property, the same benefits in terms of modernising
    the property could be achieved through a proposal which is not harmful to the
    character and appearance of the dwelling and locality. Furthermore, the innovation
    and change encouraged by the Framework does not overcome the visual harm of
    the proposal. Accordingly, such matters do not alter my findings overall and I give
    them limited weight.
Conclusion and Recommendation
26. Due to the fallback the appeal scheme would not be inappropriate development in
    the Green Belt. It would however cause harm to the character and appearance of
    the host property and the surrounding area. Using the terms of policy GB6 2. of the
    Framework, this would be an ‘other harm’. For the reasons given above, the
    fallback would not outweigh the harm to character and appearance and therefore
    the other considerations in this case would not clearly outweigh the harm I have
    found. As such, the very special circumstances necessary to justify the appeal
    scheme do not exist.
27. Consequently, the proposal would be contrary to the development plan overall and
    there are no other material considerations which would outweigh this conflict. I
    therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

T Morris
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
28. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
