Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by SE Hughes BA (Hons) PGDip MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005649
Mill House, Cryers Hill Road, Cryers Hill, Buckinghamshire HP15 6LL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
    planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Zillie Hussain against Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/25/2357/FA.
•   The development proposed was originally described as “householder application for demolition of
    existing side extension and rear conservatory, construction of single storey rear and side extensions
    and associated external alterations including conversion of existing garage to incidental use as a
    gym”.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of
   existing side extension and rear conservatory, construction of single storey rear
   and side extensions and associated external alterations at Mill House, Cryers Hill,
   Buckinghamshire HP15 6LL in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   PL/25/2357/FA, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 2518 A-02, 2518 A-04, 2518 A-06 and 2518 A-
              07.
     3)       The materials to be used for the external surfaces, including walls, roofs,
              doors and windows shall be of the same colour, type and texture as those
              used in the existing building or as stipulated within the application, unless the
              Local Planning Authority otherwise first agrees in writing.
     4)       Prior to first occupation of the development hereby permitted, one ecological
              feature comprising either a bird box, bat box or a bug hotel shall be installed
              within the site curtilage, in a position suitable for their intended purpose, and
              thereafter retained for the lifetime of the development.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of development on the application form includes the conversion of
   existing garage to incidental use as a gym. During the application process the
   appellant requested to withdraw the garage conversion element from the planning
   application. As the Council acknowledge this in its appeal statement and confirm
   that it has omitted these works from its application assessment, I have determined
   the appeal on the same basis, discounting plan no. 2518 A-03 and removing the
   reference to the garage conversion from the description of development in my

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005649


      decision above. As it is not development, I have also omitted the address of the
      property from the description of development in the banner heading and my
      decision above. For the same reason I have omitted the application type from my
      decision above.
3. The appeal relates to a planning application that was not determined by the Council
   within the prescribed period. The Council indicates that since the proposal would
   have a lesser volume compared to the existing extensions it would replace, the
   impact on the openness of the Green Belt compared to the existing situation would
   be minimal, therefore if it had issued a decision, it would have granted planning
   permission.
4. On 17 August 2026 the Government published the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). Whilst the format of the Framework is modified with
   the introduction of national decision-making policies alongside plan making policies,
   the policies pertinent to this appeal, including those relating to the extension and
   alteration of buildings in the Green Belt remain unchanged, except for their
   regrouping under policy GB7 and renumbering. Therefore, there is no need to invite
   further comments from the appellant or the Council on the revisions as they do not
   affect this appeal.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether or not the proposal would be inappropriate development
   in the Green Belt.
Reasons
6. Policy GB7 of the Framework identifies categories of development which are not
   inappropriate in the Green Belt and therefore should not be regarded as harmful to
   the Green Belt or be required to demonstrate very special circumstances. One such
   category is the extension or alteration of a building, provided that it does not result
   in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the ‘original building’1.
7. The Framework does not provide a definition of what would amount to a
   ‘disproportionate’ addition over and above the size of the original building.
8. Policy DM43 of the Wycombe District Local Plan (adopted August 2019) (WDLP)
   identifies the conditions where the extension or replacement of a dwelling is
   appropriate in the Green Belt. In cases where the original dwelling volume
   excluding outbuildings is between 240m3 and 720m3, it requires the total volume of
   the resulting building to be no more than the volume of the original building plus
   50%. Whilst the WDLP predates the Framework by seven years, at the time that it
   was adopted the Framework’s policy on extensions in the Green Belt was the same
   as it is today. Policy DM43 therefore provides detail as to how the size of a
   proposed extension should be assessed locally and is consistent with the
   Framework.
9. The appeal property is a detached, two storey dwelling with various extensions and
   alterations. This includes a side extension, a conservatory and a plant room
   constructed prior to the existence of Policy DM43.


1
 The original building for this purpose is the building that existed on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed after 1 July 1948, as it was built
originally.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    2
Appeal Decision 6005649


10. The parties disagree as to the precise volume of the original property and its
    previous extensions, over and above its original size.
11. The Council suggest that the original dwelling, which included an attached garage,
    had a volume of 607m3 and that its current extensions amount to 492m3, therefore
    they exceed the policy DM43 extension allowance by approximately 189.1m3. It
    estimates that the proposal would result in a decrease in the size of the original
    building by 32m3 (1099.6m3 [existing volume] –1067.13 [proposed volume]).
12. The appellant presents two sets of figures. The first set described as a ‘planning
    volumetric assessment’ suggests that the original dwelling had a volume of
    706.28m3 and that its current extensions amount to 591.19m3 (1297.47m3 existing
    volume). The second set of figures, based on a laser and photographic survey
    (‘architectural volumetric assessment’) suggest that the total volume of the original
    dwelling and its current extensions amount to 1155m3 and the building volume
    removed by the proposal would be 309.95m3 which would be replaced by an
    almost equivalent volume of 308.3m3.
13. Based on the evidence above and the plans before me, I am satisfied that the
    volume of the dwelling would not be larger as a result of the proposal. Furthermore,
    by replacing the elongated side extension and conservatory with more compact
    rear extensions, the appeal scheme would result in a dwelling which has a more
    consolidated, compact appearance overall, which would have less impact on the
    openness of the Green Belt than the dwelling presently. Therefore, whilst I am
    mindful of the technical conflict with Policy DM43 of the WDLP and the exceedance
    of the 50% allowance, as the Framework does not define ‘disproportionate’
    additions, and since, in relative terms, the dwelling would not be larger
    volumetrically than the existing dwelling, I find that it would not result in
    disproportionate additions to the original building.
14. For the reason above, I therefore conclude that the proposal would not be
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt under the terms set out by the
    Framework.
Other Matter
15. As the site is located in the Chilterns National Landscape, formerly known as the
    Chilterns Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, I am mindful of my duties to seek to
    further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of National
    Landscapes. Given the development would result in a more consolidated, compact
    dwelling within the property’s large garden, there would be no impact on the wider
    landscape.
Conditions
16. A condition requiring compliance with the submitted plans is necessary for reasons
    of certainty. To safeguard the character and appearance of the property I have
    imposed a condition requiring the materials for the external surfaces of the proposal
    to match the building or accord with the details specified in the application and to
    enhance on-site biodiversity in order to satisfy the provisions of Policy DM34 of the
    WDLP a condition requiring the provision of one ecological feature is also needed.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005649


Conclusion
17. The proposal conflicts with the development plan but material considerations
    indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with it. For the
    reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

SE Hughes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
