Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by J Bowyer BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 Aug 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005208
Leslie Cottage, Church Street, Dorking, Surrey RH4 1DW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by T Palmer against the decision of Mole Valley District Council.
•   The application Ref is MO/2025/02441.
•   The development proposed is ‘alterations to front boundary masonry wall to create a vehicle parking
    hardstanding’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The application form indicates that the development applied for was completed and
   I saw hardstanding which was in use for parking at my visit. I have nevertheless
   dealt with the appeal on the basis of the development as it is shown on the
   submitted plans.
3. The appeal site is located within the Dorking Conservation Area (‘the CA’) and
   includes a Grade II listed building which is listed as ‘Lesley Cottage’ (‘the Listed
   Building’). I have therefore been mindful of the duties at sections 66(1) and 72(1) of
   the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (‘the LBCA Act’)
   in determining the appeal.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
     i) the effect of the proposal on the significance of the Listed Building;
     ii) the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area
          including the Dorking CA; and
     iii) the effect of the proposal on pedestrian and highway safety.
Reasons
Listed Building
5. The list entry notes that the Listed Building is a timber-framed cottage dating to the
   17th Century. It has a plain tiled roof with a set down gable to one side, a prominent
   brick stack and a roughcast render exterior, and sits on a similar building line to the
   neighbouring Leslie House, behind a shallow front garden which is marked by a low
   wall along the boundary with North Street. The main parties indicate that the
   boundary wall itself is of relatively modern construction, but there is no firm
   information before me to suggest that it does not broadly follow a historic plot limit.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005208


6. Insofar as it relates to this appeal, I consider that much of the significance of the
   Listed Building would derive from its age and its historic and architectural interest
   as an attractive traditional vernacular cottage which the Council notes was situated
   on the edge of the town. The modest front garden distinguishes the building from
   others nearby in closer proximity to the town centre which I saw typically adjoin the
   street edge, reflecting its historic edge of town position. This element of the
   building’s setting therefore informs some understanding of the cottage’s historic
   context and I find it to contribute to the significance of the Listed Building.
7. The proposal includes the removal of a section of the boundary wall to the front of
   the site. This may not have resulted in loss of historic fabric from the site.
   Nevertheless, it has resulted in a marked visual interruption to the enclosure of the
   historic plot. The submitted plans indicate provision of a course of header paving
   along the frontage which the appellant suggests would define the route of the wall
   and form a clear defined abutment with the road. However, this would have a
   relatively modest visual presence and it would not offer comparable sense of
   enclosure to the former wall.
8. The opening in the boundary wall also affords clear views of the blockwork paving
   which has been laid to form the parking space and which appears incongruously
   modern against the traditional materials of the Listed Building. The appellant refers
   to potential conditions relating to materials and detailing including a suggested
   reference to a ‘heritage-appropriate palette’, but they have provided no firm details
   of alternative surfacing materials to enable me to determine that a suitably
   sympathetic finish would be possible.
9. In any event, the hard surfacing occupies a notable proportion of the shallow
   frontage and in my view, its extent results in a dominant feature against the
   remaining soft landscaping. When used for parking, its position also results in any
   vehicle sitting very close to the front building line of the Listed Building and the
   street which creates an uncomfortable visual juxtaposition and a cramped
   appearance.
10. Taking these factors together, I find that the proposal results in an awkward and
    conspicuous feature which detracts from the setting of the Listed Building and
    causes harm to its significance.
11. The proposal would not affect the fabric of the Listed Building and would affect only
    part of its setting, albeit a relatively conspicuous part. Having regard to these
    factors and the scale of the proposal, I find that harm to the significance of the
    Listed Building would be ‘less than substantial’ in the terms of the National Planning
    Policy Framework (‘the Framework’), and at a fairly modest level.
12. Where a proposal will lead to less than substantial harm to the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, the Framework advises that this harm should be
    weighed against the public benefits of the proposal. I return to this matter in my
    planning balance below.
Character and Appearance
13. The Dorking Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan (‘the CAAMP’)
    identifies that the area includes a mix of building types of both higher and lower
    status and a diversity of architectural styles and building materials, although
    traditional vernacular materials predominate. It also highlights the well-defined

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005208


     hierarchy of streets, lanes, footpaths and alleys as important to the area’s special
     character. The appeal site is part of the North Street, Church Street and Mint
     Gardens character area which the CAAMP notes has a very distinctive smaller
     scale and narrow streets providing for a pleasant and attractive intimacy and
     enclosure. North Street itself is particularly narrow with buildings set close to the
     street providing for enclosure in keeping with this part of the CA, while mature
     planting within modest front gardens provides an appreciable verdant quality to
     views along the street.
14. Insofar as it relates to this appeal, the quality of the historic buildings, the use of
    traditional vernacular materials and the form and pattern of the town are all
    elements that I find to contribute to the character and appearance of the CA and
    thus its significance. The listed appeal property is a historic building which formerly
    sat on the edge of the town. Together with its plot, it adds to the enclosed and
    intimate quality of North Street and verdant views along the street and informs
    some understanding of how the area developed. I therefore find the site to
    contribute positively to the character, appearance and significance of the CA.
15. The Council’s Design Guidance for House Extensions and Outbuildings
    Supplementary Planning Document 2025 indicates that proposals likely to result in
    replacing front gardens largely by hard surfaces for parked vehicles will be resisted
    and that smaller front gardens occupied by parked vehicles are normally damaging
    to the character of residential streets and especially to Conservation Areas.
16. In this case, the removal of a section of the front boundary wall on the appeal site
    which I have found above to interrupt the enclosure of the historic plot has similarly
    diminished the sense of enclosure along North Street, an effect which would not be
    meaningfully reduced by the introduction of header paving.
17. In addition, the hard surfacing occupies a significant proportion of the site frontage
    which the Council indicates was formerly landscaped, resulting in an unusually
    stark and dominant feature which stands out against the more typical verdant
    quality of frontages in views along the street. The uncharacteristic nature of the
    development is exacerbated when occupied by a parked vehicle given that frontage
    parking is unusual in the vicinity of the site. The very close proximity of a parked
    vehicle to both the front building line of the appeal dwelling and the street further
    appears cramped and results in an awkward juxtaposition.
18. I find for these reasons that the proposal would detract from the character and
    appearance of the area resulting in conflict with Policy EN4 of the Mole Valley Local
    Plan 2024 (‘the LP’) which includes requirements for high quality design that makes
    a positive contribution to local character.
19. Furthermore, the proposal would not preserve the character or the appearance of
    the Dorking CA and would cause harm to its significance. Given the scale of the
    development and the localised nature of the effect, harm to the significance of the
    CA as a whole would be less than substantial in the terms of the Framework and at
    a very low level. There would nevertheless be harm to a designated heritage asset
    which I return to consider in my planning balance below.
Highway Safety
20. The lack of turning space on the appeal site and very narrow width of North Street
    mean that vehicles would be likely to need to reverse to or from the nearby junction

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005208


     of North Street with Church Street in order to use the proposed parking space and
     the appellant has provided no firm evidence to suggest otherwise.
21. Based on my observations and the limited number of properties served, I do not
    doubt that vehicle traffic along North Street is very light and that speeds are low.
    However, I saw that both North Street and Church Street appeared to be relatively
    well-used as pedestrian routes, with pedestrians crossing the North Street/Church
    Street junction in various directions. Moreover, visibility around the junction is
    somewhat restricted by its geometry and the position of surrounding buildings.
22. As a result and given the narrow width of both North Street and Church Street close
    to the site, I find that reversing manoeuvres around the junction and to or from the
    appeal site would be likely to give rise to significant potential for conflict with
    pedestrians that would be detrimental to safety. The appellant notes that the
    Council has presented no collision data, swept path analysis or measured visibility
    studies, but neither has the appellant presented clear evidence to demonstrate that
    vehicle movements associated with the development would not result in likely
    conflict with pedestrians contrary to my observations.
23. The appellant suggests potential mitigation in the form of signage or markings
    within the forecourt to indicate a reverse-in/forward-out protocol. However, I am not
    satisfied that it would be possible to enforce adherence to such a protocol which
    would in any event still result in reversing manoeuvres into the site. I have also
    noted a suggestion of visibility aids such as a pedestrian awareness mirror, but no
    firm details have been provided and the potential effectiveness of such measures
    has not been demonstrated in evidence. I am not therefore satisfied that mitigation
    measures would offer adequate or effective means to prevent or meaningfully
    reduce the identified risk of conflict with pedestrians.
24. The appellant advises that the property already has ownership of a garage
    accessed from the corner of Church Street requiring a reversing manoeuvre off the
    road, although they indicate that this is unsuited for modern vehicles. However, the
    garage access directly adjoins the junction so that reversing distances would be
    much shorter than required to access the space now proposed and there would be
    no need to reverse along the narrow North Street carriageway. The circumstances
    are not therefore directly comparable to the appeal proposal. Furthermore, the
    garage would remain while the appeal development would introduce additional
    reversing manoeuvres so that there would be greater overall potential for conflict.
    Given these factors, the existing garage is not in my view compelling evidence that
    the proposal would not be detrimental to highway safety
25. Nor have I been provided with firm evidence indicating an existing pattern of
    kerbside stopping at the junction resulting in harm to highway safety, or clear
    information to demonstrate how any such kerbside stopping would be notably
    reduced by the proposal. It is not therefore apparent that the proposal would offer
    an overall benefit to highway safety.
26. The Framework outlines that development should only be prevented on highways
    grounds if there would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety or the residual
    cumulative impacts on the road network, following mitigation, would be severe.
27. Although manoeuvres to and from the site could cause disruption to the free flow of
    pedestrian and vehicular traffic, delays would be likely to be relatively infrequent


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005208


     and of short duration so that I consider effects on highway convenience would be
     very limited.
28. However, while I find that effects on the flow of traffic and wider highway network
    would not be severe, I conclude that the risk of conflict with pedestrians would
    cause unacceptable harm to pedestrian and highway safety. It would therefore
    conflict with Policy INF1 of the LP insofar as it broadly seeks, amongst other things,
    a safe transport network and to ensure that development would not have an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Other Matters
29. The appellant sought advice from Surrey County Council Highways before works to
    form the parking space took place and advises that they were unaware that a
    planning application would be required. I have no firm reason to doubt that the
    appellant acted in good faith, but these factors do not alter my assessment of the
    planning merits of the appeal proposal.
Planning Balance
30. I have found that the proposal would cause harm to the character and appearance
    of the area and unacceptable harm to highway safety. There would also be harm to
    the significance of both the Dorking CA and the Listed Building on the site.
     Heritage Balance
31. The harm caused to the significance of the Listed Building would be less than
    substantial and at a relatively modest level while harm to the significance of the CA
    would be at a very low level. Nevertheless, the Framework advises that when
    considering the impact of development on the significance of designated heritage
    assets, great weight should be given to the asset’s conservation and the harm in
    each case attracts considerable importance and weight.
32. The appellant has suggested that a condition could be imposed referring to all
    works being reversible and any future reinstatement of a wall being in heritage
    materials and coursing. However, it seems to me that there would be little realistic
    prospect of reversion given the effect that this would have on the availability of
    parking. In this context, the development would be likely to be permanent and the
    suggested condition would not offer effective mitigation for the identified harm.
33. Against this harm, the appellant argues that there would be environmental benefit
    through drainage and use of permeable materials to improve runoff management.
    However, there is no firm evidence to suggest a prior issue that would be resolved
    or improved by drainage and runoff management and it seems to me that this
    would relate to mitigation of the effects of the development. Similarly, alterations to
    materials may be able to define the line of the former boundary wall and might offer
    a more sympathetic hard surface, albeit that this has not been clearly
    demonstrated, to that currently present, but I have found above that this would not
    mitigate or outweigh the adverse effects of the development. I am not therefore
    persuaded that these factors amount to public benefits weighing in favour of the
    proposal.
34. The proposal would provide an on-site parking space for the appeal property.
    However, while this may reduce pressure for kerbside parking, the effect would be
    very small and there is no compelling evidence of current harm resulting from

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005208


     parking locally. Furthermore, the appellant asserts that unpredictable kerbside
     stopping at a constrained junction would be reduced but I have found above that
     there would overall be unacceptable harm to highway safety. While I appreciate
     that it would be likely to be of benefit to occupiers of the dwelling, I am not therefore
     satisfied that the provision of a parking space would offer a clear public benefit.
35. In my assessment, public benefits are insufficient to outweigh the harm that would
    be caused to the CA and the Listed Building which attracts considerable
    importance and weight in each case.
36. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would fail to preserve the setting and
    significance of the Listed Building and the character and the appearance of the
    Dorking CA would be neither conserved nor enhanced. There is no clear and
    convincing justification for the harm that the development would cause to these
    heritage assets and the proposal would fail to satisfy the requirements of the LBCA
    Act and the Framework. There would also be conflict with Policy EN6 of the LP
    insofar as it broadly seeks the conservation and enhancement of heritage assets
    and advises that proposals resulting in less than substantial harm to listed buildings
    will not be permitted unless public benefits would outweigh the harm.
     Overall Balance
37. The proposal would result in harm to the character and appearance of the area,
    heritage assets and highway safety resulting in conflict with Policies EN4, EN6 and
    INF1 of the LP. Insofar as they are relevant to this appeal, these policies broadly
    reflect objectives in the Framework seeking development that is sympathetic to
    local character, conservation and enhancement of heritage assets and to avoid
    unacceptable impacts on highway safety, and there is no firm evidence before me
    to indicate that they should be considered out of date in the terms of paragraph
    11. d) of the Framework. In any event, given my findings above, I consider that
    policies in the Framework that protect designated heritage assets provide a strong
    reason for refusing the development proposed.
38. In my assessment, the cumulative harm and resulting conflict with the development
    plan attracts significant weight and I find that the limited benefits of the proposal
    would be insufficient to outweigh the harm and the resulting conflict with the
    development plan.
Conclusion
39. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan when it is read as a whole, and material considerations do not
    indicate that a decision contrary to the development plan should be reached. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Bowyer
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
