Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by Timothy King BA(Hons), MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005011
7 East Mersea Road, West Mersea, CO5 8SL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant [outline] planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Doyle against the decision of Colchester City Council.
•   The application Ref is 252444.
•   The development proposed is a two storey rear flat roof extension with perimeter parapet.


Appeal Ref: 6005014
7 East Mersea Road, West Mersea, CO5 8SL
•  The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
   1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
• The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Doyle against the decision of Colchester City Council.
• The application Ref is 252445.
• The works proposed is a two storey rear flat roof extension with perimeter parapet.
___________________________________________________________________________________

Decision
1. Both appeals are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. As the two appeals concern the same development, albeit under different, but
   comprehensive legislation, I shall deal with both appeals together in my reasoning.
   In reaching my decision I have had regard to the statutory duties under sections
   16(2) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
3. It is proposed that a two-storey flat-roofed extension with a perimeter parapet be
   erected behind the building’s western wing.
4. The appellants indicate that the proposed extension is based on a redesign in
   response to a scheme previously refused by the Council. That might be the case,
   but my remit is to assess the current proposal, not whether its design is considered
   to address the Council’s previous concerns.
Main Issue
5. The main issue on both appeals is whether the proposal would preserve no 7 East
   Mersea Road, otherwise known as Barrow Hill House, a Grade II listed dwelling, and
   any of the features of special architectural or historic interest that it possesses.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005011 and 600514


Reasons
Special Interest and Significance
6. Barrow Hill House, a two-storey dwelling dates from the 17th century, although it has
   an earlier timber-framed cross wing. In terms of historic interest, the building is seen
   as a good example of an existing vernacular farmstead, although it has adapted
   incrementally over the years.
7. Associated with the building is a bakehouse of late 18th/ early19th.century age, along
   with a stable block built in the mid19th century. The Council makes the point that,
   together, they have a strong functional and historic group value.
8. The listing entry also mentions that this building has an exceptional number of
   original fixtures and fittings of particular quality including a fine staircase. Physical
   additions have been made to the building, particularly during the 18th century.
9. Sections 16 and 66 of the LBCAA require decision-makers to have special regard to
   the setting of a listed building. The special interest of a heritage asset derives not
   only from its physical presence and historic fabric but also from its setting which
   comprises the surroundings in which it is experienced. The setting itself, though, is
   not a heritage asset.
10.Although it might reasonably be expected that a building can adapt over time, which
  Barrow Hill House obviously has, conservation is about managing change to a
  building and its setting in ways that sustains, reveals or reinforces its cultural and
  heritage values. Indeed, they should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their
  significance. That said, the purpose of listing is not to prevent changes to buildings,
  but to ensure that the special architectural or historic interest of a building is taken
  into account and preserved.
11.Section 16(2) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
  (LBCAA) requires the decision maker to have special regard to the desirability of
  preserving a listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
  historic interest which it possesses.
12.Policy HE4 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) says that
  heritage assets, as an irreplaceable resource, should be conserved in a manner
  appropriate to their significance. To achieve this, proposals for development which
  would affect the significance of a heritage asset, including any contribution made by
  its setting, should maintain or secure a use consistent with its conservation and
  avoid or minimise harm to the asset’s significance and, instead, conserve this
  significance.
13.Framework Policy HE6 says that when considering the potential effect of a
  development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial
  weight should be given to the asset’s conservation, and the more important the
  asset, the greater the weight should be. This is irrespective of whether any potential
  impact amounts to a positive effect or results in harm, substantial harm, or total loss
  of its significance.
Effects on the listed building
14.The Council is of the view that the proposal would negatively impact on the setting
  of the listed building as it would detract from its relationship with the stables building

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005011 and 600514


   by disrupting this relationship and its setting with that of the former farmstead. In
   response, the appellants say that the wider farmstead has already undergone
   substantial change over the past decades, including the loss of the majority of
   historical agricultural buildings. I have not been provided with full details of such but
   notwithstanding this matter, my main concern is that of the effect on the listed
   building itself.
15.Here, I must agree with the Council that the proposed two-storey extension would
  not integrate with the host building so as to appear subservient to it and respect its
  significance. To illustrate, although the blank rear wall at this section of the building
  is somewhat sparse and can perhaps accommodate an extension of appropriate
  design, the intended two-storey, flat-roofed extension would, at its eastern flank,
  have an awkward interface with the building’s characteristic section of catslide roof.
  This physical relationship would appear particularly jarring and would highlight the
  problem of sympathetically integrating a flat roof form. The parapet would not
  adequately mitigate against this difficult relationship, and the building’s significance
  would be harmed.
16.In light of the above I must agree with the Council that, for the purposes of the
  Framework, the proposed works would give rise to harm. Accordingly, I shall
  attribute considerable importance to this in weighing up the planning balance.
Public Benefits and Planning Balance
17.The advice within the Framework is that firstly, it needs to be identified whether
  there would be harm, and the second stage is whether public benefits weigh against
  this harm. As I have found that the proposed development would fail to preserve the
  special architectural and historic interest of this Grade II listed building, this would
  harm its significance as a designated heritage asset.
18.Paragraph HE6 of the Framework says that where a development would harm the
  significance of a designated heritage asset, any resultant harm will be a matter of
  considerable importance and weight and, as indicated in policy HE4 thereto, any
  such harm should have a clear and convincing justification. Further, policy HE6
  goes on to say that the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
  against any public benefits arising.
19.Policy SP7 of the Colchester Borough Local Plan, Section 1 (LP) requires that
  assets of historical value are protected and enhanced and LP policy DM16 of its
  Section 2 also seeks to conserve the significance of the heritage asset. Related to
  these LP policies DM13 and DM15 serve, respectively, to ensure that residential
  extensions are compatible with the host building in terms of scale, appearance and
  character, and that they are of a high design standard. I am satisfied that the
  proposed extension, as a single entity, would be to a high quality design, but it would
  not be appropriate here in terms of its interface with the host building, especially due
  to its awkward physical relationship with the building’s roof.
20.Turning to public benefits, these should flow from the development. They should be
  of a nature or scale to be of benefit to the public at large and not just be a private
  benefit. The Framework gives two heritage-specific examples of important public
  benefits, which are securing the long-term reuse of a vacant or underused listed
  building and enabling energy efficiency and the employment of low carbon heating
  measures. Houses are for living in, and the proposal would enhance the building’s
  internal accommodation. However, that is not to say, of course, that extensions in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005011 and 600514


   this regard will necessarily be acceptable even, as is the case here, it would have no
   impact on the living conditions or amenities of neighbouring occupiers.
21.Whilst sustainability and energy efficiency are legitimate issues, where historic
  buildings are involved a balance must be achieved between this and avoiding
  damage both to the significance of the building and its fabric, and the visual impact
  of a residential extension on the character and appearance of the historic building.
22.Here the additional floorspace provided by the extension, and the proposed internal
  reconfiguration, would represent a private aspiration, being for reasons of conviviality
  and the private enjoyment of its occupiers. Neither is the building at risk, and does
  not appear in a poor state of repair. The considered visual improvements are
  subjective and do not justify the proposal having regard to the various criteria
  involved in its assessment which I have highlighted. Accordingly, I have not
  identified any actual public benefits arising from the proposed works.
23.As such, clear and convincing justification has not been provided for the
  development and works which would compromise the listed building’s conservation.
  Further, I have concluded that the proposal would not conserve the building in a
  manner appropriate to its significance. That is not to say, of course, that alternative
  proposals, if sympathetically designed, would be precluded but I must agree with the
  Council that the proposed extension would detract from the building’s historic
  interest.
Conclusions
24.I conclude that the proposal would fail to preserve the special architectural and
  historic interest of the Grade II listed building, Barrow Hill House. As such, Appeal B
  would be contrary to the requirements of sections 16(2) and 66(1) of the said Act and
  policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework.
25.It would also be in conflict with the aims and requirements of the said policies of the
  Colchester Borough Local Plan and also those of policy WM25 of the West Mersea
  Neighbourhood Plan.
26.Accordingly, I find that it conflicts with the development plan as a whole, and there
  are no material considerations which indicate that the decision for Appeal A should
  be made other than in accordance with the Local Plan.
27.For the reasons given, I have concluded that both Appeals A and B should be
  dismissed.

Timothy King
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
