Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by E Pickernell BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 08 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005123
Parpan, Eversley Centre, Eversley, Hook, Hampshire RG27 0NJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Alan Cooper against the decision of Hart District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01827/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a replacement dwelling following demolition of the
     existing bungalow and garage.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.    An application for costs has been made by Mr and Mrs Alan Cooper against Hart
      District Council. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue is the effect of the development on the living conditions of the
      occupiers of the neighbouring property, The White House, in respect of outlook
      from its garden and rear facing windows.
Reasons
4.    The appeal site comprises a single storey dwelling which is located in a set-back
      position on its plot in comparison with the neighbouring dwellings. It is proposed to
      replace the dwelling with a two-storey house which would be located further to the
      south than the existing building.
5.    The main rear patio and lawn of The White House is separated from the boundary
      with the appeal site by a parking area. Nevertheless, the side elevation of the
      proposed dwelling would be located relatively close to the boundary with The
      White House. Because of the overall depth of the proposed dwelling and its
      position on the plot, it would run alongside most of the length of the garden
      associated with this property. The side elevation of the proposed dwelling would
      be two storeys in height with a hipped roof.
6.    As a result of its relationship with the garden of The White House, the combined
      depth and height of the proposed dwelling would result in a structure which would
      be particularly oppressive and imposing when experienced from this area. This
      would have an overbearing effect which would result in a significant negative
      impact upon the enjoyment of the external amenity space and consequently, the
      living conditions of the occupiers of The White House.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005123


7.    Because of its relationship with The White House, the proposed dwelling would be
      visible from its rear facing windows. However, the outlook from these windows is
      primarily to the north, over the garden. Although the proposed dwelling would be
      an obvious presence in views from these windows, it would be peripheral due to its
      position to the northeast. As such it would not be so dominating as to be
      overbearing when experienced from within the rear facing rooms.
8.    I therefore conclude that the proposal would have an acceptable effect on the
      living conditions of the occupiers of The White House in respect of outlook from its
      rear facing windows. However, the proposal would result in significant harm to the
      living conditions of the occupiers of The White House in respect of outlook from its
      garden. It would therefore conflict with Policy GEN1 of the Hart Local Plan
      (Replacement) 1996 – 2006 Saved Policies (May 2020) which, amongst other
      things, seeks to ensure that proposals for development avoid any material loss of
      amenity to existing and adjoining residential uses.
9.    The Council refer to Policy NBE9 of the Hart Local Plan (Strategy and Sites)
      (2032) in the reason for refusal, however this refers to matters of design. Although
      the reason for refusal refers to scale and bulk, this is with respect to the effect on
      living conditions, as opposed to the appearance of the proposed development. As
      such Policy NBE9 has not been determinative in respect of my consideration of the
      main issue.
Other matters
10. I recognise that the scheme has been amended following an earlier refused
    application at the site. Nevertheless, I have assessed the proposal on its own
    merits and for the reasons given, have found that harm would occur despite the
    amendments which have been made.
11. I also acknowledge that the proposal represents an opportunity to provide a new,
    modern and efficient dwelling and that the Council have raised no objections in
    respect of the design of the proposed dwelling. However, these considerations do
    not outweigh the harm which would occur in respect of the living conditions of the
    occupiers of the neighbouring property.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.

E Pickernell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
