Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 June 2026
by N Unwin BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005788
Heyrod Fold, John Street, Tameside, Stalybridge SK15 3BN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Matthew Cust against the decision of Tameside Metropolitan Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00570/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as the: construction of one dwelling house.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2.    The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
           •    The character and appearance of the area, including the significance of the
                Grade II listed 14, 16, and 18 John Street through development within their
                setting; and
           •    Ecology and biodiversity.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
3.    The appeal site forms an area of land between John Street and Chamberlain Road
      with a public footpath along the northern boundary of the site. The appeal site is
      part of a larger undeveloped sloped area separating the properties adjacent to
      both highways. Whilst the appeal site benefits from planning approval
      08/00416/FUL for the use as private garden land, there was no evidence of such
      use at the time of my site visit, with the site appearing overgrown with dense
      vegetation, appearing undeveloped in nature.
4.    The proposal would introduce a two-storey detached dwelling on to the site which
      would be positioned at an angle across the width of the site and would be
      accessed from John Street. The dwelling would have an integral garage and would
      be constructed of stone.
5.    The majority of the dwellings adjacent to John Street appear traditional in nature
      with a mixed material pallet and vertical emphasis. The surrounding undeveloped
      green spaces give the area including the setting of these buildings, a rural
      character. Further, the undeveloped area which includes the appeal site serves to
      visually separate these traditional dwellings from the more modern nature of those

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005788


      adjoining Chamberlain Road. As such, this open area of vegetated land including
      the appeal site, positively contributes to the character and appearance of the area.
6.    The duty under Section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
      Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires special regard to be paid to the desirability of
      preserving a listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
      historic interest which it possesses.
7.    The appeal site lies to the rear of Grade II listed 14, 16, and 18 John Street. These
      form three-storey stone-built terraces with pitched slate roofs. The information
      before me indicates that these were formerly a trio of weavers’ houses whose
      appearance is characteristic of their date and historic function, with the hillsides
      beyond contributing to their wider moorland setting. As such, their significance is
      derived from age, materials, traditional construction, historic function, in addition to
      their rural setting.
8.    The appeal site forms a significant element of the green and open backdrop and
      separation from development along Chamberlain Road, preserving the rural
      setting of the listed terrace at John Street. As such, the appeal site positively
      contributes to the setting of the Grade II listed 14, 16, and 18 John Street.
9.    10a John Street (no 10a) appears to be a more recent, Moden addition replicating
      a traditional design. Nonetheless, it is located to the north of Grade II listed 14, 16,
      and 18 John Street with the end elevation, having a similar building line to the rear
      elevation of the dwellings along John Street, avoiding any encroachment into the
      green gap behind them. As such, whilst within the setting of Grade II listed 14, 16,
      and 18 John Street, no 10a preserves the open green area to their rear and
      therefore their rural setting.
10. The proposal would be orientated so as to align with the houses on John Street
    but would have a horizontal emphasis in contrast to the more vertical emphasis of
    the two and three storey terraces which it would be viewed within the context of.
    As a result, it would appear incongruously located within the existing open area,
    disrupting the pattern of the surrounding development. Moreover, this visual
    intrusion would erode the green gap to the rear of the properties along John
    Street, harming the semi-rural setting of these dwellings. Further, the elevated
    position of the proposed dwelling in relation to John Street would make the
    development a prominent feature from this viewpoint and the public realm.
11. Existing vegetation and further landscaping within the appeal site would do little to
    screen the proposal due to its elevated position. Whilst some of the green area
    would remain and the proposal would use a traditional design and materials, this
    would do little to overcome the aforementioned harm caused by the intrusion of the
    built environment. As such, the proposal would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area. Whilst the street pattern within the locality may have
    changed over time and the proposal would retain existing garden areas and not
    harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, these do not justify this harm.
12. The intrusion of the built environment to the rear of the Grade II listed 14, 16, and
    18, John Street would have a detrimental effect on the rural setting of these
    heritage assets and therefore their significance. Whilst the Council refer to the
    development representing substantial harm, on the basis of the above I consider
    the harm would amount to less than substantial. Paragraph 212 of the National


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005788


      Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) requires great weight to be given to
      the conservation of heritage assets, irrespective of the degree of harm.
13. In accordance with Paragraph 215 of the Framework, the harm should be weighed
    against the public benefits of the proposal. The proposal would contribute a large
    family dwelling to the existing housing stock, future occupiers would utilise local
    services, there would be economic benefits during the construction phase, to local
    businesses during occupation, and through the payment of council tax. The
    appellant additionally contends that the proposal would reduce the need for
    housing elsewhere in addition to being within a sustainable location. Nevertheless,
    given the scale of the proposal I can only afford these limited weight, which would
    not outweigh the harm to the significance of the heritage asset, to which I must
    afford considerable importance and weight.
14. Although the Grade II listed Holly Cottage lies between John Street and Wakefield
    Road. Given the intervening distance with the appeal site and buildings in-
    between, I do not consider the proposal to be within the setting of this heritage
    asset.
15. Taking the above matters into consideration, I conclude that the proposal would
    have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area including the
    significance of the listed buildings. It would not therefore meet the requirements of
    section 66 of the Act. As such, it would not accord with the relevant provisions of
    Policies H9, H10, C1, C6, 1.11 of the Tameside Unitary Development Plan (2004)
    (TUD), and Policy JP-P2 of the Places for Everyone Joint Development Plan
    Document 2022 – 2039 (2024) (DPD). When read together these require
    development to respect the distinct settlement pattern, open space features and
    landscape character, not cause serious detriment to the character of the area, and
    to not detract from the setting of listed buildings.
Ecology and Biodiversity
16. The appeal site is overgrown and contains mature vegetation. The appellant has
    indicated that the proposal is for self-build and custom build development and
    would therefore not be subject to the statutory pre-commencement biodiversity
    gain condition as set out in Schedule 7A to the Town and Country Planning Act
    1990 (as amended). Nevertheless, there is no mechanism before me to secure the
    proposal as self-build. Further Policy JP-G8 of the DPD requires development to
    achieve a measurable net gain in biodiversity of no less than 10%.
17. The Extended Preliminary Ecological Assessment (2025) (EPEA) found that the
    appeal site comprises semi-improved good neutral grassland as well as Bramble
    Scrub, Mixed Scrub and Other Broadleaved Woodland (non-priority Sycamore
    scrub), and Individual Rural Trees.
18. The prosed dwelling would occupy a significant portion of the appeal site with the
    EPEA providing little detail as to precisely what vegetation will be removed.
    Therefore, on the information before me, I am not satisfied that the proposal would
    not be harmful to the existing ecology of the appeal site or that a net gain in
    biodiversity of no less than 10% could be achieved.
19. As such, based on the information before me I conclude that the proposal would
    harm ecology and biodiversity. Therefore, the proposal would conflict with the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005788


      relevant provisions of Policy JP-G8 of the DPD. This requires development to
      minimise impacts on and provide no less than 10% net gains in biodiversity.
Other Matters
20. The appellant contends that heritage was not raised as an issued during the
    determination process in addition to discrepancies within the delegated report
    regarding the design of the proposal and lack of reference to a heritage specialist.
    They additionally refer to other dwellings permitted elsewhere within the village.
    Nonetheless, these do not justify the above identified harm.
21. The proposal may provide outdoor amenity space, parking and access for future
    occupiers, and not land lock other potential development sites. However, these are
    neutral factors and weigh neither for nor against the proposal.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
