Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by S Ramsden BSc (Hons) MA MA IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6005312
13 Court Yard, Eltham, London SE9 5PR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant, subject to conditions, of prior approval granted under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2,
     Part 1, Class AA of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
     Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Andrew Smith, of Altitude Contractors Ltd., against the decision of Council
     of the Royal Borough of Greenwich.
•    The application Ref 25/4000/PN5, was granted approval by notice dated 14 January 2026 subject to
     conditions.
•    The development granted approval is for a roof top extension involving the addition of one storey to
     no. 13 & 13A Court Yard, SE9 to create 1 self contained flats (1 x 2-bed).
•    The condition in dispute is No 7 which states that: no occupation of the unit shall take place until
     arrangements have been made to secure the development as 'car-free' (at the developers expense)
     in accordance with a detailed scheme or agreement which has been approved in writing by the local
     planning authority. The approved scheme or agreement must ensure that:
          a) all future occupiers of the approved development cannot apply for, obtain, or hold an on-
          street parking permit to park a vehicle on the public highway within the administrative district of
          the Local Planning Authority (other than a disabled person's badge issued pursuant to section 21
          of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970 or similar legislation);
          b) all occupiers of the approved development are required to surrender any such permit wrongly
          issued or held; and
          c) such scheme or agreement shall be implemented prior to the occupation of the development
          hereby permitted and shall be retained and operated for the lifetime of the development.
•    The reason given for the condition is: to promote sustainable transport by reducing the need for car
     travel in accordance with Policy T6 of the London Plan (2021) and Policies IM(b) and IM(c) of the
     Royal Greenwich Local Plan: Core Strategy with Detailed Policies (July 2014).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is whether Condition 7 meets the tests in the Framework and the
       Planning Practice Guidance (the PPG), with particular regard to ensuring the
       development is car-free, thereby reducing the need for car travel.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005312


Reasons
4.     To promote active travel, Policy IM(c) of the Royal Greenwich Local Plan: Core
       Strategy with Detailed Policies (the Local Plan), 2014, seeks to deliver
       developments within controlled parking zones with good access to public transport
       that are car-free or car capped. Policy IM(b) of the Local Plan encourages walking
       and cycling in the Borough, to reduce the reliance on private vehicles.
5.     These are underpinned by Policy T6 of the London Plan, 2021, which states that
       the starting point for new developments in areas with good access to public
       transport, where adequate restrictions are in place, should be car-free.
6.     The appeal site is within a controlled parking zone area and has Passenger
       Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL) rating of 5, indicating a very good level of
       public transport accessibility. It is within 800 metres of Eltham railway station,
       which is considered in the Framework to be a reasonable walking distance. At my
       site visit I observed that, although not on a street frontage, the appeal site is in
       close proximity to a main street and there are also a number of bus stops nearby.
7.     Whilst the development is for one residential unit, if it was not to be car-free, it
       would result in increased pressure on car parking locally. It would also lead to a
       possible increase in the use of private vehicles, which would not support active
       travel, contrary to Policies IM(c) and IM(b) of the Local Plan. The condition is
       therefore reasonable and necessary to make the development acceptable in
       planning terms, and to ensure the development does not conflict with those
       policies and with Policy T6 of the London Plan.
8.     The appellant states that car-free developments are typically secured through a
       section 106 legal agreement and not a planning condition. However, I have not
       been presented with a section 106 agreement, as an alternative means of securing
       the development as car-free. While the appellant also contends that the condition
       would be difficult to enforce, criterion a) and b) Condition 7 give the Council clear
       parameters within which to enforce its requirements.
9.     The PPG states that a negatively worded condition limiting the development that
       can take place until a planning obligation or other agreement has been entered
       into is unlikely to be appropriate in the majority of cases. However in the absence
       of a signed section 106 agreement, in this instance the condition is reasonable and
       necessary to ensure the development is car-free and does not conflict with
       development plan policies.
Conclusion
10. For the reasons set out above, Condition 7 meets the tests in the Framework and
    the PPG, with particular regard to ensuring the development is car-free thereby
    reducing the need for car travel, and therefore the appeal should be dismissed.

S Ramsden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
