    Appeal Decision
    Site visit undertaken on 30 August 2026

    by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 18 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6005792
    273 Abingdon Road, Oxford OX1 4TJ
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
        to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mrs Yarum Islam against the decision of Oxford City Council.
    •   The application reference is 25/02635/FUL.
    •   The development is described as on the Application Form as ‘Application to drop kerb outside of the
        dwelling house to provide access and egress to homeowners driveway.’

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (TCPA) Section 65(5) states that Notice
   etc of applications for planning permission that “a local planning authority shall not
   entertain an application for planning permission unless any requirements imposed
   by virtue of this section have been satisfied” and 327A(2) whereby “The local
   planning authority must not entertain such an application if it fails to comply with the
   requirement.”
3. The Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England)
   Order 2015 (DMPO2015) together with the National Planning Practice Guidance
   (NPPG) sets out what is required in a planning application in order to make a
   determination of that application. Section 3 of the DPO2015 states that …An
   applicant for planning permission must give requisite notice of the application to
   any person (other than the applicant) who on the prescribed date is an owner of the
   land to which the application relates. Furthermore, the NPPG states that “A
   certificate which applicants must complete that provides certain details about the
   ownership of the application site and confirms that an appropriate notice has been
   served on any other owners… An application is not valid, and therefore cannot be
   determined by the local planning authority, unless the relevant certificate has been
   completed.1”
4. In order to show the land subject to the planning application, a location plan2 is
   submitted, however the red line boundary covers land such as the footpath and
   kerb which are not under the ownership of the Appellant. In such a case the
   Certificate B of the Planning Application Form should have been signed, and
   requisite notice of the application should have been given to the owner, who is the
   Highway Authority. In this case the Certificate A was signed indicating that the
   Appellant owns all of the land within the red line boundary which is not the case.
1
    Paragraph: 025 Reference ID: 14-025-20140306 Revision date: 06 03 2014
2
    ‘Location and Block Plan,’ Drawing No. PAS-PR118-Location and Block Plan, Dated 07/10/2025

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               1
    Appeal Decision: 6005792


5. As a result of this conflict and my interpretation of the TCPA, DMPO2015 and the
   NPPG, the lack of following the correct process of notification means that the
   original application was invalid as it was unable to be determined. I note that the
   Appellant’s Appeal Statement contains another amended application form with
   details written into Certificate B which highlights that the Highway Authority was
   given notice after the decision date, however this Certificate B is also not signed.
   The signing and giving notice of the application is an essential component which
   sets the parameters of the decision and notification. The acceptance of such as an
   amendment to this appeal in my opinion would not be made in line with the
   ‘Wheatcroft Principles3’ as the acceptance of such would deprive those who should
   have been notified on the development of the opportunity of such notification.
6. Taking the above into account, and additionally advice in relevant Case Law4, the
   information presented within the application has a significant conflict and is
   subsequently invalid. I am therefore unable to make a determination as to the
   planning merits of the proposed scheme.
Conclusion
7. For these reasons, and having considered all matters raised in evidence and from
   what I saw during my site visit, the appeal should not continue, and I am unable to
   consider the planning merits of the scheme. I conclude that the appeal is not valid
   and, on this basis, should be dismissed5.

J Somers
INSPECTOR




3
  Bernard Wheatcroft Ltd v SSE [JPL 1982 P37]
4
  Maximus Networks Ltd v SSCLG [2018] EWHC 1933 (Admin) (25 July 2018)
5
  Section 79(6) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
