Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by D R Kay BA Dip.Arch RIBA(Retired)
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005162
Land to the East of Wymers Wood Road, Burnham, Buckinghamshire SL1 8LQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Gary Higson against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/25/4615/FA.
•   The development proposed is Detached two storey and single storey, 5-bedroom self-build dwelling
    house and associated works includes vehicular access, parking, integral garage and landscaping.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a detached two storey
   and single storey, 5-bedroom self-build dwelling house and associated works
   including vehicular access, parking, integral garage and landscaping, at Land to the
   East of Wymers Wood Road, Burnham, Buckinghamshire SL1 8LQ in accordance
   with the terms of the application, Ref PL/25/4615/FA, subject to the conditions in
   the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026, which made certain revisions to aspects of national planning
   policy. Having examined the revised Framework in respect of the matters relied on
   by the main parties, in the interests of fairness, I have reverted to the parties for
   their comments as to the effects of the revised Framework on their respective
   cases. I have therefore determined the appeal in accordance with the revised
   Framework, and having regard to the comments received from the main parties.
3. The decision notice contained two reasons for refusal. The second reason was the
   effect of the proposal on the Burnham Beeches Special Area of Conservation
   (SAC) without adequate mitigation. The appellant has submitted a signed and
   dated Unilateral Undertaking (the UU) with the appeal, which would secure
   payment to the Burnham Beeches Special Area of Conservation Strategic Access
   Management and Monitoring Strategy (SAMMS) Supplementary Planning
   Document (SPD). The Council, having examined the UU, determine that it would
   secure adequate mitigation and therefore the second reason for refusal would be
   adequately addressed. They therefore no longer contest the second reason for
   refusal.
4. The appeal site is proximate to a Listed Building. I am therefore mindful of the
   statutory duties placed on decision-makers by section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed
   Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended) (the Act) to have
   special regard to the desirability of preserving listed buildings or their settings.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005162


Main Issues
5. The appeal site is located within the Metropolitan Green Belt; the main issues
   therefore are:
         •    whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
              (the GB) for the purposes of the development plan and the Framework,
              including the effect upon the openness of the Green Belt; and
         •    if the proposal is found to be inappropriate development, whether the harm
              by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by
              other considerations, so as to amount to the very special circumstances
              required to justify the development.
Reasons
Whether or not the development would be inappropriate
6. The appeal site (the site) is a roughly rectangular parcel of land described as being
   around 0.16 hectares in area, and which is located to the east side of Wymers
   Wood Road on the northern side of its junction with Poyle Lane. The site currently
   takes its vehicular access from Wymers Wood Road via a field gate located in its
   north-west corner. The site is undeveloped and has significant tree and hedge
   cover to its perimeter boundaries, though it currently has an open boundary to an
   adjacent plot of land to its northern end.
7. In spatial policy terms the site lies just to the north of the defined settlement
   boundary of the village of Burnham. It therefore lies within a land use designation
   as open countryside, washed over by the Metropolitan GB.
8. Development within the GB is controlled by Policy GB1 of the South Bucks District
   Local Plan 1999 (the Local Plan). This policy reflects many of the general aims of
   GB policy within the Framework, though it does not encompass the extent of
   exceptions to inappropriate development in the GB, contained in Policy GB7 of the
   Framework. I therefore give Policy GB1 of the Local Plan more limited weight in the
   determination of the appeal. It also refers to Policy GB3 of the Local Plan for limited
   infilling within the boundaries of certain GB settlements. However, Burnham is not
   included within the list of settlements to which Policy GB3 applies, and even if it
   were, as the appeal site lies outside the defined settlement boundary of Burnham, it
   would not receive support from Policy GB3.
9. The government attaches great importance to GB’s, the essential features of which
   are their openness and permanence. Section 13 of the Framework states that the
   objective of GB policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently
   open. Policy GB6 of the Framework states that development in the GB is
   inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in Policy GB7 of the
   Framework.
10. Policy GB6 of the Framework goes on to state that inappropriate development is,
    by definition, harmful to the GB and should not be approved except in very special
    circumstances. Such circumstances will not exist unless the potential harm to the
    GB by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm resulting from the proposed
    development, is clearly outweighed by other considerations. In making this
    assessment, substantial weight should be given to the harm to the GB which would
    be caused, including harm to its openness.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005162


11. The primary issue is therefore to determine if the proposal would represent
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out
    exceptions to inappropriate development. I find the site would not comply with
    exceptions GB7(1)(a), GB7(1)(b), GB7(1)(c), GB7(1)(d), GB7(1)(f) or GB7(1)(h).
12. With regards to the exception contained in GB7(1)(e) - the redevelopment of
    previously developed land (PDL), the appellant argues that the site previously
    formed part of the curtilage of an adjacent residential dwelling known as
    ‘Elizabeth’s Way’, prior to being separated and subsequently sold. They cite
    several legal cases where the definition of land being ‘part and parcel’ of the
    curtilage of one property would provide support for the appeal site to be considered
    PDL.
13. However, were I to accept the argument that the appeal site was part and parcel of
    the residential curtilage of the adjacent ‘Elizabeth’s Way’ property, it would,
    therefore be residential garden land. As such, it would not meet the definition of
    PDL in Annex B of the Framework, which specifically excludes residential garden
    land from the definition of PDL. I find the appeal proposal would, therefore, not
    meet the GB7(1)(e) exception.
14. Turning to the exception to inappropriate development provided by Policy
    GB7(1)(g), this relates to development where all of four sub-paragraphs (i) to (iv)
    apply. However, the last, (iv), is only relevant where the proposal would be classed
    as major development. As the appeal proposal is for a single dwelling, it would not
    be required to meet this criterion.
15. GB7(1)(g)(i) requires that the proposal would utilise grey belt land and would not
    fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining GB
    across the area of the plan. The appeal proposal is a re-submission of a scheme
    which was the subject of a previous appeal1. The Inspector in that case examined
    whether the appeal site represented Grey Belt Land (GBL), reaching the conclusion
    that it was GBL.
16. Although the examination of the previous appeal was at that time under the
    December 2024 Framework, the newly issued August 2026 Framework, against
    which I am examining the appeal case, has made no alteration to the definition of
    GBL that would alter my determination, other than its inclusion now being in ‘Annex
    B: Glossary’ of the new Framework, and the removal of the old Footnote 7
    exclusions from the definition of GBL.
17. Having examined the evidence, I find that the proposal would not contribute to the
    sprawl of large built-up areas, would not result in neighbouring towns merging into
    one another, and would not be situated so as to be required to preserve the setting
    and special character of a historic town. Accordingly, as ‘any other land’ that would
    not strongly contribute to any of purposes (a), (b) or (d) outlined in Policy GB2(1) of
    the Framework, I find it would represent GBL. It is, therefore, necessary to consider
    whether development of the appeal site would fundamentally undermine the
    purposes (taken together) of the remaining GB across the area of the plan.
18. I have already determined that the appeal site would not strongly contribute to any
    of the GB purposes (a), (b) or (d) in Policy GB2(1) of the Framework. Purpose
    GB2(1)(e) relates to assisting in urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of

1
    APP/X0415/W/25/3360406


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005162


     derelict or other urban land. As the site is not urban land and is of limited size, I find
     that the appeal site would not strongly contribute to this purpose of the GB.
19. Turning to the purpose identified in GB2(1)(c), which is to assist in safeguarding the
    countryside from encroachment, the appeal proposal would result in development
    of a site which sits outside of the defined settlement boundary of Burnham, within a
    land use designation of open countryside, and which currently has a semi-rural
    appearance. However, the site is located at the edge of the village, with residential
    development to its north-west, north, north-east, east and south. On a site-specific
    level, I do not consider the proposal would result in encroachment into the
    surrounding countryside.
20. However, the assessment for Policy GB7(1)(g)(i) is not the effect of development
    on the specific site, but rather it is whether development of the appeal site would
    fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining GB
    across the area of the plan. The appeal site is located within the former South
    Bucks district, an area of 14,100 hectares, of which 87.4% comprises GB land, the
    larger towns and villages being excluded from the GB. The appeal site would, at
    0.16 hectares, represent a very small percentage of the remaining GB land.
21. Development of the appeal site would not result in the envelope of residential
    development within the village being extended further into open countryside. It
    would consolidate an area between existing development. There would, therefore,
    be no encroachment into surrounding countryside. I therefore find that, given its
    modest size, development of the appeal site would not fundamentally undermine
    the ability of the remaining Green Belt, across the area of the plan, from serving all
    five of the Green Belt purposes. It would therefore represent Grey Belt Land which
    meets exception GB7(1)(g)(i).
22. Criterion ii of Policy GB7(1)(g) relates to the need for there to be evidenced unmet
    need for the type of development proposed. This defines, via Footnote 41, that in
    the case of applications for housing, and therefore appeals for housing, this would
    be evidenced by a lack of a 5-year supply of deliverable housing sites, including the
    relevant buffers where applicable. The Council have acknowledged they cannot
    demonstrate a 5-year supply as required by the Framework. I therefore find that the
    proposal would meet Criterion ii of Policy GB7(1)(g).
23. Criterion iii of Policy GB7(1)(g) requires the development to be in a sustainable
    location, with particular reference to Policy TR3 of the Framework. This policy sets
    out in paragraph 1, five principles (a) to (e). Principle (a) requires development
    proposals which would generate a significant amount of movement, in the context
    of the area in which it would be situated, to be in locations that are sustainable.
    Having examined the proposal, as a single dwelling, I do not consider that it would
    result in a significant amount of movement, given its location at the edge of the
    village of Burnham. I find it would therefore accord with principle (a).
24. Principle (b) requires optimisation of the density of development related to the
    availability of transport infrastructure. Given the limited size of the site, I find the
    proposal would maximise its development capacity, given the context of its
    surrounding development. The site would make use of the existing transport
    infrastructure, and its edge of village location would support more walking,
    wheeling, cycling and public transport use. I find that it would, therefore, accord
    with principle (b).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005162


25. Principle (c) requires any significant impacts of development on the transport
    network in terms of capacity and congestion, or on highway safety to be mitigated.
    Due to its size, the proposal would have a limited effect on capacity or congestion
    to the transport network, and highway safety has been adequately addressed
    through the positioning of its access and the provision of adequate visibility splays
    to avoid effects on highway safety. I find that it would, therefore, accord with
    principle (c).
26. Principle (d) requires the environmental impacts of traffic and transport
    infrastructure to be identified, assessed and taken into account. Given the limited
    size of the proposal, I find it would likely have limited impact on traffic and transport
    infrastructure. I find that it would, therefore, accord with principle (d).
27. Principle (e) requires that in rural areas, opportunities to improve walking, wheeling,
    cycling and public transport, and to enhance the connectivity of an area should be
    taken where they can be supported by the development proposed. The proposal is
    of limited size and would therefore present limited opportunity to support
    improvements in connectivity. However, the proposal has included cycle parking
    which would encourage future occupiers to utilise this method of transport, which I
    find would be likely to be beneficial, given the location of the site around 1km north
    of the village high street and its services. I find the proposal would, therefore,
    accord with principle (e).
28. Policy TR3(2) also recommends the use of the Governments Connectivity Tool in
    assessing the connectivity of proposals. The appellant has submitted evidence of
    the results from an assessment of the site utilising this tool. This identifies the site
    to have average or above average connectivity, relative to the method of travel and
    to its semi-rural location. The site lies at the edge of Burnham, a large village
    whose south-eastern boundary abuts the town of Slough. It has good access to
    local health, school, sporting and commercial services, and its own station on both
    the national rail network and the London underground Elizabeth Line.
29. Having found the appeal site and proposal to accord with principles (a) to (e) of
    Policy TR3(1), and to have acceptable levels of connectivity when assessed
    against TR3(2), I therefore find that the appeal site and proposal would meet the
    criterion contained within Policy GB7(1)(g) of the Framework. It would, therefore,
    not represent inappropriate development in the GB, and would accord with Policy
    GB6 of the Framework. As the proposal would not represent major development, it
    would not need to demonstrate compliance with Policy GB8 of the Framework.
30. Accordingly, as directed by Policy GB7(1) of the Framework, the proposal should
    not be regarded as harmful to the GB or be required to demonstrate very special
    circumstances. It follows, therefore, that I find it would not conflict with Policy GB1
    of the Local Plan.
Other Matters
Habitat Sites
31. The appeal site lies within the 5.6km Zone of Influence of the Burnham Beeches
    SAC, a European Designated Site afforded protection under the Conservation of
    Habitats and Species Regulations 2017, as amended (the Regulations). The
    qualifying feature of the SAC is its Atlantic acidophilous beech forests. It is also a
    rich site for deadwood invertebrates and important epiphytic communities.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005162


32. It is accepted that the greatest pressure to the SAC arises from recreational
    activity. The proposal would increase the local population in the area, which would
    likely increase recreation use of the SAC.
33. The Council have a Strategic Access Management and Monitoring Strategy (2020)
    (SAMMS) to address public access to and disturbance of the SAC. The evidence
    base supporting the SAMMS found that an increase in the number of residential
    properties within 5.6km of the SAC would require mitigation measures to avoid
    adverse effects on the integrity of the SAC from the cumulative impacts of
    development. Consequently, taking a precautionary approach, as required by the
    Regulations, and when combined with other development within the area, likely
    significant effects (LSE) on the SAC as a result of the proposal cannot be ruled out
    in the absence of mitigation.
34. The SAMMS is robust and capable of mitigating the likely significant effects of the
    proposal, subject to a financial contribution being provided towards the SAMMS
    and the monitoring fees of the Council. The appellant has submitted a Unilateral
    Undertaking (a UU) to secure the payment of the required contributions, including
    the monitoring fee and legal costs. The appellant’s UU has secured the necessary
    financial contribution to overcome the Council’s reason for refusal regarding
    adverse effects on the integrity of the SAC, and which has been accepted by the
    Council.
35. Natural England has been consulted as part of this appropriate assessment and is
    content that the financial contribution secured by the UU, which aligns with the
    Council’s adopted strategy, would address the adverse effects associated with the
    proposed development and would thereby relieve pressure on the Habitat sites.
36. As competent authority for the purposes of this appeal, I am satisfied that the UU
    would secure and ensure delivery of mitigation, sufficient to address the harm likely
    to be caused by the development. I therefore find that, subject to the proposed
    mitigation, the proposal would not have any harmfully adverse LSE on the integrity
    of the Habitat sites, in accordance with regulation 63 of the Conservation of
    Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 and would therefore accord with Core
    Policy 9 of the Core Strategy.
Listed Building
37. The appeal site is located adjacent to ‘Elizabeth’s Way’ a 17th Century, two-storey,
    timber framed residential cottage with later additions, which is Grade II listed, and
    which derives its significance from a combination of its age and from the quality of
    its architectural detail. The Council found no harm, either to the significance or the
    setting of the listed building resulting from the appeal proposal.
38. Having examined the evidence, and based upon my site visit, owing to the
    combination of the separation distance and the presence of a dense, mature tree
    and shrub belt to the eastern boundary of the appeal site, separating and screening
    it from the adjacent garden and property of the listed building, I find no reason to
    find otherwise. The appeal proposal would be sufficiently distant from the listed
    building, and adequately screened, such that the proposal would not cause harm
    either to its significance or its setting. As a result, this is a matter that carries little
    weight in the planning balance, as an absence of harm does not weigh positively in
    favour of the proposal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005162


Self-Build / Custom-Build
39. The application is for the development of a self-build/custom-build dwelling.
    Accordingly, it benefits from an exemption to the statutory requirements of the
    Environment Act (2021) (the EA), to deliver a mandatory biodiversity net gain of at
    least 10%. However, it is essential that the self-build/custom-build form of
    development is secured. The appellant has completed a deed of Unilateral
    Undertaking under s106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, dated 26
    August 2026, which includes an obligation for financial contributions to the Council
    to reimburse it for its costs in preparing and monitoring the agreement.
40. The appellant’s signed and dated deed of unilateral undertaking also defines the
    development as self-build and legally binds the appellant to construct and occupy
    the property as a self-build dwelling. I have considered this in light of the statutory
    tests contained in Regulation 122 of The Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
    Regulations 2010. I am satisfied that the obligation is necessary to make the
    development acceptable in planning terms. The information before me indicates the
    parties have agreed to the identified figures. I have little basis to find otherwise.
    Hence, on that basis this obligation is fairly and reasonably related to the
    development proposed and passes the statutory tests in this regard.
Planning Balance
41. The Council’s latest 5-year housing land supply statement for the southern area
    identifies that they can currently demonstrate 0.97-years housing land supply. This
    is significantly below the 5-years supply of housing land required by the
    Framework.
42. The site is within the zone of influence of a European Habitat Site. Policy N6 of the
    Framework is therefore of relevance. However, as I have found that any LSE to the
    Habitat Site can be adequately mitigated, and this has been secured by a signed
    and dated UU, it would comply with Policy N6, and therefore, not provide a strong
    reason for refusing the proposed development.
43. The site is also within proximity to a listed building which is a designated heritage
    asset protected by Policies HE5 and HE6 of the Framework. However, I have found
    that the proposal would not harm either the significance or the setting of the Grade
    II listed ‘Elizabeth’s Way’ property. It would therefore accord with Policies HE5 and
    HE6 of the Framework.
44. Policy S3 of the Framework identifies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S5(1) of the Framework identifies that for development
    proposals outside settlements, only certain forms of development should be
    approved. However, paragraph 5 of Policy S5 notes that Policy S5 does not apply
    to development proposals in the GB, which should be determined in accordance
    with Policies GB6, GB7 and GB8(as appropriate). Paragraph 5 of Policy S5 goes
    on to state that where development in the GB would not be inappropriate,
    proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework, and applying paragraph 2 of
    Policy S5.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005162


45. I have found that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the GB
    having been assessed against Policies GB6 and GB7 of the Framework. As the
    proposal would comply with Policies N6, HE5 and HE6 of the Framework, applying
    paragraph 2 of Policy S5, I find that the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development would not be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
46. As I have found the proposal would not represent inappropriate development in the
    GB, it would, therefore, also accord with Policy GB1 of the Local Plan.
Conditions
47. I have had regard to the 14 conditions suggested by the Council and the comments
    provided by the appellant. Where necessary I have amended the wording, in the
    interests of precision and clarity, and in order to comply with the advice in the
    Planning Practice Guidance and the Framework. Pre-commencement conditions
    have been agreed by the appellant, following issuance of a Regulation 2(4) Notice.
48. In addition to the standard time limit for implementation, in the interests of certainty,
    I have attached a condition specifying the approved plans.
49. Pre-commencement conditions are necessary to establish a Construction and
    Environment Management Plan in the interests of public safety, as well as a
    Construction and Ecological Management Plan in the interests of ecological
    protection and control.
50. Conditions are necessary for submission of the materials to be used in the external
    envelope of the dwelling, and for the submission of hard and soft landscape and
    planting proposals in the development and their replacement in the event of failure,
    in the interest of visual amenity, and to define a water conservation and efficiency
    strategy in the interests of water conservation.
51. Conditions are also necessary for the control of arboricultural works in accordance
    with approved procedures, and for the implementation of an ecological
    enhancement scheme in the interest of ecological and habitat biodiversity.
52. Conditions are also necessary to control permitted development rights relating to
    boundary treatments to the Wymers Wood Road and Poyle Lane boundaries in the
    interest of visual amenity. Conditions are also necessary to ensure that access,
    turning, and parking facilities for cars and cycles are provided in the interest of
    highway safety, and refuse storage is provided for health and safety purposes.
Conclusion
53. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal proposal accords with the
    development plan, read as a whole, and there are no material considerations,
    including policies in the Framework, that would justify determining other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be allowed.



David Kay
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6005162


                                           Schedule of Conditions

       1 The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
         the date of this decision.
       2 The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
         following drawings:
            Plan Reference                            Description                      Dated
            PP-13202667v1                             Location Plan                    16.09.24
            1551/SAP/XX/XX/DR/A/10100/SO Rev 10       Proposed Site Plan               08.07.24
            1551/SAP/XX/00/DR/A/10110/SO Rev 05       Proposed Ground Floor Plan       08.07.24
            1551/SAP/XX/00/DR/A/10111/SO Rev 04       Proposed First Floor Plan        08.07.24
            1551/SAP/XX/00/DR/A/10112/SO Rev 01       Proposed Roof Plan               02.10.24
            1551/SAP/XX/00/DR/A/10115/SO Rev 01       Proposed Bin & Bike Store        02.10.24
            1551/SAP/XX/00/DR/A/30310/SO Rev 05       Proposed Elevations              08.07.24
            1551/SAP/XX/00/DR/A/30311/SO Rev 02       Proposed Elevations              08.07.24
            1551/SAP/XX/XX/DR/A/80810/SO Rev 01       CGI Image 01                     08.07.24
            1551/SAP/XX/XX/DR/A/80811/SO Rev 01       CGI Image 02                     08.07.24
            Encon Associates Report Ref:A6192 Rev C   Transport Statement              11.09.24
            AA Environmental Report:243163            Ecological Report                June 2024
            Brindle & Green Report:BG23.299.2 Rev 2   Arboricultural Impact Assess.    Aug. 2024
            Brindle & Green Report:BG23.299.3 Rev 2   Arboricultural Method Statmnt.   Aug. 2024

       3 Prior to commencement of any works on site, including any demolition works,
         a Construction and Environment Management Plan (CEMP) must be
         submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and shall
         be implemented and remain in place throughout the development. The CEMP
         shall address at least the following matters: Control of Air Quality, Dust, Water
         Quality, Lighting, Noise and Vibration, Pollution Prevention and Control, and
         Monitoring Arrangements. Construction working hours shall be between 8am
         to 6pm Monday to Friday and between 8am to 1pm on Saturdays, with no
         working on Sundays, Public or Bank Holidays. There shall be no burning of
         materials on site.
       4 No development shall take place, including ground works, until a Construction
         and Ecological Management Plan (CEcoMP) completed in accordance with
         the British Standard on Biodiversity BS 42020:2013, has been submitted to
         and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The CEcoMP shall
         include the following:
               i.     Risk assessment of construction activities potentially damaging to
                      biodiversity present on the site.
               ii.    Identification of "biodiversity protection zones".
              iii.    Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working
                      practices) to avoid or reduce impacts during construction (may be
                      provided as a set of method statements).
              iv.     A management plan to avoid the spread of invasive non-native species.
               v.     Details of procedures to avoid pollution incidents.
              vi.     Details of contingency measures in the event of an accident or other
                      potentially damaging incident, and inspection procedures to avoid
                      wildlife becoming trapped in excavations or machinery.
             vii.     The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
                      features.
            viii.     The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be
                      present on site to oversee works.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      9
Appeal Decision 6005162


              ix.     Responsible persons and lines of communication, including reporting
                      compliance of actions to the LPA.
               x.     Use of protective fences (including buffer distances), exclusion barriers
                      and warning signs.
            The approved CEcoMP shall be adhered to, monitored and implemented
            throughout the construction period strictly in accordance with the approved
            details, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the local planning authority.
       5 Notwithstanding the approved drawings, prior to development above ground
         level taking place, details of all materials (including their colour) proposed to
         be used in the external envelope of the building, including (but not limited to)
         windows and doors, roofing systems, walling and cladding materials, fascias,
         soffits, balustrading systems, copings, flashings, gutters and downpipes, shall
         first have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
         Authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
         approved details.
       6 Notwithstanding the trees indicated on the approved drawings, prior to
         development above ground level taking place, details of all existing trees,
         including accurate crown spread and direction, shrubs and hedgerows on the
         site, together with details of those to be retained, and how they will be
         protected during construction, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
         the Local Planning Authority. None of the trees, shrubs or hedgerows shown to
         be retained, shall be removed, felled, lopped or topped within a period of five
         years from the date of this permission, without prior written permission from
         the Local Planning Authority.
       7 Prior to development above ground level taking place, a scheme for both hard
         and soft landscape works, including a programme for their implementation,
         shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
         The approved works shall be completed in accordance with the
         implementation programme. Hard landscaping shall include details of all
         boundary treatments, including the height, type and position of retaining walls,
         boundary walls or fences, pathways, steps and all other hard surfaces and the
         demarcation of parking spaces. Soft landscaping shall include planting plans,
         written specifications (including cultivation and other operations associated
         with plant and grass establishment), schedules of new trees and plants noting
         species, sizes, proposed location and numbers and the planting densities
         where appropriate, and full details of landscape maintenance regimes after the
         completion of works. Any trees or plants which are planted in connection with
         the development hereby approved which, within a period of five years from
         planting, die, are removed or become seriously damaged or diseased, shall be
         replaced in the next planting season with others of the same size and species
         as those originally approved.
       8 The development hereby approved, shall be constructed to meet, as a
         minimum, the higher standard of 110 litres per person per day, using the
         fittings approach as set out in ‘Housing: optional technical standards’ guidance
         and prescribed by Regulation 36(2)(b) of the Building Regulation 2010.
       9 The development hereby approved, shall be implemented in accordance with
         the approved Arboricultural Method Statement Report:BG23.299.3 Rev 2
         prepared by Brindle & Green and dated August 2024. Works shall be carried


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     10
Appeal Decision 6005162


            out under the supervision of a retained arboricultural specialist, to ensure that
            the phasing of the development accords with the stages detailed in the method
            statement, and that the correct materials and techniques are employed.
       10 Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3(1) of the Town and Country
          Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any
          order revoking or re-enacting that Order), no gate, fence, wall or other means
          of enclosure shall be erected, constructed or placed within the area forward of
          the southern or western elevations of the dwelling hereby permitted, without
          the prior written consent in writing of the Local Planning Authority.
       11 Prior to development above ground level taking place, an ecological
          enhancement scheme to include at least one integrated bat box, one
          integrated swift box, log piles, hedgehog access gaps in boundary fences, and
          landscape planting beneficial to wildlife, shall be submitted to, and approved in
          writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out
          in accordance with the ecological enhancements approved, which shall have
          been installed prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved.
          They shall be retained thereafter unless otherwise agreed in writing by the
          Local Planning Authority.
       12 Prior to first occupation of the approved development, the proposed access,
          parking, turning areas and garaging shall be constructed and arranged in
          accordance with the approved drawings and permanently retained and kept
          available for their intended purpose only, thereafter.
       13 Prior to the occupation of the dwelling hereby approved, the cycle parking and
          bin storage facilities, indicated on the approved plans shall be provided. These
          facilities shall thereafter be permanently retained and maintained for those
          purposes.
                                           *** End of Schedule***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     11
