Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by Timothy King BA(Hons), MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005177
51 Thorndon Hall, Ingrave, CM13 3RJ
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Dean Taylor against the decision of Brentwood Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00822/LBC.
•    The works proposed are the proposed replacement of 3 x sash windows..

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Thorndon Hall, formerly a large country house dating from the 18th century, is a
       substantial Grade I listed building which was refurbished and converted into 84
       residential flats in the 1980s. It is a striking example of Georgian architecture.
3.     No 51, is at first floor level, situated to the rear of the building and its three rear
       facing windows look out over the grounds and gardens, covering over 1,000 acres.
4.     Due to the said windows’ timber frames being in a poor state of repair, with
       resulting problems, such as from draughts during cold weather, it is proposed that
       these three single-glazed sash windows are removed, and replaced with slimline
       double glazing which, it is said, would involve replicating the existing timber profile.
5.     The Council’s Heritage and Conservation consultee is of the view that the wooden
       stiles, rails and glazing bars have been neglected due to inadequate maintenance,
       but I have no direct proof of this. Accordingly, it has not been a consideration in
       my decision.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on the significance of the listed
       building, and also the effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding
       area with regard to its conservation area location.
Reasons
Special interest and significance
7. Section 16(2) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   (LBCAA) requires the decision maker to have special regard to the desirability of
   preserving a listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
   historic interest which it possesses. Thorndon Hall, which stands within open

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005177


     surrounding land, is visually prominent on all sides. In this particular instance the
     appellant, in his representations, acknowledges that this Heritage Asset, given its
     listed status, is one of national importance and exceptional significance.
8. Policy HE4 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) says that
   heritage assets, as an irreplaceable resource, should be conserved in a manner
   appropriate to their significance. To achieve this, proposals for development which
   would affect the significance of a heritage asset, including any contribution made by
   its setting, should maintain or secure a use consistent with its conservation and
   avoid or minimise harm to the asset’s significance and, instead, conserve this
   significance.
9. Framework Policy HE6 says that when considering the potential effect of a
   development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
   substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation, and the more
   important the asset, the greater the weight should be. This is irrespective of
   whether any potential impact amounts to a positive effect or results in harm,
   substantial harm, or total loss of its significance.
Effect on the listed building
10. The appellant indicates that the existing sash windows, found throughout the whole
    building, were installed upon its conversion in the early 1980s although, as the
    Council says, little is known as to the exact glazing type or their manufacture.
11. Nonetheless, Historic England’s guidance publication, ‘Traditional Windows: Their
    Care, Repair and Upgrading’ says that where historic windows, whether original or
    later insertions, make a positive contribution to the significance of a listed building
    they should be retained and repaired where possible. If beyond repair, they should
    be replaced with accurate copies.
12. Repair and maintenance are usually more sustainable than replacement as a well-
    maintained and repaired historic window will last longer than a poor quality
    replacement. Many historic windows were made with materials such as old growth
    timber that are no longer available, yet sympathetic repairs, where possible, will
    prolong the life of these materials, minimising environmental impact and sustaining
    the significance of the building for future generations.
13. Many historic window frames will be capable of accommodating slim-profile or
    vacuum double-glazing but, despite the appellant considering otherwise, double
    reflections exacerbated by modern high quality float glass would, quite possibly be
    discernible and detract from the architectural integrity of Thorndon Hall.
14. More recently, Historic England’s Advice Note 18 ‘Adapting Historic Buildings for
    Energy and Carbon Efficiency’ indicates a degree of flexibility regarding installation
    of slim-profile double glazing in historic buildings but, as part of the process,
    reference is also made to the retention of existing window frames.
15. I note the various photographs submitted by the appellant which show that existing
    timber frames are in need of considerable attention and repair. I have also taken
    into account the appellant’s claim that the removal of a large portion of rotten timber
    can make repair complex but there is no report provided by any timber specialist to
    confirm that the existing windows have been personally examined and neither
    repair nor splicing can be reasonably considered possible or viable. In other words,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005177


     I have no firm confirmation that there needs to be wholesale replacement apart
     from the intended retention of the sash boxes.
16. In the event, the timber specialist could have provided firm recommendations. The
    proposed windows would obviously represent increased thermal performance
    compared to the current situation. However, It is insufficient for the appellant’s
    Heritage Statement to merely say that ‘the glazing would have a very similar
    appearance to the existing single glazing.’ This is a sweeping statement, and is not
    substantiated by direct evidence. Also, there is no explanation as to what, if any,
    alternatives to replacement have been explored.
17. The above is of special importance given the building’s Grade I listing. Further, the
    Council’s concern that the building’s fenestration is of the same typology to guard
    against visual impact from inconsistences is an understandable objective,
    particularly should there be inconsistent use of highly reflective slim profile double
    glazing.
18. In the circumstances I conclude that the proposed works cause harm to the
    significance of this listed building.
Effect on the conservation area.
19. Thorndon Hall lies within the Thorndon Park Conservation Area. The Council has
    not produced an appraisal for this designated heritage the conservation area
    covers the historic Thorndon Hall Park and Garden. However, in accordance with
    my statutory duty under s72(1) of the LBCAA I have paid special attention to the
    desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the
    conservation area.
20. The test is the considered effect on the conservation area as a whole, and given
    that the proposal only requires the replacement of three upper floor windows I am
    of the view that any discernible visible change would be so localised as to have
    little or no appreciable effect on the character of the conservation area.
    Accordingly, I find that its character would be preserved, and the predominant issue
    is, instead, the effect on the significance of the building itself.
Related considerations
21. I acknowledge that there is pressure to reduce heat loss and increase thermal
    efficiency which means that double-glazed units, in an attempt to achieve this, are
    often proposed. Double glazing creates an insulating thermal barrier, reducing heat
    loss during winter and keeping rooms cool during the winter months, thereby
    significantly improving energy efficiency by lowering the energy required for both
    heating and cooling.
22. However, as mentioned, by way of the LBCAA, there is a statutory duty to have
    special regard to the desirability of preserving the listed building or any features of
    special interest it possesses.
23. In respect of fenestration, research by Historic England has shown that the use of
    secondary glazing with low emissivity coating can significantly reduce heat loss.
    With secondary glazing, the original window remains unaltered, and this can
    obviously be beneficial where they are historically significant.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005177


24. In instances where replacement is unavoidable due to irreversible decay, the new
    windows should, ideally, match the originals like-for-like.
25. The appellant cites two examples where replacement windows, in the form of
    double glazing installations in listed buildings, have been found acceptable with
    consent given. One relates to 37 Thorndon Hall, but the Council stresses that this
    is not comparable as no 37 is a modern roof top development, of modern
    construction, which is not visible from ground level.
26. The other case is Ledston Hall, also a Grade I country house building. Whilst I
    have regard to the paperwork provided on this it is important to highlight that,
    although there may be similar issues, each case is determined with regard to its
    own individual circumstances, balancing the particular merits and impacts involved.
    Accordingly, direct parallels are not easily drawn.
27. It is also suggested that the Council might consider a local development order to
    control window replacements at Thorndon Hall, However, that is a matter for the
    Council, and is beyond my remit.
Public Benefits and Planning Balance
28. Paragraph HE6 of the Framework says that where a development would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, any resultant harm will be a matter of
    considerable importance and weight and, as indicated in policy HE4 thereto, any
    such harm should have a clear and convincing justification. Further, policy HE6
    goes on to say that the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits arising.
29. Public benefits can include enabling energy efficiency and the employment of low
    carbon heating measures. Whilst sustainability and energy efficiency are legitimate
    issues, where historic buildings are involved a balance must be achieved between
    this and avoiding damage both to the significance of the building and its fabric, and
    the visual impact of a renewable installation on the character and appearance of
    the historic building.
30. In accordance with policy CC2(2) of the Framework I give substantial weight to the
    benefits of improving the energy efficiency of existing buildings. However, apart
    from the photographs I have referred to I have seen no technical evidence to
    support the claim that the existing windows and their frames are beyond
    refurbishment. No brochures or firm details of the works and associated materials
    to be used have been produced from specialist consultants to this effect.
31. If the listed building was vacant or under-occupied, and the proposed works were
    widespread to assist with its beneficial re-use then this would represent a public
    benefit. However, that is not the case here.
32. On the basis that there would be a loss of historic fabric resulting from the
    proposed installation, and this has not been fully justified due to the absence of
    specialist reports and illustrative material, I must consider, as it stands, this is an
    incomplete proposal.
Conclusion
33. I conclude that the listed building would lose an important element of its historic
    fabric which would cause harm to the significance of Thorndon Hall. Whilst I

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005177


     accept that works are likely to remedy problems currently experienced no clear
     justification has been made for the extent of the works proposed here. This is not
     outweighed by any public benefits.
34. Accordingly, the appeal does not succeed.

Timothy King
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
