Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026
by L Reid BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005461
Chelmer House, Braintree Road, Great Dunmow, Essex CM6 1HT
 • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
   against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 • The appeal is made by Mrs Jane Sawyer against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
 • The application Ref is UTT/25/2680/FUL.
 • The development is change of use from residential dwelling to part residential and part business use
   (wellbeing business).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development has been taken from the decision notice as it is
       more succinct than that on the planning application form. The application is
       retrospective in nature. However, the appeal is determined based on the
       information submitted with the application.
3.     Since the appeal was made, the Government published a revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). Any policies that are material to this
       decision have not fundamentally changed in the Framework. As a result, I consider
       that there is no requirement for me to seek further submissions on the revised
       Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s interests have been prejudiced by
       my approach.
4.     Appeal decisions must be made on the basis of the currently-adopted
       development plan. Since the application was determined, the Uttlesford Local Plan
       2021 – 2041 March 2026 (the Local Plan) has been adopted and supersedes the
       Uttlesford Local Plan January 2005. The Council has provided the relevant
       policies, and both main parties have had the opportunity to comment on the
       implications for this appeal. I am therefore satisfied that my consideration of the
       appeal against the policies in the new Local Plan has prejudiced no party.
5.     The appellant has submitted additional evidence with the appeal which includes a
       letter from the owner, a letter of support from a nearby resident and a parking
       management plan. Changes are also proposed to the class schedule. This new
       evidence does not result in a substantial or fundamental change to result in a
       different application. The Council has also had the opportunity to comment. Given
       its nature, the acceptance of this new evidence would not deprive those who
       should have been consulted of the opportunity of such consultation. I have
       therefore considered it in determining this appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005461


Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:

       •    Whether adequate on-site parking provision and safe access arrangements
            have been demonstrated;
       •    The effect of the development on the living conditions of neighbouring
            occupiers with regards to noise and disturbance; and,
       •    The effect of the development on the residential character of the area.
Reasons
Parking provision and access
7.     The proposal involves the use of two of the rooms within the dwelling as a
       wellbeing business, with the remainder of the property retained in residential use.
       The wellbeing business provides Pilates and yoga classes.
8.     The appeal site is a large property. It has a front driveway, and there is vehicular
       access to the side that leads to two garages and other properties that are also
       within the appellant's ownership. The parking management plan submitted with the
       appeal depicts parking for eight vehicles within the appeal site. However, it does
       not include dimensions, and the parking layout is not shown to scale. It is therefore
       not possible to establish whether the appeal site can realistically accommodate the
       number of vehicles illustrated.
9.     The Parking Management Plan depicts one vehicle overhanging the driveway and
       encroaching onto the pavement which is not acceptable. Additional vehicles are
       also shown in tandem parking arrangements along the side access. As no vehicle
       tracking details are provided, this arrangement raises concerns that it could
       potentially obstruct the access, particularly as it has not been shown that sufficient
       manoeuvring and circulation space is available, or that vehicles would not be
       required to undertake multiple manoeuvres within the access. It has therefore not
       been demonstrated that vehicles can safely enter, manoeuvre within, and exit the
       site.
10. The Highway Authority also raises similar concerns regarding the parking
    arrangements. The adequacy of the parking, manoeuvring and circulation
    arrangements is fundamental to the acceptability of the development. There must
    also be a reasonable degree of certainty that any planning conditions could be
    satisfactorily discharged. These matters can therefore not be resolved by planning
    conditions. Even if some attendees use nearby public car parks, as these are not
    under the control of the appellant, their availability cannot be secured. It is
    acknowledged that some attendees may walk, but it cannot be assumed that this
    would always be the case. These factors do therefore not overcome the concerns
    identified in relation to the parking layout.
11. A 15-minute gap is scheduled between classes, but this does not in itself
    guarantee that parking demand is limited to a single group of attendees at any one
    time. Attendees may arrive before the start of a class, particularly if parking spaces
    are more limited, leading to an overlap between classes. Consequently, there is
    potential for vehicles associated with departing and arriving attendees to be
    present on the site at the same time, which could result in a greater number of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005461


       vehicles being parked at, or seeking to access the site at the same time, despite a
       maximum of four attendees per session.
12. There are no details regarding the allocation of spaces between the wellbeing use
    and the residential use. Some classes take place in the evening, when people may
    be home. In the absence of adequate parking provision, this could increase
    pressure on the parking arrangements, resulting in vehicles obstructing one
    another within the site or consequent illegal or unsafe parking, which would be
    harmful to highway safety.
13. The appellant operates a no grass-verge parking policy, which is communicated to
    attendees at the time of booking and through written guidance. Whilst this is a
    positive measure, its effectiveness is dependent upon the behaviour and
    compliance of attendees. Furthermore, evidence before me from third party
    representations to the planning application suggests parking is taking place
    outside of the appeal site. Limited information has also been provided regarding
    how compliance is actively monitored, enforced and addressed, should breaches
    occur. As a result, only limited weight can be afforded to these measures.
14. Drawing all of the above together, I therefore conclude that adequate on-site
    parking arrangements and safe access have not been demonstrated. The proposal
    therefore conflicts with Core Policies 26, 27 and 31 of the Local Plan. These
    policies amongst other things, require development to reduce road danger and
    comply with the latest guidance on parking provision. The District Wide Design
    Code 2024 requires well-considered parking. The proposal would not achieve this.
    It would also fail to accord with Policy TR4: 1.e of the Framework which states that
    proposals should provide a suitable number of parking spaces.
Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
15. The appeal site is located between 7 Braintree Road and Clare House, which are
    the nearest neighbouring occupiers. The class schedule has been revised so that
    no classes would commence before 08:15. Nevertheless, attendees would be
    expected to arrive shortly beforehand, meaning that activity associated with the
    use could occur before the advertised start time. Whilst some neighbouring
    occupiers may already be awake, this does not necessarily mean that additional
    activity would be imperceptible or without effect on their living conditions.
16. Classes are limited to a maximum of four attendees, and there is no substantive
    evidence before me to indicate otherwise. Although classes take place six days of
    the week, they would not run continuously throughout the day, with sessions
    confined to morning and evening periods. The frequency of classes would also
    vary throughout the week. Having regard to the class schedule and the number of
    attendees, the overall level of activity generated would be moderate rather than
    limited.
17. Even if noise generated within the studios is limited, the use would give rise to
    noise associated with arrivals and departures, including vehicle movements, car
    doors closing, conversations between attendees, and access to the building.
    Whilst the appellant contends that there is no evidence of such disturbance, the
    absence of complaints does not necessarily mean that the activity is without effect.
    Although these sources of noise are commonly experienced within a residential
    area, the proposal would result in them occurring on a regular and recurring basis
    through the turnover of attendees between successive classes. This would create

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005461


       a pattern of activity that differs materially from the comings and goings typically
       associated with a dwelling. Consequently, the cumulative effect of these repeated
       comings and goings would be more noticeable, particularly during the morning and
       evening periods when neighbouring occupiers may reasonably expect a quieter
       environment.
18. I have considered whether the harm arising from the proposal could be mitigated
    through the imposition of planning conditions. However, this would require a suite
    of restrictive controls, including limitations on class numbers, operating hours and
    removal of permitted development rights. Neither party has suggested such
    conditions or provided evidence as to how they would operate in practice. In the
    absence of that information, I cannot be certain that suitably worded conditions, in
    relation to their enforceability and reasonableness, could be imposed that would
    effectively overcome the harm I have identified whilst still allowing the wellbeing
    business to operate as intended.
19. I have also given careful consideration to whether the impacts of the proposal
    could be mitigated by granting a temporary planning permission. However, the
    appellant has not identified a clear end date. Furthermore, the application is
    retrospective, and the use has been in operation since May 2025. Consequently, a
    period of the effects of the development on neighbouring occupiers has already
    occurred. I have had regard to the letter of support received from the neighbouring
    property and that this suggests that the use has been operating without causing
    noise. I am however mindful that one person’s perception of what constitutes
    unreasonable noise and disturbance is different from another, and that
    surrounding occupiers may change over time.
20. For these reasons, I conclude that it has not been demonstrated that the proposal
    would not cause harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with
    regard to noise and disturbance. Accordingly, the proposal conflicts with Policy 44
    of the Local Plan, which amongst other things, requires it to be demonstrated that
    nearby noise sensitive uses will not be exposed to noise impacts that adversely
    affect the amenity of existing and future users. It also conflicts with Policy P3: 2.d
    of the Framework which states that development proposals should mitigate and
    reduce to a minimum potential adverse impacts resulting from noise.
Residential character
21. The appeal site is situated within a predominantly residential area. During my late-
    morning site visit, I observed a steady flow of traffic along the road and associated
    traffic noise was audible. Whilst I recognise that this is likely to vary throughout the
    day, the area cannot be characterised as one of complete tranquillity.
22. The proposal introduces a commercial element within this residential setting.
    However, a large part of the appeal building is used for residential purposes.
    Although the use would generate a greater level of activity than would typically be
    associated with a dwelling, the appeal building remains largely unchanged in
    appearance and retains its domestic character, with no obvious external indication
    that it is operating in part as commercial premises.
23. Whilst I have identified harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
    arising from the frequency and regularity of comings and goings associated with the
    wellbeing use, it would be experienced most by those properties closest to the
    appeal site and would not extend so widely to affect the area as a whole. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005461


     effects are therefore localised. As previously explained, the overall activity from the
     wellbeing use is moderate. The intensity is therefore not to the extent that it attracts
     such numbers of attendees and vehicle activity that erodes the residential character
     or alters the overall function of the area.
24. For these reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal does not cause harm to
    the residential character of the area. Accordingly, the proposal does not conflict
    with Policy 52 of the Local Plan, which amongst other things, requires proposals to
    have regard to context and identity.
Planning Balance
25. Policy E2: 1.a of the Framework states that to support business growth, substantial
    weight should be given to the economic benefits for commercial development which
    allow businesses to invest, expand and/or adapt. There is limited information to
    assess the proposal's economic benefits.
26. In line with Policy HC4 of the Framework, substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits where development proposals would make a demonstrable contribution
    towards promoting good health, reducing health inequalities or supporting social
    interaction in the local community. Whilst the planning application form states that
    the intention is to build a business that benefits the local community, no further
    details have been provided. There is also very little evidence to demonstrate that
    there is a need for this type of development.
27. Whilst the proposal may provide some social and economic benefits, in the
    absence of more detailed evidence, they can only be afforded limited weight and
    therefore do not outweigh the harm identified or the conflict with the development
    plan.
Conclusion
28. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.



L Reid
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
