Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by L Fleming BSc (Hons) MRTPI IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6005495
Manor House Farm, Hillfoot Lane, Kingsley, Frodsham WA6 6TB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Garry Ormisher (Cemco 21 Ltd) against Cheshire West and Chester Council.
•    The application Ref is 24/01335/FUL.
•    The development proposed is conversion of agricultural buildings to residential dwellings, demolition
     of the later additions and construction of new single storey extension to the farmhouse, construction
     of a new replacement dwelling, new garages and new field gate to adjoining field.

Appeal B Ref: 6005497
Manor House Farm, Hillfoot Lane, Kingsley, Frodsham WA6 6TB
• The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
  1990 (as amended) against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an
  application for listed building consent.
• The appeal is made by Garry Ormisher (Cemco 21 Ltd) against Cheshire West and Chester Council.
• The application Ref is 24/01336/LBC.
• The works proposed are conversion of agricultural buildings to residential dwellings, demolition of the
   later additions and construction of new single storey extension to the farmhouse, construction of a
   new replacement dwelling, new garages and new field gate to adjoining field.

Decisions
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is dismissed and planning permission is refused.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is dismissed and listed building consent is refused.
Preliminary Matters, Background and Main Issues
3.     Both appeals relate to the same scheme under different but complementary
       legislation. I have therefore dealt with them together in my reasoning except where
       indicated otherwise.
4.     The Government has published the National Planning Policy Framework 2026 (the
       Framework), which replaces the version of the Framework available when the
       Council reached its putative reasons for refusal. Both main parties have had the
       opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the
       appeals, and I have taken those comments into account. I am satisfied that no
       party has been prejudiced by my approach.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005495 & 6005497


5.     The description of development/works is the same for both Appeal A and Appeal
       B. Both refer to “construction of a new replacement dwelling”. I have noted
       comments about the appeal property being sub-divided into two houses for some
       time, the internal doorway separation, separate kitchens and bathrooms and other
       features capable of allowing two households to live independently. However, sub-
       division of one house to create two separate dwellings would require planning
       permission or a lawful development/use certificate to be granted. There is no
       substantive evidence to demonstrate that either has been applied for or granted.
6.     It is not my role in determining an appeal under Section 78 of the Act to determine
       whether the use of the appeal property as two separate dwellings is lawful. The
       appellant is able to seek such a determination from the Council under section 191
       of the Act. Thus, for the purposes of determining this appeal, I have assessed the
       scheme on the basis of there being one detached house (a single dwelling) on the
       appeal site. As such the proposed “replacement dwelling” would not be a
       replacement, it would be a new additional dwelling in its own plot capable of being
       occupied completely independently of the existing dwelling.
7.     The Council did not reach a decision on either Appeal A or Appeal B. However, it
       has made clear that had it done so it would have refused planning permission and
       listed building consent for both appeals because of their effect on the grade II*
       listed Manor House Farmhouse. Furthermore, it would also have refused planning
       permission for Appeal A for reasons relating to the effect on the character and
       appearance of the area, the Green Belt, the principle of residential development in
       the countryside, the impact of the proposal on protected species and non-
       compliance with the Habitats Regulations.
8.     Alongside their final comments on the appeals, the appellant has submitted a
       Unilateral Undertaking (UU) with a range of drawings which have different drawing
       reference numbers from those which appear to have been considered by the
       Council when it prepared its appeal statements. I cannot be certain that these
       drawings are the same as those considered by the Council and interested parties.
       Thus, in the interests of fairness to all parties I have not considered them,
       notwithstanding the appellant’s assurances that they are the same. However, the
       UU appears to address the Council’s ecological and biodiversity net gain concerns
       and even if it doesn’t, I am satisfied these matters could be overcome in this case.
       As such, because I am dismissing both appeals for other reasons, in the interests
       of efficiency, I have not sought the Council’s views on the UU and I have
       determined the appeals on the basis that the ecological impacts have been
       addressed subject to conditions and the UU and the policy requirements with
       regard to biodiversity net gain have been met to the levels detailed in the
       appellant’s evidence. I am satisfied that no party has been prejudiced by this
       approach.
9.     Against all this background the main issues are:
     • The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area bearing
       in mind Manor House Farmhouse is grade II* listed (Appeals A and B)
     • Whether the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green
        Belt and its effect on openness (Appeal A)




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005495 & 6005497


    • Whether the appeal site is an appropriate location for the proposal having regard
      to access to services and facilities, the development plan and national policies
      (Appeal A)
    • If the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt, whether
      any other considerations clearly outweigh the Green Belt harm and any other
      harm so as to amount to the very special circumstances necessary to justify the
      proposed development (Appeal A).
Reasons
Context (Appeals A & B)
10. The appeal site is a collection of traditional farmstead buildings arranged around a
    courtyard, with domestic gardens next to a dwelling. This includes the grade II*
    listed Manor House Farmhouse (Manor House) and a range of associated
    agricultural buildings. The site is close to a small number of properties, mainly
    dwellings, which are positioned close to and accessed from a narrow rural lane
    (Hillfoot Lane). This built form is surrounded by open countryside. For the
    purposes of the Framework, I have treated the appeal site as being outside a
    settlement.
Character, appearance and heritage significance (Appeal A & B)
11. Manor House is a late C17, detached, three-storey dwelling. It is constructed in
    brown brick with a slate roof. It has a broadly symmetrical frontage facing Hillfoot
    Lane, with a two-storey gabled porch, sandstone quoins and other high-quality
    traditional architectural features as well as modern extensions. Inside it has an oak
    open-well staircase with wavy splat balusters, early eighteenth-century oak
    panelling and cornice, moulded beams, oak doors and other high-quality fixtures
    and fittings.
12. To the west of the dwelling is a substantial U-shaped former piggery range. To the
    north-east of the farmhouse is a smaller traditional agricultural outbuilding. Both of
    these traditional agricultural buildings are finished in brick and slate and display a
    variety of traditional architectural features such as brick arches and stonework
    around the openings. There are also a number of modern structures attached to
    the U-shaped former piggery and there is a large agricultural building to its west.
13. Insofar as is relevant to these appeals, the significance of Manor House derives
    from its value as a well-preserved historic farmhouse with associated traditional
    agricultural buildings, the surviving high-quality traditional architectural detailing,
    historic fabric and evident functional relationship between the farmhouse,
    traditional agricultural buildings and their rural agricultural setting.
14. Although the site would no longer be in agricultural use, the conversion and reuse
    of the traditional agricultural buildings would secure their long-term retention.
    Furthermore, the removal of some later additions and the rationalisation of the
    group of buildings would improve aspects of the immediate setting of Manor
    House. The works to the farmhouse would be modest and would remedy negative
    effects associated with modern additions. Furthermore, the works to the
    farmhouse would be sympathetic to its architectural and historic interest,
    preserving the features which contribute to its significance. Overall, these
    elements of the scheme would allow the agricultural heritage of the existing appeal


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005495 & 6005497


       buildings to be appreciated, preserve their traditional agricultural character and
       would not harm their significance. On balance, except for the proposed detached
       new-build dwelling, all other works/development proposed combined would clearly
       amount to an overall heritage benefit. However, this heritage benefit must be
       considered alongside the effect of the proposed new-build dwelling.
15. Manor House derives significance not only from its architectural and historic
    interest as a high-status former farmhouse with associated buildings, but also from
    its functional relationship with the surrounding rural landscape, where the
    farmhouse is clearly the principal building within the historic farmstead group.
16. The proposed new-build dwelling would be positioned within that setting and would
    be physically and functionally separate from Manor House. It would introduce an
    additional new independent residential building, together with its own separate
    domestic curtilage, into a part of the site which presently contributes to the wider
    farmstead context of the listed building. This would dilute the historic relationship
    between the farmhouse, its associated agricultural buildings and their rural setting.
    It would also reduce the ability to appreciate Manor House as the principal building
    within the group of buildings which comprise the historic farmstead, particularly
    when viewed through the access points on Hillfoot Lane and from the countryside
    to the north. This would therefore harm the setting and significance of the
    designated heritage asset which is, in my view, of sufficient magnitude to outweigh
    the heritage benefit described above.
17. In reaching these conclusions, I have considered the detailed viability evidence,
    the various condition survey drawings and associated evidence. I note the
    comments that the proposed new-build dwelling is necessary to make the wider
    scheme viable and thereby secure the heritage benefit. However, having regard to
    Historic England Good Practice Advice in Planning Note 4: Enabling Development
    and Heritage Assets (2019) (GPA4), enabling development of this kind should be
    justified by clear evidence that it is necessary to secure the conservation objective
    and that the amount and form of development proposed is the minimum necessary
    to do so. Irrespective of how the restoration of the historic buildings could be
    secured, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that the creation of a new
    detached separate dwelling in the specific sensitive location proposed to the
    eastern side of Manor House is necessary in all respects to secure those benefits.
18. Particularly, I am not satisfied that alternative, less harmful options have been
    robustly assessed and discounted. The proposed dwelling would introduce a
    separate independent residential building and domestic curtilage in a location
    where it would compete with Manor House as the principal residential building
    within the historic farmstead group. The evidence does not adequately
    demonstrate that other options involving the existing buildings, or a different scale,
    form or siting of development within parts of the site already affected by
    substantive built form, have been considered. Such options may have retained a
    more subordinate relationship with Manor House and preserved more of the
    agricultural character of the group.
19. It is not for me to design an alternative scheme, however, in the absence of
    adequate evidence on these matters, the claimed need for the proposed dwelling
    does not overcome the harm I have identified. Whilst I have considered all the
    examples quoted where schemes involving historic building restoration have been
    permitted but not implemented, those examples do not justify the particular

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005495 & 6005497


       proposal before me, which must be considered on its own merits and in light of its
       specific effects on the significance of Manor House.
20. The residual harm I have identified (accounting for the heritage benefit), whilst not
    substantial, is a matter of considerable importance and weight. Policy HE6 of the
    Framework requires this to be balanced against the public benefits of the scheme.
    I will return to this as part of my planning balance and conclusion.
21. Turning to the effects on character and appearance more generally, I have noted
    comments about views from nearby public footpaths and other vantage points.
    However, the scheme would remove some existing built form of poor appearance
    and would improve the overall appearance of this group of traditional rural
    buildings. The proposed new dwelling is of relatively simple form and would be
    seen largely within the context of the existing collection of buildings at Manor
    House Farm and on Hillfoot Lane, rather than as an isolated form of development
    in the wider countryside. Thus, I do not find that the proposal would cause harm to
    the rural character and appearance of the area.
22. Thus, the proposals would accord with Policies ENV 6 of the Cheshire West and
    Chester Local Plan (Part One) (2015) (LP1) and DM 3 of the Cheshire West and
    Chester Local Plan (Part Two) (2019) (LP2), insofar as they seek to ensure that
    development protects local character and appearance. However, for the reasons
    given, it would conflict with the heritage protection aims of Policy ENV 5 of LP1,
    Policy DM 47 of LP2 and Policies HE5 and HE6 of the Framework.
Location (Appeal A)
23. Policy STRAT 9 of LP1 allows the reuse of existing rural buildings in the
    countryside, provided that they are of permanent construction and can be reused
    without major reconstruction. Furthermore, Policy DM 22 of LP2 supports the
    change of use of buildings in the countryside to dwellings provided the building is
    currently redundant or disused; is of permanent and substantial construction and
    suitable for and capable of conversion to residential use without significant loss of
    existing fabric, or major or complete reconstruction; the existing building does not
    have a harmful visual impact; the conversion or change of use of the building
    would lead to an enhancement to its immediate setting; and the proposal would
    not be in conflict with existing uses in the locality. Both main parties agree the
    conversion of the existing agricultural buildings as proposed would accord with
    Policy STRAT 9 of LP1 and Policy DM 22 of LP2, and I agree.
24. However, the proposed new-build detached dwelling would be outside a
    settlement in the countryside. It would be located on a narrow rural road without
    footways and some distance from bus stops and day-to-day services. As such, the
    proposed new dwelling would not be in an attractive location for walking or cycling
    to services, particularly in inclement weather, and would not enable good
    accessibility as envisaged by Policy TR3 of the Framework.
25. Policy S5 of the Framework sets out forms of development outside settlements
    which should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework. This includes, at criterion j), development
    which would address an evidenced unmet need. The proposal would clearly
    address a housing need, particularly given the Council’s accepted inability to
    demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites. However, footnote 28

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005495 & 6005497


       is clear that, where development is outside a settlement, it should be physically
       well-related to an existing settlement. For the reasons given above, including the
       character of Hillfoot Lane, its separation from services and facilities and its
       surrounding open countryside context, I am not satisfied that the appeal site is
       physically well-related to an existing settlement. There is also no substantive
       evidence to suggest the proposed new detached dwelling would be on previously
       developed land or that it would meet any of the other exceptions listed in Policy S5
       of the Framework.
26. Thus, the appeal site would not be an appropriate location for the proposed new-
    build dwelling having regard to development plan policies and national policies. In
    this regard, that element of the scheme would specifically conflict with Policies
    STRAT 1, STRAT 2, STRAT 8 and STRAT 9 of LP1, Policies DM 1 and DM 9 of
    LP2 and Policy TR3 of the Framework, which seek to ensure new dwellings are
    sustainably located. It would also fail to satisfy Policy S5 of the Framework, insofar
    as it relates to new-build dwellings outside settlements. For the avoidance of any
    doubt, I return to Policy S5 of the Framework in my overall planning balance.
Green Belt (Appeal A)
27. Policy GB6 of the Framework confirms that inappropriate development is, by
    definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very
    special circumstances. Policy GB7 identifies forms of development in the Green
    Belt which are not inappropriate, subject to the criteria set out in that policy. The
    development plan contains similar policy safeguards in relation to development in
    the Green Belt, particularly Policy STRAT 9 of LP1. Insofar as is relevant to this
    appeal, this policy is broadly consistent with the Framework.
28. For the reasons already given, the proposed “replacement dwelling” would not
    replace the existing dwelling, nor would it form an extension or alteration to it.
    Instead, it would create a new separate dwelling with its own separate domestic
    curtilage. It has not been demonstrated that the proposal should be treated as not
    inappropriate development by reference to the Framework’s grey belt provisions.
    In any event, for the reasons already given, the proposed new-build dwelling would
    not be in a sustainable location with particular reference to the Framework’s
    transport policies. Consequently, the proposal would not fall within any relevant
    exception under GB7.
29. I acknowledge that substantial existing structures and built form would be
    demolished. I also note the appellant’s case that, overall, even taking account of
    the proposed new dwelling, there would be a reduction in the volume of built form
    on the appeal site. However, that does not, in itself, mean that the proposal would
    preserve Green Belt openness.
30. In contrast with the built form proposed for demolition, the proposed new-build
    dwelling would be positioned to the eastern side of Manor House in an area
    currently largely free from significant structures. It would be prominently located on
    rising land at the edge of the existing group of buildings in the locality. Together
    with its associated parking, separate domestic curtilage and likely domestic
    paraphernalia, it would introduce a separate residential presence into this part of
    the site which would be particularly noticeable from the countryside to the north
    and through the access from Hillfoot Lane.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005495 & 6005497


31. Although the overall reduction in built form may limit harm to spatial openness, the
    proposal would nevertheless cause visual harm to Green Belt openness in this
    particular location. In my view, that harm would not be outweighed by the benefit
    associated with the proposed removal of built form from the appeal site. Based on
    the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that the retention of existing vegetation
    or new planting would overcome this harm.
32. I therefore find that the proposal would not fall within any relevant exception in
    GB7 of the Framework. It would amount to inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, which is, by definition, harmful under GB6 of the Framework. Overall,
    the scheme would also cause harm to Green Belt openness. The proposal
    therefore conflicts with Policies GB6 and GB7 of the Framework and with Policy
    STRAT 9 of LP1 which, taken together, seek to avoid inappropriate development
    within the Green Belt and harm to Green Belt openness.
Other considerations (Appeal A)
33. I note the proposal would provide six new dwellings and would secure the
    refurbishment of the existing farmhouse and associated buildings. It would
    therefore make a modest contribution to the Council’s housing land supply. The
    Council accepts that it cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites, although it has not quantified the shortfall or provided the latest
    figure. The proposal would improve the living conditions for the occupiers of the
    appeal property, and there would be economic benefits associated with
    construction and economic activity associated with the introduction of new
    households into the area.
34. I have also noted the comments with regard to the Council’s handling of the
    proposals over time and the living conditions of the occupants.
Conclusion and planning balance (Appeals A and B)
35. I have found that the proposals would amount to inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, which is harmful by definition. They would also cause harm to Green
    Belt openness. Substantial weight must be given to that Green Belt harm. I have
    also found that, even accounting for the heritage benefit, the proposal would on
    balance harm the significance of the grade II* listed building, which attracts
    considerable importance and weight. It would also include a new-build dwelling in
    an inappropriate location outside a settlement.
36. Against this, I give substantial weight to the provision of six new dwellings,
    particularly in the context of the Council’s accepted inability to demonstrate a five-
    year housing land supply. I also give weight to the heritage benefits associated
    with the repair, conversion and reuse of traditional buildings, the removal of later
    additions, the refurbishment of the existing farmhouse, improved living conditions
    and the economic benefits. Any biodiversity gains above existing policy
    requirements and landscaping above minimum requirements also carry weight in
    favour of the scheme.
37. However, whatever the scale of the housing land supply shortfall, the proposed
    new-build dwelling has not been demonstrated to fall within any relevant category
    of development supported by Policy S5 of the Framework. Furthermore, insofar as
    the proposal would address an evidenced unmet need, the appeal site is outside a
    settlement and, for the reasons given above, is not physically well-related to an

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005495 & 6005497


       existing settlement. When assessed against the national decision-making policies
       in the Framework, the benefits of the proposal would clearly be substantially
       outweighed by the adverse effects I have identified. The other considerations also
       do not clearly outweigh the Green Belt harm and the other harms I have identified.
       Consequently, the very special circumstances necessary to justify the
       development do not exist.
38. The proposal would therefore conflict with the development plan as a whole and
    with national policy. For the reasons set out above, and having regard to all other
    matters raised, I conclude that both appeals should be dismissed and planning
    permission and listed building consent refused.



L Fleming
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
