Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by Carla Livingstone MA(SocSci) (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026
Appeal Ref: 6005995
16-17 Cecilia House, Hanger Lane, Ealing W5 3HH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Mr Reeve, Charter Property Development Ltd, against the Council of the
     London Borough of Ealing.
•    The application Ref is 254825FUL.
•    The development proposed is single storey rear extension to Sui Generis HMO.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework ('the Framework') on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
       amendments against the December 2024 version before the parties for their
       evidence. Although there have been significant amendments to its layout and
       formatting such that previously cited paragraph references are no longer relevant,
       other changes are not substantive or determinative to the outcome of this appeal. I
       have therefore not gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
3.     The appeal relates to a planning application that was not determined by the
       Council within the prescribed period. In response to the appeal, the Council has
       prepared an appeal statement in relation to the proposal it came to the view that it
       had insufficient information in relation to land use and the spatial relationship
       between units within the site to make a decision. I have considered the Council’s
       appeal statement in framing the main issue below.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the living conditions of the
       occupants of rooms 5 and 30 in regard to outlook and daylight and sunlight.
Reasons
5.     The building is located within a predominantly residential area and was formed
       through the consolidation of two detached three storey dwellings. It is currently
       divided into 29 residential units, and the proposal is for the erection of a single
       storey extension on the rear elevation in order to provide two additional units;
       bringing the total capacity of the building up to 31 units.
6.     The building has several extensions on its rear elevation, of varied heights and
       sizes. The proposal is for the erection of a single storey hipped roof extension, that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005995


        would provide two en-suite bedrooms. The extension would project from an
        existing extension on the rear elevation, and would partly enclose the gap between
        two of the existing rear extensions.
7.      As detailed above the building has been divided into several separate units. Two
        of the existing units on the ground floor would be close to the proposed extension.
        Bedroom 5 is served by a single large window and includes an ensuite and a small
        kitchen area. Bedroom 30 is larger and includes an ensuite and a kitchen area,
        this room is served by two small windows in the sleeping area and a larger window
        that serves the kitchen and living area.
8.      The resultant extension would enclose part of the area to the rear of the building,
        close to the only window that serves bedroom 5. Also, the side wall of the
        extension would be very close to the main window that serves the kitchen and
        living area of bedroom 30. Due to the height of the extension and its proximity to
        the only window, and main window, that serve these units it is likely to have a
        harmful effect on outlook and daylight and sunlight to these dwellings.
9.      I note that a daylight and sunlight assessment prepared in support of a planning
        application at 15 Hangar Lane found no harm in relation to sunlight and daylight, at
        that location. However, this assessment does not clearly and accurately assess
        the specific effect of the appeal scheme on daylight and sunlight, to existing units
        within the host property. In the absence of any substantive evidence to
        demonstrate otherwise, the proposed development would have a materially
        harmful effect on the living conditions of the occupants of bedrooms 5 and 30.
10. For the reasons detailed above the proposal conflicts with policy 7B of the Ealing
    Development Management Development Plan Document 2013 (DPD) which is
    consistent with the Framework in requiring that new development achieves a high
    standard of amenity for adjacent users by ensuring good levels of daylight and
    sunlight; policy 7B of the DPD also requires that development ensures a positive
    visual impact for adjacent users.
Other Matters
11. The main parties disagree in regard to the planning history of the appeal site, as
    well as previous developments that have taken place within the building. Concerns
    in this regard are a separate enforcement matter and not within my remit for
    consideration as an Inspector in the assessment of the proposal before me.
12. My attention has been drawn to an application for a building containing co-living
    units at 115 Gunnersbury lane1 and the conversion and extension of 15 Hanger
    Lane to provide co-living units. Full details of each of these schemes have not
    been provided, as such I cannot be certain that the circumstances are the same as
    the scheme before me.
13. The appeal site is located within the Ealing Common Conservation Area (ECCA)
    and is adjacent to the Creffield Conservation Area (CCA). Section 72(1) of the
    Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, requires special
    attention to be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of the conservation area. The significance of the ECCA is derived in
    part by its high quality architecture as an early example of a London suburb. The

1
    163170FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005995


       proposed extension would not be visible from the public realm but would be visible
       from neighbouring properties. Both the host building and neighbouring buildings in
       the area have been extended extensively in the past. The extension would read as
       part of existing rear extensions and would be relatively modest in comparison to
       the host property as originally built. In this context the proposed extension would
       not have a harmful effect on the significance of the ECCA and the setting of the
       CCA. I note the Council has no concerns in this regard either.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
14. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. As the appeal site is within a settlement, policy S3 stipulates that it
    should be considered against policy S4 of the Framework. In this instance, this
    sets out that planning permission should be approved unless the benefits of doing
    so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies.
15. In the context of the Government objective to significantly boost the supply of
    homes, even a small scheme of two units would make a positive contribution
    towards housing in the area. Furthermore, the scheme would make effective use
    of the land as required by policy L3 of the Framework. Alongside the social and
    economic benefits associated with the construction and subsequent occupation of
    the dwellings, these benefits are afforded substantial weight in favour of the appeal
    scheme.
16. However, I have found that the proposal would have a harmful effect on the living
    conditions of the occupants of two of the existing units within the building in regard
    to outlook and daylight and sunlight. The proposed scheme therefore conflicts with
    the development plan and policy L2 d ii of the Framework. I attach greater than
    substantial weight to the identified adverse effect of the proposed development.
17. Despite the substantial weight afforded to the creation of two residential units. The
    proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations do
    not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
18. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.




Carla Livingstone
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
