Appeal Decision
Inquiry held on 4, 5, 6 and 11 August 2026
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by John Longmuir BA(Hons) DipUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005822
Former National Grid Site, Marsh Lane, Stanmore, HA7 2SN
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by C/O Agent against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
       Harrow.
•      The application Ref is PL/1370/25.
•      The development proposed is the construction of a new food retail store, comprising the erection of a
       part one and two storey building of Class E(a) floorspace, including a warehouse, ancillary staff
       facilities, access, car and cycle parking, landscaping and associated works.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed and planning permission is refused for the construction of
         a new food retail store, comprising the erection of a part one and two storey
         building of Class E(a) floorspace, including a warehouse, ancillary staff facilities,
         access, car and cycle parking, landscaping and associated works at Former
         National Grid Site, Stanmore, HA7 2SN.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The third reason for refusal, relating to the absence of a satisfactory Retail Impact
         Assessment, suggesting harm to the vitality and viability of the existing town
         centres within the surrounding area, as well as the fourth reason on ecology and
         the seventh on surface water flooding, were all not contested at the Inquiry. I still
         give them consideration but not as main issues.
3.       The Council raised concern during the Inquiry that Aldi were not registered owners
         of the site and that the owner was not party to the Unilateral Undertaking. Whilst
         there was dispute over the enforceability of the obligations, Aldi’s ownership was
         registered on the 27 August1 and accordingly the Undertaking is duly considered
         as part of my decision.
4.       The Undertaking covers matters including Biodiversity Net Gain, employment and
         training opportunities for local people during construction, highway works, Travel
         Plan and monitoring fees and carbon offsetting.
5.       The Council expressed concern that National Grid were unaware of the application
         and appeal, noting that the appropriate certificate and notification had not been
         provided. The Appellant’s solicitors advise that National Grid were fully aware of


1
    A copy of the register of title from The Land Registry was provided by e-mail from the Appellant on 28 August.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005822


         the application and appeal throughout. Indeed the Heads of Terms for the sale
         makes reference to the intention to obtain planning permission2.
6.       Both parties were given the opportunity to comment on the significance or
         otherwise to the amendments of the 17 August published edition of the National
         Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). I have considered their comments in
         my reasoning below.
Main Issues
7.       The parties agreed the main issues at the Case Management Conference and
         those remaining as contested are:
       • whether the site is in an appropriate location for the proposed use in relation to the
          impact on town centres including consideration of national retail policies;
       • whether the use is appropriate for the site in terms of the Borough’s economy;
       • the effect of the proposed level of car parking; and
       • whether the proposal does or does not optimise the efficient use/development of
          the site.
Reasons
The location for the proposed use in relation to the impact on town centres
8.       Both parties agree that the appeal site is in an out of centre location. Policy LE1 of
         The Harrow Local Plan covers Development Principles within centres and
         parades. Criterion G in part requires proposals for new retail development in out of
         centre locations will only be supported where they undertake a sequential test to
         demonstrate that there are no appropriate town centre sites, followed by edge of
         centre sites. This is intended to support the vitality and viability of centres.
9.       Paragraph TC3 of the Framework has a similar requirement: ’The sequential test
         means that main town centre uses involving new development should be located
         within town centres identified in the development plan; then, if this is not feasible,
         in edge of centre locations; and only if suitable sites are not available (or expected
         to become available within a reasonable period) should out of centre sites be
         considered. When considering edge of centre and out of centre locations,
         preference should be given to accessible sites which are well connected to the
         town centre by sustainable transport modes’.
10. TC3 continues: ’Applicants and local planning authorities should exercise flexibility
    when considering issues such as format and scale, so that opportunities to utilise
    suitable town centre or edge of centre sites are fully explored’. The Council
    emphasised the words flexibility and fully. Both parties agree that the sequential
    test is materially unchanged from the previous Framework. TC4 supports
    consumer choice but also makes reference to town centre vitality and viability.
    Similarly Paragraph 011 of the Town Centres and Retail Planning Policy Guidance
    also requires compliance with the sequential test.




2
    17 August e-mail from the Appellant


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6005822


11. The Appellant submitted a sequential site assessment at the planning application
    stage, which was unchanged in the appeal submissions. The Council accepted the
    broad methodology.
12. The Council conclude that the only possible alternative site is Anmer Lodge, which
    is to the rear of The Broadway in Stanmore. In 2013 the Local Plan allocated this
    site for retail development. The recent iteration of the Local Plan allocates this site
    (O21) for mixed use development including residential and retail food store, whilst
    referring to this ’under-utilised’ site.
13. In 2014 a planning application was submitted for a mix of residential and 818sqm
    retail floorspace and 50 parking spaces. Marks and Spencer were linked to that
    scheme and annotated as such on the submitted plans. This was implemented
    and confirmed as extant by a Certificate of Lawful Development but has remained
    barely beyond initial commencement.
14. Since that permission the land in the western part of the allocation has been
    developed for residential use. This has reduced the potentially developable site
    area, which would be likely to lead to smaller floorspace whereby either the
    operator would have to reduce ranges, and/or narrow aisles. A reduced range
    would be less attractive for shoppers as well as hinder potential income. The
    available car parking is also likely to be less as the 2013 site boundaries have
    been reduced. These have lessened the potential size of a food store, nonetheless
    the wording of the sequential test is to require flexibility.
15. In 2021 a pre-application scheme by Notting Hill Genesis sought 185 dwellings
    and 740sqm retail floorspace. This was not pursued further, which suggests it was
    not commercially attractive. Moreover the Council’s Officer responded: 'It is
    appreciated it may no longer be the right location for a large retail store however
    the ability of the non-residential component to be split into smaller units should be
    explored'.
16. The Council at this Inquiry suggested that this was only one officer’s opinion to a
    pre-application proposal which was not binding. Nonetheless it indicates an
    independent planner’s overall assessment of the situation and that doubt over
    implementation was at May 2021, eight years after the initial allocation, and now a
    further five and a half years later. The Council suggest that this may be due to a
    variety of factors, specific particular developers and general market conditions
    since 2021. Such factors were not fully evidenced by either party.
17. Additionally, more recently, The Gracie Group has submitted a pre-application
    proposal. Their press release refers to a “residential led development” and
    suggests the previous scheme is 'no longer viable'.
18. This pre-application proposal did not align to the Council's aspirations rather they
    suggest a retail led scheme is required and advised The Gracie Group
    accordingly. At the time of this Inquiry the aspirations of The Gracie Group are
    unknown about the extent or otherwise of any intended food retail. Their original
    pre-application submission foresaw a second public consultation in summer 2026.
    In any event this interest indicates that there is momentum in moving the site
    forward, and the potential for a food element cannot be discounted. The resulting
    proposal and its acceptability in terms of the allocation O21 have considerable
    relevance on this appeal decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005822


19. Aldi did make an approach to acquire the Amner Lodge site, but this was rejected.
    The Council at the Inquiry questioned whether this offer was of an appropriate
    value and suggest it sought excessive floorspace and parking. In any event, there
    is insufficient evidence before me to confirm or not the significance of the value of
    the offer. The fact that an offer was made means that it is hard to preclude there is
    no potential for some kind of food retail on the site.
20. The Local Plan, adopted 24 March 2026, allocates Anmer Lodge for mixed use
    development. This followed consideration of the site by the examining Inspector.
21. The Inspector’s report3 acknowledges that the site has an extant planning
    permission and also notes: 'the development principles of the policy also
    recognises that the site is an appropriate location for a supermarket'. This
    indicates that the Inspector was satisfied with the allocation.
22. When asked at the Inquiry whether there had been any market testing for the
    potential of retail use at Anmer Lodge, the Council stated that none had taken
    place. Nonetheless it is reasonable to assume that the Local Plan Inspector must
    have concluded there was merit in the allocation.
23. The site is behind the built up commercial frontage facing the through (Broadway)
    road and pedestrian pavement, served by a secondary access. The Council at the
    Inquiry when asked by me, accepted this is not a primary frontage. However there
    was no evidence from either party on the significance or otherwise of this location,
    in terms of the need for prominence and/ or passing trade and the potential footfall.
24. The Council in closing point to other examples in London of discount and
    comparable stores including the Old Kent Road, Wemberly, Hoxton Road, Hawsey
    Green and Beulah Hill. However comprehensive details were not provided of their
    contexts to show whether they are wholly comparable. Consequently this does not
    lead me to a particular decision.
25. The Council in closing also refer to Aldi’s own published requirements for the
    London market where within the M25 they will be flexible about format and mixed-
    use development and suggest it has been absent here. However I find that this
    shows their general approach is towards flexibility in these respects. In terms of
    the actual proposal here, this also does not lead me to a particular decision.
26. Aldi model their customer base on a 5 minute drive time. The submitted map
    shows this drive time from the appeal site overlaps with Stanmore and food stores
    to the east but not so to the south and west. This indicates some need within the
    immediate locality of the site. The map also shows the nearest Aldi store is beyond
    the 8 minute drive time. Customer loyalty may mean that some Aldi customers are
    currently making such a journey, but quantifiable evidence is not before me, and it
    would not trump the sequential test.
27. I therefore find that the evidence before the Inquiry is conflicting and taken overall,
    is not sufficiently clear to demonstrate that the potential for food retail at the Anmer
    Lodge site can be discounted and the sequential test has not been fully explored.
28. I therefore find that the proposal would be contrary to Policy LE1 and the
    Framework.


3
    Harrow Local Plan 2021-2041, Inspector’s Report March 2026 paragraph 213


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6005822


The effect of the proposed level of car parking
29. TR1 of the Framework is titled vision led approach to planning for transport and
    seeks to locate development where it can support sustainable patterns of
    movement. TR3 has a link to be used ’alongside other relevant quantitative or
    qualitative evidence in assessing the connectivity of particular locations proposed
    for development’. TR2 highlights local parking standards, which should take into
    account connectivity, opportunities for low carbon transport, car ownership, electric
    vehicles and the appropriateness for the particular development, using a range
    where a degree of flexibility is desirable. TR4 advocates a suitable number of
    parking spaces for a range of transport modes and flexibility where reconfiguration
    of retail sites would make better use of previously developed land.
30. Policy T1 of the London Plan supports the delivery of the Mayor’s strategic target
    of 80 per cent of all trips in London to be made by foot, cycle or public transport by
    2041. It requires all development should make the most effective use of land,
    reflecting its connectivity and accessibility by existing and future public transport,
    walking and cycling routes, and ensure that any impacts on London’s transport
    networks and supporting infrastructure are mitigated.
31. Policy T2 promotes cycling, walking and public transport use. Policy T4 criterion C
    requires mitigation, either through direct provision of public transport, walking and
    cycling facilities and highways improvements or financial contributions. It also
    states ’proposals should not increase road danger’.
32. Policy T6 restricts car parking in line with transport accessibility and connectivity. It
    makes cross reference to maximum car parking spaces in Policy T6.3. It also
    requires E.V. charging points and a car parking management plan.
33. Policy T6.3 identifies maximum car parking spaces for retail uses as ’new retail
    development should avoid being car-dependent and should follow a town centre
    first approach’.
34. Local Plan Policy M1 titled ’Sustainable Transport’ requires development supports
    enhancement of cycle and walking and access to facilities, as well as public
    transport and the submission of a Travel Plan.
35. Local Plan Policy M2 titled ’Parking’, requires compliance with London Plan vehicle
    parking standards and also promotes cycle parking facilities. Criterion E states:
    ’Proposals that create significant on-street parking problems, prejudice highway
    safety or diminish the convenience of pedestrians and cyclists, will be resisted
    unless appropriate mitigation measures can be put in place’.
36. Under Policy T6.3 the proposal would warrant 38 spaces using the standard of one
    space per 50sqm. This proposal is for 94 spaces, which the Appellant supports on
    the basis of the TRICS database for the store size as well as surveys by Parking
    Eye. The latter looked at stores in similar locations or where appropriate
    allowances could be made for any different sizes.
37. The Council suggest the proposal is a demand led approach, rather than the
    modal shift that the policy is seeking. The suggested implication is that the
    proposed level of car parking spaces would encourage car use, thereby leading to
    congestion and carbon emissions. Additionally the Council note that half of food
    shopping trips in London currently are on foot and 15% by public transport.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005822


38. The Transport for London (TfL) response to the planning application consultation
    was: ’There is potential for many car trips to be replaced by trips by active travel or
    public transport. The proposed development, in providing excessive customer car
    parking, would fail to realise and capitalise on the potential for transferrable trips’.
    The Council support the view of TfL.
39. However, conversely the Harrow Council Highways Department response to the
    planning application consultation was: ’Parking is above London plan standards
    however in this instance it is welcomed and accepted the level of parking within
    the site will cater for expected demand. This is being backed up by data’.
40. Mr Ustic, on behalf of the Council suggested that the Highways Department had
    primarily safety in mind rather than sustainability interests. However the same
    response does mention the concept of permeability, which is not directly related to
    safety. I also note the word ’accepted’ is used, which suggests a weighing up
    judgment is being made. I find that the view of the Council’s own highways team is
    persuasive since they would have detailed local knowledge to come to a balanced
    decision.
41. Notably the Council Highways team further comment: ’Typically these types of
    supermarkets provide less than maximum standards which causes issues back
    onto the surrounding highway network’.
42. Indeed potentially at peak times a shortage of spaces would lead to congestion at
    the site entrance, as shoppers would be likely to wait for spaces. This would lead
    to queuing up, particularly due to the shortness of the access road within the site
    before the first car parking spaces, thereby obstructing the flow on Marsh Lane,
    creating potential hazards and undermining driver’s behaviour.
43. To the rear of the site is Wychwood Avenue, which in parts has no parking
    restrictions. I noted on street parking within this residential area on both of my site
    visits and deduce that it is common due to the pressure on many driveways. A rear
    pedestrian access from Wychwood Avenue would provide a short walk into the
    store and inevitably shoppers would park there: it would be a short drive around,
    and regular customers would get to know it, and the pedestrian link would be
    readily apparent. This would lead to conflict with residents parking, congestion,
    and potential hazard as cars manoeuvre around to find spaces. Similarly
    Landsdowne Road opposite is in part free of parking restrictions in places, which is
    a through road which appeared busy during my site visits, where conflict and
    congestion would be unwelcome and unsafe.
44. The site is within the defined ’PTAL 2’ area, which has low public transport
    accessibility. Consequently there would be likely to be pressure for car use, as
    shoppers would be likely to be predominately from the locality bearing in mind the
    Aldi catchment area of a 5 minute drive time. Car ownership too is higher in outer
    London than inner London and the proposal would be orientated towards large,
    heavy loads rather than top ups.
45. The proposal would encourage cycle use by provision of indoor cycle parking for
    staff and robust covered points for shoppers cycles as well as the re-instatement
    of the defined cycle lane on Marsh Lane. Similarly walking would be encouraged
    by the rear Wychwood Avenue footpath access. Two new bus stops would be
    created either side of Marsh Lane, close to the store to encourage use of the
    existing service.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005822


46. A Travel Plan would be the subject of a condition which would encourage staff to
    use low carbon travel.
47. The Appellant offered a condition for management of parking spaces, whereby if
    they are found to be excess to requirements, spaces would be adapted perhaps to
    include EV charging points. This would be a helpful measure of efficiently
    controlling the level of parking.
48. Significantly up to 364 car parking spaces are within the easement for Cadent (the
    gas authority) to do remedial or maintenance works to underground pipes. This
    would cause the temporary loss of some or all of those spaces which would
    necessitate other spaces to allow the functioning of the store.
49. TfL analysis of the Parking Eye and TRICS data suggest demand would be a
    maximum of 85 spaces, whereas the Appellant’s analysis is for 89 spaces. Both
    are less than the 94 proposed, however the over provision would allow the safe
    operation of the car park, particularly as excessive manoeuvring and movement to
    find spaces could impair the safety of pedestrians as they walk to or from the store
    entrance. Indeed the car parking would be split into two elements where one,
    behind the store, may not be readily visible, thereby leading to more movements.
50. The Appellant suggests that Policy T.6 criterion (L) supports the proposal. This is
    worded: ’some flexibility may be applied where retail sites are redeveloped outside
    of town centres in areas which are not well served by public transport, particularly
    in outer London’. However the site is not in existing retail use and being
    redeveloped rather it is development of a non-retail used site, so I disagree with
    the Appellant. Nonetheless this does not lead me to a different decision.
51. The proposal would support the choice of travel and encouragement to alternative
    means, and the knock on effects of reduced parking spaces in this particular
    circumstance would be very significant.
52. I therefore find that the proposal would conflict with Policies T1 and T6.3 by
    providing more than the London Plan’s stipulated spaces. The reference in Policy
    T6.3 to ’town centre first’ also reflects upon the earlier first main issue and
    Framework policies TR1 and TR3 are also relevant in this regard. In terms of
    Policies T2 and M1 and the Framework, the level of parking could encourage more
    driving, but the proposal does provide measures to support use of public transport,
    cycling and walking, so there is both support and conflict. In terms of Policies T2
    and M2, the level of parking is necessary to allow safe functioning, and the
    proposal would not conflict.
Whether the proposal does or not optimise the efficient use/development of the site
53. Policy D3 of the London Plan requires a design led approach to optimising
    capacity. Strategic policies O1 and GR1 of the Local Plan are similar.
54. L2 of the Framework promotes effective use of land, particularly if vacant or under-
    utilized. L3 seeks to increase the density of the area but requires consideration of
    the local character. L3 is part of a wider effective use of land taking into account
    the need for infrastructure, sustainable transport, connectivity and well-designed
    places.


4
    Paragraph 4.14 Darren Wing Design Statement


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          7
Appeal Decision 6005822


55. The site is a triangular shape, which is problematical to devise a development
    involving a rectangular orientated building form. Additionally there is need to
    arrange parking, servicing, warehouse access and pedestrian access.
56. Additionally as stated above, the site is constrained by easements. These restrict
    the overall 0.9ha site to a developable area of 0.4ha. Figure 125, titled Proposed
    Constraints Plan graphically demonstrates the situation.
57. At the planning application stage the Appellant explored the best form of
    development in a series of options, varying the shape and arrangement of the
    footprint6. I find that in layout terms the building footprint and siting are efficient.
58. The Council at the Inquiry promoted the concept of residential development
    extending into the south west corner, however the surface water strategy requires
    this to be kept free of building. Whilst it was suggested that it is often possible to
    find alternative solutions, the surface water drainage was the subject of a reason
    for refusal being a long running issue, and only latterly the strategy has been
    agreed by the Council. Accordingly I do not find this point is persuasive.
59. As stated above 36 car parking spaces would be within the easement area. This
    does prevent building, but car parking is allowable and so would be an efficient
    use.
60. The Council suggest that the parking is excessive and should be reduced; in its
    place they advocate landscaping, biodiversity enhancement or sustainable
    drainage. However the additional benefit of any such landscaping would be very
    limited due to the small areas involved and the context of being close to a
    supermarket and underground pipes. Additionally the most meaningful
    landscaping would be around the boundary of the site to help the outward facing
    appearance and surrounding ecology rather than deeper into the site. Drainage
    too has been addressed and agreed.
61. The proposed building would be between 5.8m to 10.5m high. The Council are
    critical that it would be predominately single storey and rather promote the
    potential for 3-4 storey residential. Nonetheless the proposal would be akin to 3
    storey domestic scale, which would be sympathetic to the surroundings of 2 to 2.5
    storey dwellings. Indeed the site is prominent on Marsh Lane, and the heights are
    a unifying feature of the street scene, so to break this context would be challenging
    in terms of elevations, form and siting.
62. The Council suggested at the Inquiry that residential was the best use for the site.
    However this was not supported by the Local Plan Inspector partly on grounds of
    constraints.
63. The Council did not provide Housing Land Supply data to quantify the need.
    Significantly the Local Plan has recently been adopted and that would be expected
    to promote new housing across the Borough towards its needs. In addition this site
    was not included in that housing strategy. Whilst it was suggested that Aldi may
    have blocked the allocation, they only began to acquire an interest in the site in
    2024.



5
    Darren Wing Design Statement page 23
6
    Ms Moss Proof of Evidence Appendix 1


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6005822


64. Moreover any housing scheme would be expected to have the same constraints to
    the developable area as this proposal. In addition its height (and relatedly siting)
    would need to be in keeping with the area.
65. The site has been underused since 2012 and has been largely vacant except for a
    means of access to gas infrastructure. This is a lack of opportunity for the
    brownfield land where the impetus is for its re-use.
66. The Council expressed concern about the permanent loss of land that continues to
    host gas infrastructure and a live 24 hours access easement. However the access
    easement has been secured, and the gas authority have deemed it surplus to
    requirements in passing the land to the Appellant for development.
67. The Council in closing7 suggest: 'a low density, single use, car park led
    supermarket forecloses, for the foreseeable future, the kind of better and more
    intensive use of a substantial brownfield site'. However in policy terms there is no
    requirement for a mixed use, and this is reuse of a seemingly vacant, but definitely
    much under used, brownfield site which in itself is positive.
68. I therefore find that the proposal would comply with Policies D3, O1 and GR1 and
    the Framework.
Whether the use is appropriate for the site in terms of the Borough’s economy
69. Policy E4 of the London Plan requires sufficient sites of land and premises for
    industrial and related functions including infrastructure. Policy LE3 of the Local
    Plan affords protection to non-designated industrial sites.
70. PM1 of the Framework promotes spatial development strategies, in particular
    footnote 7 promotes The Governments’ Modern Industrial Strategy and similarly
    E2 supports business growth.
71. The Council suggest as the site has been used for infrastructure delivery an
    industrial land use is accrued. The Appellant argues that the infrastructure has
    been abandoned, the site is vacant and below ground pipes are common and do
    not indicate the above use, so that a nil use results.
72. I note that no Certificate of Lawful Existing Use or Development has been
    submitted, wherein comprehensive information would be expected to be provided
    to allow a sound conclusion.
73. The three gas holders dominating the site were demolished in 2012 which
    contributed to the primary function of the site, nonetheless that may not
    necessarily preclude other gas orientated activities. Similarly the site does appear
    vacant and cleared, the hazardous substance consent has also been evoked but
    that would not prevent ongoing works on the ground, including potentially
    maintenance activities. I find that there is insufficient evidence before me to
    confirm the uses or otherwise since 2012 to make a categoric decision on its
    authorised use.
74. Nonetheless Mr Ustic considered the best use of the site would be industrial. The
    Council state 34% of industrial floorspace has been lost since 2001 and there is a
    7.6% vacancy rate, below the London average.

77
     Paragraph 59


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6005822


75. However as stated at the round table session, industrial uses have been shown to
    generally generate less jobs than retail8. Moreover the proposal would provide 40
    jobs whereas the site currently has minimal.
76. In addition the surrounding homes would need protection from noise, disturbance
    and pollution, so any industrial development would be expected to warrant
    stringent limitations in the inevitable planning conditions. The extent of building
    would also be constrained by the easements as above.
77. The Local Plan quantifies the industrial and non-industrial land supply and need in
    the Borough. It also provides policies to support such delivery, particularly in
    making allocations. Notably paragraph 5.3.4 of the Local Plan states: ’Given the
    modest amount of floor space that is required to be delivered, the Council will seek
    to deliver this within the existing industrial sites located across the borough’.
    Additionally the Plan does not allocate the site for industrial use. The Plan is
    tailored for the locality and is more relevant than the generality of the Framework. I
    therefore find no overriding need for the industrial use of the site.
78. The benefits of construction would derive from any development, whether retail,
    industrial or housing. Although as this proposal is a deliverable scheme, that
    opportunity would be realised now.
79. Some of the submitted Council’s evidence suggested the site should be used for
    housing, which would conflict with this economic aim. The Council explain this was
    due to competing strategic priorities, nonetheless this shows that industrial use
    was less favoured.
80. The Council argued no marketing strategy for industrial use here had taken place.
    Whilst that would have been informative in terms of the site’s potential constraints
    of the size/shape/easements and the adjoining residential context, the employment
    land supply and job creation aspects as above would still be most pertinent.
81. I therefore find that the proposal would comply with Policies E4 and LE3 as well as
    the Framework in this respect.
Other matters
82. A Retail Impact Study has been submitted, and the methodology and findings were
    accepted by the Council. This showed that the proposal would not significantly
    adversely impact on local centres. I concur.
83. Some residents expressed concern about highways safety, in particular the impact
    of the new access onto Marsh Lane and school traffic. A Transport Assessment
    was submitted, prepared in accordance with methodology agreed by the Council.
    The likely traffic generated by the store was calculated and the capacity of the
    road network was assessed as well as the accident record in the vicinity. Marsh
    Lane has a 30mph speed limit and there is a speed warning sign opposite the site,
    and the proposed traffic island should also slow speed.
84. The new access has been designed in accordance with accepted standards in
    terms of its geometry and width. Visibility splays would surpass 70m in both
    directions thereby respecting the measured speed in the area. Finer details would
    be expected to be part of the road adoption process. Additionally the findings of

8
    Ms Moss made reference to data from The Office for National Statistics


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   10
Appeal Decision 6005822


       the submitted Transport Assessment show that there is capacity in the flow rates
       in Marsh Lane for the new access, which was accepted by the Borough Council,
       and passed a Stage 1 Safety Audit. I too find that the access would be safe.
85. Several residents expressed concern about the pedestrian access to the rear,
    joining Wychwood Avenue, anticipating noise, disturbance and jeopardising
    security. However a condition is suggested to provide a barrier which would allow
    access during particular hours only. The store‘s opening hours too are suggested
    to be subject of a condition. The access would be overlooked which would help
    discourage potential problems and a condition requiring compliance with 'Secure
    by Design’ principles is also mooted. The service yard would be in the middle of
    the site and away from any vulnerable boundary. The Inquiry heard that there have
    been some recent cases of unsavoury incidents, but a vacant site is likely to attract
    trouble.
86. Stanmore Marshes are adjacent, however the appeal site has a wall ranging from
    at least 2m to 3m high along the facing boundary, which constrains wildlife
    movement. The existing buildings are being demolished and otherwise the site is
    covered by hard surfaces /rubble. Appropriate surveys have been undertaken and
    there are no protected species or habitat on site. The trees on the site boundary
    would be largely retained, the boundary wall would be removed, and new
    landscaping would be provided, which all would support the ecology of the area.
    There is also commitment to lighting controls to avoid disturbance.
87. The surface water flooding has been the subject of a revised Flood Risk
    Assessment, which requires the south west corner of the site to be kept clear of
    development to maintain flood flow routes, with a suggested condition confirming
    the implementation of such measures. The site is currently hard surfaced, and
    surface water run-off is unmanaged, and the proposed new building has been
    shown not to exacerbate the situation. Following ongoing discussions, the Council
    had no objection and I similarly concur.
88. One of the speakers raised the need for affordable housing. However that would
    be commensurate with a housing scheme, and the Local Plan Inspector did not
    allocate the site. Moreover there is no such alternative detailed residential scheme
    as a fallback which demonstrates how many affordable homes would be viable.
Planning Obligations
89. The CIL Regulations and paragraph DM6 of the Framework provide the legal and
    policy tests for obligations. These tests require that planning obligations should
    only be sought where they are: a) necessary to make the development acceptable
    in planning terms; b) directly related to the development; and c) fairly and
    reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.
90. As I have found above the Travel Plan would encourage staff to use low carbon
    access and is therefore necessary. The monitoring fees would help towards the
    Council’s staffing of overseeing this obligation.
91. The highway works are necessary in the interests of the safety of all road users as
    agreed with the Highway Authority.
92. The Biodiversity Net Gain would ensure that the scheme meets the national
    requirements. The carbon offsetting would respect the wider environment.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6005822


93. The Employment and Training Plan would provide training and employment
    opportunities for local people on the construction of the development. This would
    promote the social and economic wellbeing of the area and would be a benefit of
    the proposal.
Development Plan and Planning Balance
94. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires this
    appeal to be determined in accordance with the development plan unless material
    considerations indicate otherwise. The relevant policies are the primary reality
    against which proposals must be tested.
95. The Harrow Local Plan 2021 to 2041 was recently adopted on 24th of March 2026.
    The London Plan is also up to date.
96. The most important policy for consideration here is LE1 which I have found to be in
    conflict with the proposal, based upon the evidence before the Inquiry and the
    circumstances of the Amna Lodge site at this particular time. The reference in
    London Plan Policy T6.3 to the ’town centre first’ sequence also reinforces this
    conflict as do Framework policies TR1 and TR3. The proposal in respect of the
    balancing of the other main issues complies with the Development Plan. However
    when taken as a whole I find that the proposal would be in conflict and the
    Development Plan warrants substantial weight.
97. Policy S3 of the Framework has a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S4 states development proposals within settlements should
    be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects. The following paragraph then refers to such circumstances
    and notes a substantial adverse impact would be on an allocation unless there is a
    reasonable prospect of an application coming forward for the allocated use or
    there is evidence that safeguarding is no longer appropriate. This supports my
    conclusion above.
98. The proposal would make positive use of an underused, largely vacant brownfield
    site, which is a favourable aspect. It would also create 40 new jobs, with a training
    plan supporting wider prospects. It would provide a biodiversity net gain and an
    energy efficient building which would support the wider environment. The new bus
    stops would help the local community in general. These benefits collectively would
    be significant.
99. I conclude that the planning benefits whilst significant do not warrant a decision
    other than that in accordance with the Development Plan. I have also given
    consideration to the Framework and the PPG which support the Development
    Plan.


Conclusion
100. I therefore find that the appeal should be dismissed.



John Longmuir INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6005822


Appearances
The Council
Saira Kabir Sheikh, Kings Council, Francis Taylor Building
Heather Lindley-Clapp BA(Hons) MPLAN MRTPI, Reginal Director, Nexus Planning
Dino Ustic, BA(Hons) MRTPI, Principal Planning Officer, Harrow Council
Helena Wagg, BA(Hons) MArch, Urban Design Officer, Harrow Council


The Appellant
Paul Tucker, Kings Counsel, Kings Chambers
Stephanie Hall, Counsel, Kings Chambers
Penny Moss BA(Hons) MPhil MRTPI Director, Avison Young
Sam Jackson BSc(Hons) MCIHT, Principal Transport Planner, Connect Consultants
Harry Flexman MSci(Hons) MCIHT, Director, Connect Consultants
Darren Wing BA(Hons) March ARB RIBA, Associate and Architect ,The Harris
Partnership Ltd


Interested parties
Abe Hayeem            Local resident and architect
Sam Parsons Local resident
Dhanesh Shah Local resident
Tony Williams Local resident
Kalpesh Shah Local resident


Documents submitted during the Inquiry
ID 1 Appellant’s appearances list
ID 2 Appellant’s opening statement
ID 3 Council’s opening statement
ID 4 statement of Mr Hayeem
ID 5 statement of Mr Parsons
ID 6 Council's appearances list
ID 7 signed Statement of Common Ground
ID 8 signed Statement of Common Ground (Highways)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     13
Appeal Decision 6005822


ID 9 signed Statement of Common Ground (Flood risk)
ID 10 e-mail from TfL dated 3rd August 2026
ID 11 Appellant's map of local supermarkets
ID 12 Draft section 106 agreement
ID 13 Council’s CIL compliance statement




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
