Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by P Barton BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005418
91 Staplers Road, Newport, Isle of Wight PO30 2DG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (the
     Act) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Maggie Read against the decision of Isle of Wight Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01743/HOU.
•    The development proposed is 2 storey extension to side and new vehicular access.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the new vehicular access.
2.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted insofar as it relates to
      the 2-storey side extension at 91 Staplers Road, Newport, Isle of Wight PO30 2DG
      in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/01743/HOU, and the plans
      submitted with it, so far as relevant to that part of the development hereby
      permitted and subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The 2-storey side extension hereby permitted shall be carried out in
              accordance with drawing no. 32-2025-3 Rev A Dec 2025 ‘Proposed
              Extension. Floor Plans & Elevations as Proposed’.
     3)       Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
              Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-
              enacting that Order with or without modification), no windows/dormer
              windows (other than those expressly authorised by this permission) shall be
              constructed at 1st floor level on the western elevation of the extension hereby
              permitted.
Preliminary Matters
3.    The Council has sought to make a split decision. In the interests of certainty, I
      have based my assessment on the proposed development originally applied for.
4.    The Council has only raised substantive concerns with regards to the proposed
      new vehicular access and not in reference to the 2-storey side extension. From the
      evidence before me, I see no reason to disagree with the Council’s position with
      respect to the 2-storey side extension. I am satisfied that the vehicular access is
      clearly severable from the side extension, as it is physically and functionally
      independent. Therefore, under section 79(1)(b) of the Act, I have the power to
      issue a split decision in this case.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005418


5.    A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
      published on 17 August 2026. The policy emphasis of the parts of the Framework
      most relevant to this appeal have not changed. As a result, I have not sought
      comments on the new version of the Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s
      interests have been prejudiced by taking this approach.
6.    The Island Plan Core Strategy March 2012 (CS) referred to in the decision notice
      has been superseded by the Island Planning Strategy September 2026 (PS),
      which was adopted on the 16 September 2026. The main parties have had the
      opportunity to comment on the PS in the context of the appeal.
7.    Appeal decisions must be based on the policies from the development plan
      prevailing at the time of determination. Policies referred to in the reason for refusal
      from the CS are no longer relevant and are disregarded.
8.    It has been suggested that the surfacing of the front garden with permeable
      materials is permitted development. However, it is not for me, under a section 78
      appeal, to determine whether this would comply with the Town and Country
      Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 2015. I am required to consider
      the proposed scheme before me as a whole.
9.    I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty contained in Section 149
      of the Equality Act 2010, which requires me to consider the need to eliminate
      unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and foster good
      relations between people who share a protected characteristic and people who do
      not share it. Protected characteristics include a person’s disability.
Main Issue
10. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
    appearance of the area.
Reasons
11. 91 Staplers Road is one half of a pair of semi-detached properties, which sits
    within a row of similar properties to the northern side of Staplers Road. Parking to
    these houses, including No. 91, is provided within rear garage courts with
    vehicular accesses at either end of the row.
12. Between these modest accesses is a sizeable length of highway with a wide grass
    verge containing street trees, and the semi-detached houses have open and
    predominantly grassed front gardens with an absence of off-street parking to these
    areas. I found these to be positive features that make a significant contribution to
    the open and verdant character and appearance of the area, which is reinforced by
    large areas of open grassland, with some trees, and a lack of parking to the
    frontages of the properties opposite.
13. In addition to the replacement of part of No. 91’s current front garden with a
    hardstanding drive, the proposal would involve cutting through the grass verge to
    facilitate a vehicular access to the proposed off-street parking spaces. This would
    result in the permanent loss of the grass verge affected, eroding the soft
    landscaped character of the area. This material adverse effect on the verdant
    street scene would be further compounded by the parking of vehicles on the drive
    to the front of No. 91, in an elevated position, creating a stark contrast to the
    harmonious nature of this stretch of Staplers Road.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005418


14. Although the topography of the verge would reduce the visual impact of the access
    when viewed from a distance along Staplers Road, it would still be prominent
    when passing the site and from nearby properties.
15. A claim made by the appellant that the verge is broken 11 times by vehicular and
    footpath accesses along a 380m section of Staplers Road between Fairmount
    Drive and Mayfield Drive has not been challenged by the Council. Nevertheless, I
    saw that the vehicular accesses predominantly consist of a shared arrangement
    between properties that minimises the overall number and their presence has not
    swayed me from my findings on this main issue.
16. Although it is contended by the appellant that the front garden to No. 91 could be
    hard surfaced without the need for planning permission, the proposal includes the
    access off Staplers Road that would enable vehicles to park on this frontage,
    which would not otherwise occur. Consequently, the proposed development would
    have a more harmful impact on the character and appearance of the area
    compared to this fallback and it does not indicate I should reach a different
    conclusion.
17. For the above reasons, the proposed development would have an unacceptable
    effect on the character and appearance of the area. This would conflict with PS
    Policy C1, which requires development proposals to, amongst other things,
    respect and enhance the character of the area through their layout and design.
Other Matters
18. I recognise that the appeal scheme seeks more convenient parking to the front of
    the dwelling compared to the existing provision within the nearby garage court,
    particularly if it were to be used by a person with a disability or limited mobility.
    However, there is no compelling argument before me that the existing garage is
    such a distance, and the route to the house is not suitable, that it represents a
    remote and difficult parking arrangement.
19. The ability to provide 2 parking spaces, electric vehicle charging and disabled
    access parking, as well as the retention of existing street trees do not outweigh my
    concerns surrounding the effect of this aspect of the appeal scheme on the
    character and appearance of the area.
20. Benefits to pedestrian safety and accessibility including the relocation of an
    existing pedestrian footway, installation of tactile paving and a dropped kerb have
    been requested by Island Roads but there is no formal correspondence before me
    outlining this. Nevertheless, due to the scale and nature of these works, I attribute
    it moderate weight in the planning balance.
21. Whilst consistency in the planning process is important and like cases should be
    decided in a like manner, it is important to reiterate that each case is determined
    on its own merits and on the basis of the evidence, particularly in relation to
    matters of character and appearance. I acknowledge the appellant’s comments on
    the Council’s concerns surrounding a precedent being set, but I have not found
    this to be a determinative factor in this case.
22. A lack of harm or policy compliance with regards to flood risk, highway safety,
    heritage assets, designated green space, and street trees would have a neutral



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005418


      effect which weigh neither for nor against the proposal. Moreover, a lack of
      objections from neighbours does not equate to a lack of harm.
Planning Balance
23. There is consistency between PS Policy C1, and national decision-making policy
    DP3 of the Framework, which seeks proposals that respond to their context, so
    that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Consequently, the
    proposed vehicular access would fail to comply with one of the national-decision
    making policies which state that development proposals should be refused in
    specific circumstances, as set out in policy S4(2)(c). In this instance, I have found
    that the benefits of approving the vehicular access would be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework. Consequently, the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out in policy S4 of the Framework does not apply.
Conditions
24. With regards to the proposed 2-storey side extension, and in addition to the
    standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that the development
    is carried out in accordance with the approved plan, as this provides certainty. A
    condition is also necessary to control the provision of any additional windows at
    first floor level on the western elevation of the extension in the interests of the
    living conditions of neighbouring properties.
Conclusion
25. The appeal scheme includes two different elements. Having had regard to the
    development plan as a whole and the material considerations, including the
    Framework, I dismiss the appeal in respect of the new vehicular access. However,
    I allow the appeal in respect of the 2-storey side extension.

P Barton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
