Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by Ian Dyer BSc (Eng) FCIHT
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005653
Medvale House, Mote Road, Maidstone, ME15 6AH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant [outline] planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Medvale House (Maidstone) Ltd against the decision of Maidstone Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/500559/FULL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of Medvale House to 87no. residential apartments,
     including associated infrastructure works, communal areas and amenity spaces.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have removed the words “part retrospective” from the description of the
       development as this does not describe an act of development.
3.     At the time of my site visit I was met by a security guard who indicated that he was
       authorised to allow me access to the interior of the building but would not
       accompany me. Given the unknown conditions within the building that I may
       encounter, I determined that lone working within the building would be an
       unacceptable risk and did not enter. However, I consider that I have sufficient
       information, from what I observed on site and the written evidence, to make my
       decision and I have proceeded on this basis.
4.     Following the Council’s determination of the application, a revised version of the
       National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August
       2026. The Framework has not materially altered its approach to the matters in
       dispute in this appeal and so I have not sought further comment from the parties in
       making my decision and, under these circumstances, I do not consider that
       injustice would result to any party from my doing so.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues in this appeal are: -
           •    Whether the proposal would provide suitable living conditions for future
                occupiers, having particular regard to private amenity space; and: -
           •    Whether the proposed development would provide an appropriate standard
                of accommodation having regard to fire safety.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005653


Reasons
Background
6.     Medvale House is a 7-storey building with a basement, roof area and parking at
       ground level, lying within Maidstone town centre. Adjacent to the site lie other
       former office blocks of a similar scale, currently being converted to residential use.
7.     The site has previously been subject to three prior notification applications for the
       change of use of offices to residential, and work commenced on site to implement
       one of the schemes. However, the work was not completed within the prescribed
       time scale, and the permission has fallen away, requiring a full planning application
       for implementation. The prior notification scheme, whilst commenced, does not,
       therefore, present a viable fallback scheme.
Living conditions
8.     The proposal provides 87 dwellings with no outdoor private amenity space for
       future occupiers. A laundry room has been provided to allow the future occupiers
       access to clothes washing and drying without the need to have damp clothes
       drying and airing within their flat. There is also a gym, lounge and co-working area,
       measuring some 115 m2.
9.     Policy LPRQD7 of the Maidstone Local Plan Review 2021-2038 (2024) (the LPR)
       sets out the requirements for private open space in flatted development. This
       requires a balcony or terrace for each unit large enough for two persons to use
       and for drying clothes and which provides for sufficient privacy.
10. Where it is not feasible to provide balconies for all flats, the policy allows a quality
    private communal space to be provided for occupants to use (in addition to any
    necessary public open space provision).
11. The supporting narrative to the policy sets out that the scale of the space should
    increase depending on the number of occupants of the flat, but a minimum of 5m2
    should be provided as a minimum standard. However, some of the flats are larger,
    with potential to accommodate families, raising an expectation of larger amounts of
    private internal amenity space. The total internal communal private amenity space
    for the proposal falls well short of such an expectation.
12. Thus, whilst the provision of a laundry room provides opportunities for clothes
    drying, there is no provision for children living in the flats to play privately, nor any
    opportunity for any resident to sit out-of-doors in a secluded environment.
13. Even were I to accept the appellants argument that provision of balconies for the
    flats is not economically viable, given the works likely to be required, considering
    the number of units and the potential for children to live in the proposed
    development, the under-provision of internal private amenity space of any form
    would lead to significant pressure on what communal space is provided, and this
    would be exasperated by the total lack of private outdoor amenity space
    associated with the proposal.
14. The appellant has brought my attention to a public open space, Mote Park, and
    other public open spaces nearby. However, public open space does not fulfil all
    the amenity functions of private space, lacking seclusion and privacy as it does.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005653


15. The appellants have brought to my attention that Policy LPRQD7 of the LPR
    advises that “All new dwellings created through subdivision, conversion or new
    build should have private amenity space” before setting out various criteria. They
    interpret this as being an aim, rather than a requirement. However, my reading of
    the policy as a whole is that its intent is to provide private amenity space to support
    future residents’ needs but allow some flexibility within the exercise of planning
    judgement, as exceptional situations can arise. This is reflected in the rest of the
    wording of the policy, where it is identified that alternative provisions are possible
    under certain circumstances.
16. This is a common approach to wording within policies where an intent is stated,
    but some flexibility in compliance is desirable for practical reasons. I do not see
    that a complete lack of personal private provision is an option being offered as a
    matter of choice for the developer, but as seeking justification for their solution,
    should alternatives, such as is proposed here, being put forward. The appellants
    have put insufficient justification in this place to support the reduced provision
    proposed.
17. Whilst the building has previously benefitted from Prior Approval, that route is
    subject to different tests than an application for planning permission. I have
    determined this appeal on the basis of the proposal that is before me.
18. I therefore find that the proposal would fail to provide suitable living conditions for
    future occupiers, having particular regard to private amenity space. This would be
    contrary to the aims of Policy LPRQD7, as set out above and Policy LPRSP15 of
    the LPR in as much as this, amongst other things, seeks to ensure that
    development proposals create high quality design, including the provision of
    adequate residential amenities for future occupiers, having regard to relevant
    national and local design guides and codes.
19. For similar reasons the proposal would fail to accord with the advice provided in
    the Maidstone Building for Life 12 (2018), which has similar aims.
Fire safety
20. Article 9A of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management
    Procedure) (England) Order 2015, requires that a fire statement must be submitted
    for relevant buildings. There is no dispute that the appeal site is a relevant building
    or that a Fire Statement has been submitted. However, the Fire Statement has
    proven unacceptable to the Council, in consultation with Statutory Consultees.
21. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)1 sets out :
       “Government made a commitment in ‘A reformed building safety regulatory
       system: government response to the ‘Building a Safer Future’ consultation’ to
       introduce planning gateway one.”
22. Planning gateway one has two key elements:
           •    to require the developer to submit a fire statement setting out fire safety
                considerations specific to the development with a relevant application for
                planning permission for development which involves one or more relevant
                buildings, and

1




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005653


             •    to establish the Health and Safety Executive as a statutory consultee for
                  relevant planning applications.
23. The PPG goes on to advise2 that “The changes are intended to help ensure that
    applicants and decision-makers consider planning issues relevant to fire safety,
    bringing forward thinking on fire safety matters as they relate to land use planning
    to the earliest possible stage in the development process and result in better
    schemes which fully integrate thinking on fire safety.”
24. There is, therefore, more to this matter in the determining of a planning application
    than submitting a document. It is material to the determining of the proposal that
    the document is relevant to the proposal and achieves the objective of addressing
    fire safety effectively.
25. The appellants have provided three fire statements. The latest, produced by
    Clarke Banks (Fire Engineering) Limited and dated 26 February 2026,
    accompanied this appeal.
26. Within that statement it is proposed that the proposal will incorporate one
    dedicated firefighting shaft and stair (Stair 1) with a firefighting lift and that this will
    be supplemented by a shared escape stair located within the adjoining Kent House
    (Stair 4) serving floors 2–7.
27. The proposal would be reliant on a shared escape stair outside the control of the
    appellants. The appellants identify that they have a legal agreement with the
    owner of Kent House to provide access.
28. There is dispute regarding which design standards should be used, based on
    whether the assessments for the project upon which work has commenced but for
    which permission has lapsed, and the current proposal, which differs in internal
    layout. I note that the building is the subject of an ongoing Building Regulations
    application with Stroma Building Control.
29. This notwithstanding, I do not have a plan demonstrating how persons using the
    stair in Kent House would reach ground level or the outside of the building. There
    is limited evidence before me demonstrating the fire risk from Kent House itself,
    which would affect the fire risk associated with Stair 4.
30. Access to the escape route cannot be secured through a planning condition as it
    lies outside of the red line for the application and would affect the rights of a third
    party. The appellants state that they have secured a legal agreement for use of
    Stair 4 as a fire stair. However, a scan of a legal document appended to the
    Planning Fire Statement dated 26 February 2026, produced by Clarke Banks Fire
    Safety, is unclear in its content and intent. On the basis of the evidence before me
    it is it has not been demonstrated that this document is enforceable in planning
    terms. Whilst there is an ongoing application Building Regulations application,
    there is no certainty that the current scheme will pass.
31. On this basis of the evidence before me it has not been demonstrated that the Fire
    Statement submitted with the appeal demonstrates a suitable solution to the risk to
    human life from fire. I note that the Health and Safety Executive, who are a
    Statutory Consultee in the process also object to the proposal on the basis of the
    inadequacy of the information provided, noting that “The applicant has failed to
2
    Paragraph: 002 Reference ID: 71-002-20210624


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decision 6005653


       provide a compelling rationale for the reliance of a shared (third party) staircase
       and provided no evidence about what the risks are and how they will be managed.
       This has profound implications for the layout of the development and the number
       and configuration of dwellings provided.”
32. Through this failure I therefore find that the development would not provide an
    appropriate standard of accommodation having regard to fire safety. The proposal
    would fail to meet the expectations of planning gateway one, which is a statutory
    requirement for development proposals such as this. The proposal would thereby
    be contrary to the fundamental social objective of the Framework to provide well-
    designed, safe places and fail to ensure safe and healthy living conditions for
    future occupiers.
Other Considerations and Planning Balance
33. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 states that,
       “If regard is to be had to the development plan for the purpose of any
       determination to be made under the planning Acts the determination must be
       made in accordance with the plan unless material considerations indicate
       otherwise.”
34. The proposal would fail to provide adequate living conditions for future occupiers
    by virtue of its lack of suitable private amenity provision. I have found that the
    proposal would, therefore, be contrary Policies LPRQD7 and LPRSP15 of the
    LPR, evidencing poor design. The proposal would not, therefore, accord with the
    development plan as a whole and this is a matter that counts significantly against
    allowing the appeal.
35. Further, the proposal has not been demonstrated to provide a safe living
    environment for future occupiers, having regard to fire, contrary to the expectations
    of legislation and the Framework. This is a matter weighing very significantly
    against the proposal.
36. There is no dispute between the parties that the Council is unable to demonstrate
    an adequate supply of housing land in line with Government expectations. The
    appeal site lies within Maidstone Town Centre where Policy S4 of the Framework
    states that Development proposals within settlements should be approved unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in this Framework.
37. The proposal would provide an additional 87 dwellings in a location with
    convenient access to services and facilities to augment the Council’s housing
    supply. There is no dispute that the Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year
    supply of housing land in accordance with Government expectations. Their
    position would be made worse as a result of the loss of the 87 dwellings from their
    measured housing supply and so this is a matter carrying significant weight in
    support of the proposal.
38. The development would bring economic benefits, both short-term through
    increased activity in the construction sector and supply chain, and longer-term
    through support to local shops and businesses. Given the scale of the
    development, the short-term benefits during the construction period would be a



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005653


       limited benefit, whilst the longer-term benefits provided by the increase in
       population carry moderate weight.
39. Whilst the proposed development re-uses an existing building, thus having no
    significant effect on either the character and appearance of the area or local
    biodiversity, these are neutral effects, rather than benefits and so carry no weight
    in my deliberations.
40. The appellants consider that additional Council tax revenues from new households
    and contributions to Council funding from the New Homes Bonus would be public
    benefits. However, these are payments reflected on the need for additional
    spending on services and so are neutral in my weighing of the effects of the
    proposal.
41. Whilst the appellants consider that the provision of accommodation with close
    proximity to various employment opportunities and public transport links,
    community facilities, parks and services and with access to the services and
    facilities of Maidstone, such matters are already considered above as justification
    for the presumption in favour of sustainable development. To consider them again,
    separately, would be to double count the effects.
42. The policies in the Framework seek to deliver a sufficient supply of homes and the
    site lies in an area where there is considerable need for them. However, good
    design is fundamental to what the planning system should seek to achieve, and
    that would not be delivered by this scheme. Given the paucity of provision of
    private shared amenity space and its poor quality, the design of the proposal and
    its effect on the lived experience of future occupiers would itself be sufficient to
    overwhelm the benefits accruing. Further, I cannot be certain, on the basis of the
    evidence before me, that human life would not be unacceptably put at risk by the
    proposal.
43. Therefore, the adverse impacts of the proposal significantly and demonstrably
    outweigh the benefits when assessed against the national decision-making
    policies in the Framework. As a result, the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development does not justify granting planning permission in this instance.
Conclusion
44. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and statutory requirements and
    the material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.

Ian Dyer
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
