Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by P Brennan BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 19 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005503
Home Farm Cottage, Malt House Bank, Little Wenlock, Telford TF6 5BN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mick Barker against the decision of Telford and Wrekin Council.
•    The application Ref is TWC/2025/0684.
•    The development proposed is the construction of detached garage with garden store with first floor
     one bedroom guest accommodation subservient to the main dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the construction of
       detached garage with garden store with first floor one bedroom guest
       accommodation subservient to the main dwelling at Home Farm Cottage, Malt
       House Bank, Telford TF6 5BN in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       TWC/2025/0684, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Proposed Location Plan – 1002-211-sk2c;
              Proposed Block Plan – 1002-211-sk4a and Proposed Car Port with Living
              Accommodation Above Plans, Elevations and Sections – 1002-211-02h.
     3)       No development above slab level shall take place until details and samples,
              including types and colours of the materials to be used in the construction of
              the external surfaces of the outbuilding including any hard surfaced areas
              have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details.
     4)       No development above slab level shall take place until a detailed
              specification and drawings including sections of the proposed windows and
              doors at a scale of 1:5/1:10 or 1:20, together with details of proposed finishes
              have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details.
     5)       The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied at any time other
              than for purposes ancillary to the residential use of the dwelling known as
              Home Farm Cottage and shall not at any time be occupied, let or sold as a
              separate unit of residential or holiday accommodation.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005503


Preliminary Matters
2.     I have amended the description of development in the heading above to remove
       “revised from previously withdrawn application TWC/2025/0435” as this does not
       form part of the operational development seeking planning permission.
3.     The Council’s Officer Report identifies conflict with Policy NE7 of the Telford and
       Wrekin Local Plan 2011-2031 (TWLP) in its conclusions. However, this policy is
       not mentioned in its subsequent reasons for refusal. As the policy relates to
       Strategic Landscapes, of which the appeal site forms part, I have taken this policy
       into consideration in my decision.
4.     The Council refers to the emerging development plan in its delegated officer report
       which forms part of its evidence. However, as the emerging plan is at the early
       stages of examination, I afford limited weight to its policies.
5.     I have a duty under Section 66(1) of the Act to have special regard to the
       desirability of preserving listed buildings or their settings or any features of special
       architectural or historic interest which they possess. The listed buildings, identified
       in evidence are the Grade II listed Home Farmhouse and Barns to the west of
       Home Farmhouse and the curtilage listed Home Farm Cottage.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would preserve or enhance the adjacent Grade II
                listed buildings at Home Farm and Barns and their setting and the setting of
                curtilage listed Home Farm Cottage;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the host dwelling at Home Farm Cottage and the surrounding area with
                regards to its scale and design; and
           •    whether the proposed development represents sustainable development.
Reasons
7.     The appeal site comprises Home Farm Cottage and its rear curtilage. Home Farm
       Cottage originally formed two outbuildings, a two-storey outbuilding of local rubble
       stone construction and a later single storey brick extension. The rear of the
       property consists of a large stone chipping driveway and a raised garden area of
       paving, grass and decking. Brick stone walls form the side boundaries to the north
       and west while the east boundary is the rear elevation of the Grade II listed barns.
       Due to its functional historic association, the cottage is identified by the Council as
       being curtilage listed to the adjacent Grade II listed Home Farmhouse and barns.
Heritage assets
8.     Home Farmhouse is a late 18th century two-storey brick farmhouse with a full attic
       storey, two gables to the front and a slightly lower single bay extension to the 3-
       bay main block. The Farmhouse has brick plat bands, a gable end tiled roof and
       tall coupled shaft cornices brick chimney stacks.
9.     The adjacent barns to the west of the Farmhouse, and forming the eastern
       boundary of the appeal site, are circa 1800 to 1830. These comprise a range of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005503


       brick farm buildings including byres, stabling and outhouses which enclose the
       farmyard. The barns have tiled gable end roofs with a raised brick eaves band and
       a segmental arched waggon entrance to the road elevation. The barn buildings
       form a closely related group with the farmhouse.
10. Home Farm Cottage formed part of an additional series of outbuildings further to
    the west of the Farmhouse, outside of the closely related group and with a
    separate access from Malt House Bank. These included a larger barn structure
    directly to the rear of Home Farm Cottage and further barns located on agricultural
    land to the rear.
11. The significance of the listed buildings relates to their historic character and the
    rural setting of the wider farmstead group, which retains value as a coherent
    historic ensemble. The significance of the curtilage listed building is its historic and
    architectural relevance as part of the wider former farmstead. Planning permission
    has previously been granted for the conversion of the barns to residential use.
12. The proposed development relates to a one and a half storey outbuilding for the
    purpose of providing a car port and garden store with ancillary guest
    accommodation above. The building is designed as a modern agricultural farm
    building clad in timber with a reclaimed/handmade clay tile roof and having
    domestic attributes including rooflights and a glazed front gable. The outbuilding
    would be sited around 25m from the rear of Home Farm Cottage adjacent to the
    rear boundary of the site.
13. Following demolition of the larger barn structures on the appeal site and
    conversion of the outbuildings to holiday accommodation and latterly to a dwelling,
    the association of the outbuildings with the wider former farmstead has diminished
    and become fragmented. Furthermore, the introduction of domestic paraphernalia
    to the rear of the property has diminished its former agricultural use and
    association with Home Farmhouse and its closely related farm buildings further
    still.
14. The severance of the original farmstead can be clearly seen. Home Cottage is now
    in residential use with its own residential curtilage. Adjacent dwellings have been
    previously introduced into its setting with the neighbouring property also having
    been extended further intruding into the setting of Home Cottage. Part of this
    extended neighbouring dwelling is located directly to the rear of Home Cottage,
    and its parking area is located adjacent to the rear wall. The severance of farming
    land to the rear of the listed buildings has also occurred with part now being
    residential garden area for Home Farmhouse and part now forming a tennis court,
    children’s playground and playing field for the village. The village’s rural setting
    remains beyond.
15. Consequently, the setting of Home Farmhouse, the adjacent barns and the
    curtilage listed Home Cottage have changed considerably over time. The removal
    of large-scale agricultural buildings has benefitted the setting of Home Cottage and
    provided rear garden space following its conversion to residential, whilst reducing
    the significance of its former use and association.
16. Whilst glimpses of the proposal would be available from the access on Malt House
    Bank, the main viewpoint would be from the village tennis court and playground to
    the rear of the site, where the roof of the structure would be clearly prominent.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005503


       Nonetheless, from this location, the building would be read as a domestic structure
       in a domestic garden and as such, would be appropriately located.
17. The eaves of the proposed outbuilding would be at approximately the same height
    as those of the adjacent listed barns whilst its proposed ridge would be at the
    same height. As a result, the outbuilding is unlikely to be visible from the adjacent
    listed buildings. The proposal’s scale and design in relation to the adjacent barns
    and farmhouse would be smaller in footprint and volume and whilst being hybrid in
    design, would not harm the significance or setting of the curtilage listed Home
    Cottage.
18. The proposal would not affect the historic and architectural relationship between
    the adjacent barns and Home Farmhouse, which are viewed as one entity from
    Malt House Bank and would remain closely related to each other. As a result, the
    proposed development would preserve their significance and setting.
19. Consequently, the proposal accords with Policies BE4 (i, iii and vii) of the Telford
    and Wrekin Local Plan 2011-2031 (TWLP). This policy, amongst other matters,
    supports alterations, extensions and other changes to listed buildings where the
    form, character and special interest of the building is maintained, and the historic
    interest and setting are not adversely affected; and where the development is
    appropriate in design and of high quality.
Character and appearance
20. The appeal site is located within Little Wenlock, a rural village on the outskirts of
    Telford and within the Wrekin Forest Strategic Landscape (WFSL). The village is a
    mix of residential properties of varying age and architectural styles. Opposite the
    site is a modern, purpose built, single storey village hall with car parking. As a
    historic agricultural building within a rural village setting, the appeal property and
    site make a valuable and positive contribution to the character and appearance of
    the area.
21. As previously outlined, although the proposed building is of a scale and height
    similar to the existing Home Cottage, it would occupy a footprint that is
    approximately 22% smaller than the host dwelling.
22. Policies within the TWLP do not define subservient and the assessment of such is
    consequently a matter of planning judgement. Nonetheless, taking the English
    dictionary definition, the meaning is identified as being an element which is
    secondary or lower in rank.
23. The proposed development, whilst providing ancillary guest accommodation
    above, is for a car port and garden store and is located adjacent to the rear
    boundary. Its proposed use, design, scale and location on the appeal site identify
    its lower rank in relation to Home Cottage.
24. Consequently, the proposed development would not be disproportionate in size,
    scale or mass to the existing dwelling. Whilst the proposal would be foremost in its
    position, it would not be overly dominant within the site, its wider surroundings or
    its historic context. The development would only be wholly visible by partial
    glances from Malt House Bank, where, when viewed from the road, the
    development would be prominent and perceived as a stand alone building. When
    viewed from Home Cottage or the adjacent village facilities to the rear, the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005503


       development would be read as a large outbuilding to the rear of a residential
       property.
25. The proposal has been designed to appear as a modern agricultural barn and
    whilst the glazed gable would not naturally be akin with the design approach, it
    would sit comfortably within the development. The use of natural materials
    including timber and clay would assist in ‘bedding’ the development into the rural
    landscape of the village.
26. I note the concern from the Council regarding the number of rooflights assisting in
    its domestic appearance. Nonetheless, and despite its hybrid agricultural design,
    the proposed development does include an element of residential accommodation
    which requires light and ventilation, primarily in the form of rooflights to reduce its
    residential appearance. Consequently, whilst 8 rooflights are proposed, these are
    of a conservation form which sit on the plain of the roof rather than above it and
    would appear as an integral part of the roof structure.
27. As the proposal would be located to the rear of the existing cottage and is of a
    modern design with a scale and mass appropriate for its context, the proposal
    would sit at ease within the character and appearance of Little Wenlock
28. The WFSL spans the Wrekin hill and surrounding woodlands. It serves as a rural
    backdrop, protected ecological network, and a recreation area adjacent to the
    neighbouring Shropshire Hills National Landscape. The landscape has a
    distinctive character based around its extensive woodland, ancient road and
    settlement patterns and its history of farming and industry. Due to its position,
    design, scale and mass, the proposal would conserve and enhance the existing
    character of the WFSL.
29. Accordingly, the proposal would not be disproportionate in its size in relation to the
    host dwelling, the site or its historical context and would conserve and enhance the
    WFSL. Consequently, the proposal would comply with Policies BE1 (i, ii, and iv),
    BE2 (i, ii, and iii) and NE7 of the TWLP. These policies, amongst other matters,
    prevent development that would cause detrimental change to the quality of the
    landscape and supports development that respects and responds positively to its
    context, demonstrates an integrated design approach and preserves and
    reinforces historic layouts. The policies also support, amongst other things,
    extensions to residential buildings where it would not be disproportionate in size,
    respects the character of the area and remains in keeping with the existing
    building.
Sustainable development
30. As the appeal site is located within Little Wenlock and relates to a development for
    a domestic outbuilding, I find that Policy SP1 of the TWLP relating to Telford and
    its principal role for growth is of limited relevance and the proposal does not
    therefore fail to accord with it.
31. I have determined that the development would not result in harm to the designated
    heritage assets identified above; would be acceptable in terms of design, scale
    and massing; and would conserve and enhance the WFSL and the wider character
    and appearance of Little Wenlock. Consequently, I find the proposal would accord
    with the presumption in favour of sustainable development outlined in Policy SP4
    of the TWLP.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005503


Other Matters
32. The Council has referred to the need to secure listed building consent for the
    proposed development as a section of wall, which would also be curtilage listed, is
    proposed to be incorporated into the building. Whilst this was not concurrently
    applied for, the absence of listed building consent does not prevent planning
    permission being granted.
Conditions
33. The Framework states that conditions should be kept to a minimum and only
    imposed where they are necessary, relevant to planning and to the development to
    be permitted, enforceable, precise, and reasonable in all other aspects. I have
    considered the conditions put forward by the Council against the Framework and
    where necessary I have amended the wording in the interests of clarity and
    enforceability.
34. To ensure certainty and clarity, I have imposed the standard conditions relating to
    the commencement of development and approved plans. I have also imposed a
    condition requiring samples of external materials to be used in the development to
    be submitted and approved to ensure that the development accords with the
    surrounding historic context. I have not however included the requirement for a
    sample panel of brickwork as the outbuilding is to be clad in timber.
35. I have imposed a condition requiring the submission of window and door details to
    ensure that the detailing of these accords with the historic context and modern
    agricultural design of the outbuilding.
36. It is also necessary to impose a condition ensuring that the accommodation
    remains ancillary to the main residential use of Home Cottage and is no occupied,
    let or sold as a separate residential unit.
Conclusion
37. For the reasons given above, the proposed development would comply with the
    development plan.
38. There are no other material considerations, including the Framework that indicate
    to me, that planning permission should be withheld. Having considered all other
    matters raised, I therefore conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



P Brennan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
