Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 July 2026
by N Unwin BSc (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005067
10 Dingle Bank Close, Lymm, Warrington WA13 0QR
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
     •     The appeal is made by Ms Jackie McKenna, (Dingle Bank Management Company Ltd) against
           the decision of Warrington Borough Council.
     •     The application Ref 2024/01202/FUL was approved on 9 May 2025 and planning permission
           was granted subject to conditions.
     •     The development permitted is: Change all the windows and doors, garage doors, in the
           development, flats 7,9,11,15,17,19,21,23,25,27 and in the large house, flats, 10,12, 14, 16, 18,
           20, 22. Cosmetic changes painting the timber work, including soffits, and fascia's to match the
           windows.
     •     The condition in dispute is No 3 which states that: All materials and external finishes to be used
           in the approved scheme shall be as stated on the approved documents and shall not be varied
           without the prior written approval of the Local Planning authority.
     •     The reason given for the condition is: To ensure that the development will be of a satisfactory
           appearance and to comply with Policies DC2 and DC6 of the Warrington Local Plan (2023).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an opportunity
   to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework in my
   decision.
Background and Main Issue
3. Planning permission Ref 2024/01202/FUL (the original permission) was granted to
   change all the timber windows and doors of a group of buildings which includes
   Dingle Bank House. The original permission included the replacement of timber
   windows with white uPVC composite, excluding those within Dingle Bank House,
   which were to be of a timber construction. The materials and specification of the
   windows were set out within Condition 2 with Condition 3 requiring all materials and
   external finishes to be as stated on the approved documents of Condition 2.
4. The Council object to the proposal on the basis of its effect on the character and
   appearance of the Lymm Conservation Area and Locally Listed Dingle Bank House.
   The main issue in this appeal is therefore, the effect of varying the condition on the
   character and appearance of the Locally Listed Dingle Bank House, including
   whether it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the Lymm
   Conservation Area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005067


Reasons
5. The appeal site is located within the Lymm Conservation Area (the CA) wherein I
   have a statutory duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
   Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) to pay special attention to the desirability of
   preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the area.
6. The CA covers a large and varied area. The significance of the CA stems from the
   many historic buildings and rich diversity of the area, which includes a compact
   village core and low-density suburbs featuring villas set on large plots. Its
   significance is also derived from the retention of the traditional character buildings
   that include painted timber windows that positively contribute to the character of the
   CA as a whole.
7. The area surrounding the appeal site forms a close comprising dwellings of varying
   designs and materials. The appeal site comprises a cluster of modern two-storey
   buildings at the end of the close surrounding the imposing three-storey locally listed
   Dingle Bank House. Dingle Bank House appears 19th century, with Victorian
   architecture. Despite some alterations to Dingle Bank House, it has retained much
   of its traditional character, through design detailing and use of traditional materials,
   and as such contributes positively to the character and appearance of the CA.
8. Whilst the existing timber windows of Dingle Bank House may not be original, they
   possess a traditional design and are of a timber construction reflecting the original
   fabric of the building. Painted timber, with its natural grain and subtle surface
   imperfections, contributes to the historic interest of the buildings and the character
   of the CA as a whole.
9. The proposal would replace the windows within Dingle Bank House with uPVC
   which the appellant contends would be high quality and replicate traditional
   proportions, profiles, and detailing. the uPVC would have a more uniform and even
   finish than painted wood with its surface flaws. Also, uPVC would not age or
   weather in the same way as timber. As such, the uPVC windows would be clearly
   distinguishable from timber and would be an incongruous and inharmonious
   material on the host building, with a well-preserved historic character. The proposal
   would therefore harm the significance of the CA.
10.Whilst somewhat screened from surrounding roads, Dingle Bank House forms a
   prominent feature within Dingle Bank Close and is highly visible from this viewpoint.
   Even though the proposal would not affect other historic features, this does not
   justify the harm caused by the proposed uPVC windows.
11.Given the scale of the development within the context of the CA as a whole, I
   consider the harm to its significance to be on the lower end of less than substantial.
   Nevertheless, Policy HE6 of the Framework directs that the potential effect of a
   development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
   substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
12.Policy HE6 states that where a development proposal would harm the significance
   of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its significance should be
   weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
13.The appellant contends that the development would secure the long-term
   maintenance and continued viable use of Dingle Bank House, prevent deterioration,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005067


    improved thermal performance and energy efficiency, create a consistent
    appearance across the building, and deliver the works under leasehold and
    statutory obligations. Nevertheless, I have been presented with limited evidence as
    to why the above can only be achieved through the proposal, and not through a less
    harmful scheme utilising timber windows. The appellant additionally states that
    timber windows are undeliverable in practice due to limited supplier availability, lack
    local support, and are of disproportionate cost, however little evidence of this has
    been presented to me. As such, I can only afford these matters limited weight,
    which would not outweigh the harm to the significance of the CA as a heritage
    asset.
14.For the above reasons, I conclude that Condition 3 is reasonable and necessary to
   preserve the character and appearance of the CA. An alternative condition allowing
   the use of uPVC windows would harm the significance of the CA and the public
   benefits would not outweigh this harm. As such, it would conflict with the relevant
   provisions of Policies DC2 and DC6 of the Warrington Local Plan 2021/22 - 2038/39
   (2023) and the Framework. When read together these require development to
   preserves or enhance the character and appearance of Conservation Areas and for
   substantial weight to be given to its conservation.
Other Matters
15.The appellant contends that the proposed uPVC windows have been used within
   Conservation Areas and in some cases on Grade II listed buildings. Nevertheless, I
   have not been provided with specific examples, and I cannot be sure the
   considerations were the same as the appeal before me.
Conclusion
16.I have found that Condition 3 is reasonable and necessary to preserve the character
   and appearance of the CA. It would therefore meet the 6 tests to ensure planning
   conditions are justified. Conversely, the proposal would harm the character and
   appearance of the CA and the public benefits would not outweigh this harm. The
   appeal is therefore dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
