Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by N Armstrong BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005670
47 Huddersfield Road, Mirfield WF14 8AE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Domino’s Pizza UK & Ireland Ltd against the decision of Kirklees
     Metropolitan Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/62/90487/E.
•    The development proposed is change of use from vacant bank (Class E) to hot food takeaway (sui
     generis) with installation of extract and ventilation equipment and external alterations to the front and
     rear elevations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from
       vacant bank (Class E) to hot food takeaway (sui generis) with installation of extract
       and ventilation equipment and external alterations to the front and rear elevations
       at 47 Huddersfield Road, Mirfield WF14 8AE in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref 2025/62/90487/E, subject to the conditions in the attached
       schedule.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs has been made by Domino’s Pizza UK & Ireland Ltd
       against Kirklees Metropolitan Council, and this is the subject of a separate
       decision.
Preliminary Matter
3.     The Government issued the revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The appellant and the Council
       have had the opportunity to make any comments on the implications of that
       relevant to the appeal. I have had regard to these and the revised Framework in
       my decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
           •    highway and pedestrian safety, with particular reference to traffic
                generation, parking provision, pedestrian movements and refuse
                storage/collection; and
           •    the living conditions of neighbouring residents, with particular reference to
                traffic generation, noise and disturbance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005670


Reasons
Highway and pedestrian safety
5.       The appeal site comprises a vacant former bank fronting Huddersfield Road, a
         main road that runs through the Mirfield District Centre. To the rear of the site is a
         gated, enclosed yard and single-storey sections of the host building, accessed
         from Trinity Street to the side of the site. Trinity Street also provides access to
         other uses, including residential properties and the car park of the Grade II listed
         Trinity Methodist Church, which is located across this street from the appeal site.
         Mirfield Community Fire Station lies adjacent to one side of the appeal site, which
         is set back from and has access directly onto Huddersfield Road. The immediate
         area of the site is a generally busy environment due to its location within the
         District Centre, fronting the road and close to a mix of commercial development.
6.       There are existing highway restrictions in the vicinity of the appeal site, including
         double yellow lines to the front of the site and opposite on Huddersfield Road, as
         well as to Trinity Street, Fenton Street and Knowl Road. A yellow box junction is
         located to the front of the fire station’s access. There is some limited designated
         on-street parking nearby to the opposite side of Huddersfield Road from the
         appeal site, with a one-hour time restriction between 0800 to 1800 Monday to
         Saturday. However, a larger public car park is situated further away on
         Station Road, albeit a reasonably short walk from the site. Additional on-street
         parking with no apparent restrictions is situated further to the east of the appeal
         site to the opposite side of Huddersfield Road.
7.       At the time of my visit during the early afternoon, I observed reasonably high levels
         of traffic along Huddersfield Road close to the appeal site, including some periods
         with stationary vehicles extending beyond the site when waiting at the signalised
         junction with pedestrian crossing points on Huddersfield Road, Station Road and
         Queen Street. There were also moderate levels of pedestrian movements.
         Trinity Street is quieter in comparison, reflecting its function and predominantly
         residential character. The areas of on-street parking on Huddersfield Road were
         well used, with moderate use of the Station Road car park. Parking, vehicle and
         pedestrian movements in these areas will also likely fluctuate at different times.
8.       The proposal would operate as a pizza hot food takeaway from 1100 to 2300 each
         day with the main entrance on Huddersfield Road. The rear yard would provide
         space for refuse storage and access to an existing first floor residential flat. The
         rear yard would also be used for staff parking and by customer delivery vehicles,
         which the submissions state would be undertaken on E-bikes or mopeds.
9.       A Highways Technical Note1 (HTN) and Delivery Management Plan2 (DMP) were
         submitted during the application. Based on experience of similar development, the
         HTN highlights that a greater proportion of total trade (approximately 66%) is from
         deliveries with the remaining trade comprising store collections. Operating in this
         way would therefore likely reduce the demand for customer car parking in
         connection with the proposal. The evidence also indicates that the peak trading
         hours for the proposal are between 1800 and 2000, with Fridays and Saturdays
         being the busiest days. The DMP states that customer deliveries would be
         undertaken by Domino’s employees and no third-party companies are used.

1
    Eddisons: Proposed Change of Use Planning Application – 47 Huddersfield Road, Mirfield – Highways Technical Note 01 (4851)
2
    Eddisons: Proposed Change of Use – 47 Huddersfield Road, Mirfield – Delivery Management Plan – October 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decision 6005670


10. Given the appeal site’s location within the District Centre and its proximity to other
    commercial uses, the proposal would not be the only use that would attract
    customers in this area. Whilst no customer parking is proposed within the appeal
    site, this appears to be common for other uses nearby on Huddersfield Road,
    therefore the proposal would not be materially different to other development in
    that respect. Notwithstanding this, from the information before me and my
    observations on site, there would be reasonable options available to park within
    the general area for those customers who choose to visit the premises by car.
11. The busy nature of Huddersfield Road and the position of the appeal site in
    relation to other street junctions would likely deter most customers from parking on
    double yellow lines in an area that could impact on the flow of traffic. The narrower
    width of Trinity Street would also likely deter customers from parking along it. Due
    to the extent of the existing markings to the hard surface within the fire station site,
    the signage highlighting parking restrictions and the nature of that use, I also
    consider it unlikely that customers of the proposal would park to the front of, or
    within, that site and therefore restrict access to and from it. The existing box
    junction is also a notable feature and restriction within the highway in this area.
12. Whilst there may be occasions when some motorists choose to contravene the
    double yellow line and box junction restrictions, there are existing measures in
    place to ensure the effective control of parking in the immediate vicinity and allow
    for access to the fire station. Whilst I note the Council’s concerns regarding
    customers parking on double yellow lines and blocking the fire station access,
    there is nothing substantive before me to demonstrate such parking resulting in
    harm to highway safety would be an inevitable consequence of the proposal. In
    any event, the existing restrictions would be enforceable by the relevant authority
    outside of the planning process. On this basis, and having regard to the scale of
    development and the parking available within the area, I am satisfied that the
    proposal would not result in unacceptable harm to highway safety due to demand
    for customer parking.
13. Whilst the signalised pedestrian crossing point over Huddersfield Road is not
    within the immediate vicinity of the appeal site, it is reasonably close to it. There
    are existing uses on both sides of Huddersfield Road, therefore the proposal would
    not create a materially different situation for pedestrians needing to cross the road.
    There is no compelling evidence before me to indicate customers visiting the
    appeal site would not use the existing safe crossing point. Any pedestrians who
    might choose to cross closer to the appeal site would likely only do so when the
    road is clear, which I observed at my visit. However, given the existing signalised
    crossing point and the presence of other uses within the District Centre, I am not
    persuaded that the proposal would encourage pedestrians to cross a busy section
    of highway with resultant harmful effects on pedestrian safety.
14. Due to its location in relation to Mirfield, other areas and public transport options,
    the appeal site is also accessible by other sustainable travel modes. Furthermore,
    given the site’s location and the role and function of the District Centre, with its mix
    of uses and services, there would also be the potential for some linked trips with
    the proposal and other uses in this area.
15. The Council raises concerns that no swept path analysis has been undertaken,
    and that access to bin storage and accessibility for waste collection vehicles could
    give rise to highway safety issues. From the information before me, the rear yard

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005670


       would be used for refuse storage alongside some staff parking and use by
       customer delivery vehicles. As set out within the DMP, refuse would be collected
       from Huddersfield Road with deliveries to the site also taking place from this road
       for limited periods. The Council does not appear to raise any concerns with that
       arrangement, and from the information before me, I see no reason to reach a
       different conclusion. Having regard to the proposed use of the rear yard and the
       arrangements for refuse storage/collection, as well as the customer delivery
       vehicles that would be used, it has not been satisfactorily explained how the
       proposal would result in harm in this regard. Consequently, I am not persuaded
       that the lack of a swept path analysis or the proposed refuse arrangements would
       result in adverse effects on highway and pedestrian safety.
16. Given the proposed arrangements for servicing, refuse storage/collection, the
    likely frequency and nature of customer deliveries, the existing layout and use of
    Trinity Street by vehicles, as well as the existing parking restrictions, I do not
    consider that the proposal would unduly obstruct access for vehicles or adversely
    affect pedestrians using this area. In addition, there is nothing substantive before
    me to demonstrate that the existing access from Trinity Street onto Huddersfield
    Road would be unsuitable for the proposal, either on its own or alongside existing
    use, or that the proposal would unacceptably impact on visibility from this junction.
17. I am mindful that the Officer Report highlights that the Council’s Highways
    Development Management concerns were addressed by the HTN and that the
    submitted DMP was considered acceptable with regard to highway safety. From
    the information before me, and having regard to policy TR6(4) of the Framework,
    there is no compelling evidence to demonstrate that the proposal would have a
    severe adverse impact on the transport network or an unacceptable impact on
    highway safety in this location.
18. I conclude that the proposal would not have an unacceptable harmful effect on
    highway and pedestrian safety, with particular reference to traffic generation,
    parking provision, pedestrian movements and refuse storage/collection. It would
    therefore accord with Policies LP21 and LP22 of the Kirklees Local Plan (2019)
    (the KLP). Amongst other things, these policies aim for proposals to achieve safe
    and suitable access for all people, demonstrate adequate information and
    mitigation measures to avoid a detrimental impact on highway safety and the local
    highway network, and determine car parking provision by the accessibility of the
    site, as well as the type and location of the development.
Living conditions
19. As established above, the appeal site is within the District Centre, adjacent to a
    busy main road, in an area with a mix of existing uses and associated activity. The
    nearest residential uses to the appeal site include the first floor flat within the same
    host building and properties to the rear of the site on Trinity Street. The properties
    on Trinity Street are located beyond the rear yard of the site and do not face
    directly onto it, with the blank side gable end of the nearest two-storey property
    forming the rear boundary of the site and enclosing part of this space.
20. Given the location of those residential properties, residents and users of other
    buildings nearby will pass the appeal site on Trinity Street when coming and going
    from Huddersfield Road. However, activity associated with the proposal, including
    for customer deliveries, would likely be limited to a shorter section of the street


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005670


       between Huddersfield Road and the rear yard, rather than passing directly by or to
       the front of residential properties. Therefore, from the information before me, even
       during peak delivery periods and later in the evening, the proposal would not result
       in significant traffic movements and associated activity passing neighbouring
       residents on Trinity Street. Any effects on the nearest adjoining neighbour on
       Trinity Street would also be minimised due to its layout and the absence of
       openings facing onto the rear yard and its access.
21. Whilst Trinity Street is narrow, it has not been sufficiently explained how this would
    adversely impact upon the residents of the street, although I have considered
    above potential effects in terms of highway and pedestrian safety. The evidence
    indicates that use of and access to and from the rear yard would be limited to
    refuse storage, staff parking and for customer deliveries. Servicing deliveries and
    refuse collection would take place from Huddersfield Road, which would further
    reduce the potential for such vehicle movements or activity close to residential
    properties on Trinity Street. In addition, the strategy for delivery drivers and their
    vehicles set out within the DMP has been developed to take account of the width
    of the street. Having regard to the likely levels of deliveries and traffic using this
    street, the proposed opening hours and the position of the rear yard in relation to
    residential properties, the proposal would not result in significant or unacceptable
    effects of noise and disturbance for neighbouring residents.
22. The proposal would incorporate new ventilation and extraction equipment, and the
    application was supported by a Plant Noise Assessment, as well as a Floor Sound
    Insulation Review due to the relationship with the first floor flat. The Council’s
    Environmental Health team consultation response notes that the proposed
    mechanical plant will meet relevant noise limits and is therefore accepted, subject
    to a compliance condition to secure the necessary mitigation. These comments
    also accept the proposed measures regarding sound insulation and do not raise
    any concerns regarding adverse effects from odour, subject to conditions.
    Consequently, suitable mitigation could be secured with regard to the new plant
    equipment that would ensure the proposal would not result in unacceptable
    adverse effects on the quality of life and living conditions of nearby residents.
23. The proposal would bring a vacant building back into use within the District Centre,
    with increased activity at the site close to existing residential properties. However,
    whilst this may be a change from the former use and the current situation, I am not
    persuaded that the likely activity associated with the proposal would increase to
    such a degree that it would adversely affect the living conditions of neighbouring
    residents in this location. Suitable mitigation measures could also be secured by
    condition, including limiting opening hours and those referenced above regarding
    the operation of plant and sound insulation.
24. I conclude that the proposal would not have an unacceptable effect on the living
    conditions of neighbouring residents, with particular reference to traffic generation,
    noise and disturbance. It would therefore accord with Policies LP24 and LP52 of
    the KLP. Amongst other things, these policies aim for proposals to provide a high
    standard of amenity for neighbouring occupiers and ensure proposals do not
    reduce the quality of life and well-being of people to an unacceptable level. The
    proposal would not conflict with the Framework, and its aims for proposals to be
    appropriate for their location, taking into account likely effects on living conditions.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005670


Other Matters
25. Whilst other sites may also be suitable for the proposal, the appeal site is within a
    District Centre. KLP Policy LP13 sets out the role and function of these, which
    include being the local focus for basic financial services, food and drink,
    entertainment, leisure and tourist facilities, and health services. The proposal
    would therefore be in accordance with this, and there is no apparent policy
    requirement to demonstrate a need for the proposal in this location. The proposal
    would also provide investment into the area and a currently vacant building. From
    the information before me, there is also no substantive evidence to demonstrate
    that the proposal would result in harm to the character, function, vitality and
    viability of the centre, either individually or cumulatively, through a concentration of
    hot food takeaway uses in the area. Whilst other alternative uses may also be
    suitable at the appeal site, this does not alter my conclusions on the proposal.
26. I note the Council’s Public Health consultation response and the Hot Food
    Takeaway SPD (September 2022) with regard to concerns raised over health,
    wellbeing and obesity. From the information before me, there is no substantive
    evidence to indicate that the proposal would be in a location where there is a
    concentration of hot food takeaways having an adverse impact on local health,
    pollution or antisocial behaviour. The Council does not raise any objection in this
    regard, and I have no reason to take a different view.
27. The proposal would make satisfactory arrangements for refuse storage within the
    appeal site. As food would either be delivered or collected by customers for
    consumption elsewhere, the proposal would be unlikely to result in an
    unacceptable increase in litter from customers at or around the appeal site.
    Furthermore, there is no substantive evidence before me to indicate that the
    proposal would likely result in unacceptable effects arising from vermin at the
    appeal site or nearby, or from antisocial behaviour.
28. For the same reasons as set out in the main issues, from the information before
    me there is little to suggest that the proposal would unacceptably impact users of
    the adjacent Trinity Methodist Church, Scout group building or other uses nearby.
29. The Council does not dispute that the lawful use of the premises falls within Use
    Class E of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as
    amended), which covers commercial, business and service uses. Such uses would
    principally be for visiting members of the public, which could result in some similar
    activity to the proposal. The former bank use and other Class E uses would also
    likely attract customers that would use cars, need to park and cross the highway,
    as well as result in general activity at the site and within the rear yard. Given the
    site’s position within the District Centre and its former use, I consider there is a
    greater than theoretical possibility that Class E use could take place. Whilst there
    is some potential for similar effects, in the absence of further information regarding
    the likelihood of a specific use, matters such as the overall level of activity, car
    parking demand, delivery, servicing and plant requirements may also vary
    between different uses. I therefore give this fallback position moderate weight.
    Notwithstanding this, for the reasons set out, I find that the proposal would be
    acceptable in this location.
30. The Council does not raise any concerns regarding the effect of the proposal on
    the character and appearance of the area. From the information before me and my


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005670


       observations on site, I have no reason to reach a different conclusion. Any
       subsequent signage at the premises is not a matter for me to determine through
       this appeal. This would be subject to the requirements of the Town and Country
       Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended).
31. The appeal site lies close to the Grade II listed Trinity Methodist Church. The
    significance of the listed building, insofar as it relates to this appeal, derives in part
    from its architectural and historic interest given its scale and appearance within the
    area. Due to the proximity, the setting of the listed building includes the appeal
    site, and the listed building is primarily experienced from Huddersfield Road, and is
    also seen alongside the appeal site from Trinity Street. Due to the nature of the
    use and the extent of the proposed external changes, I find there would be no
    harm to the significance of the listed building, including through development
    within its setting. The Council also does not raise any concerns in this respect.
32. I have had regard to the representations submitted in response to the planning
    application and the appeal. Whilst I note the objections and the concerns raised,
    these do not alter my conclusions that the proposal would be acceptable in this
    location for the reasons set out above.
Conditions
33. The Council has suggested a number of conditions, which I have considered
    against the tests set out in the Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. In
    some instances, I have made minor changes to wording to improve precision and
    enforceability.
34. A condition specifying the approved plans is necessary in the interests of certainty.
    Whilst I have found the proposal to be acceptable in this location, conditions
    requiring compliance with the submitted plant noise assessment, sound insulation
    review report and kitchen extract information, as well as restrictions on the hours
    of opening and deliveries, are necessary to protect the living conditions of
    neighbouring residents. To ensure the operation of the proposal does not
    adversely impact the drainage network from fats, oils and grease, a condition
    requiring compliance with the appellant’s submitted guidance is necessary.
35. A condition securing compliance with the DMP is necessary in the interests of
    highway safety. As deliveries would be undertaken by employees rather than third
    party operators, I am satisfied that such a condition would be enforceable.
    Although the Council has not suggested a condition, potential effects that may
    arise during construction could be considered and addressed under other
    legislation, if necessary, therefore I do not consider a condition is reasonable in
    this instance.
Conclusion
36. For the above reasons, the proposal would comply with the development plan
    taken as a whole and material considerations do not indicate a decision should be
    made other than in accordance with the development plan. I therefore conclude
    that the appeal should be allowed.

N Armstrong
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005670


                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
              10131-SD-XX-00-P-A-00001 Revision 01 – Location Plan
              10131-SD-XX-00-P-A-00002 Revision 01 – Block Plan
              10131-SD-XX-00-P-A-11001 Revision 02 – Proposed Ground Floor Layout
              10131-SD-XX-00-E-A-13001 Revision 03 – Proposed Elevations 1 & 2
              10131-SD-XX-00-E-A-13002 Revision 02 – Proposed Elevations 3, 4, 5 & 6
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall not be brought into use until all of
              the mitigation measures specified in the approved Plant Noise Assessment
              (Suono: Report 27CD.RP.1.1st Issue // 6 February 2025) and the Floor
              Sound Insulation Review (Suono: Report 29AA.RP.2.1 // 7 February 2025)
              have been carried out in full. Thereafter, the mitigation measures approved
              by those reports shall be retained, and the reports shall be adhered to at all
              times.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall not be brought into use until the
              kitchen extract system as specified in the approved document from
              CanopyUK.com (REF: Domino’s Mirfield, dated 30 January 2025 update
              26 March 2025) has been installed in accordance with the submitted details.
              Thereafter, the kitchen extract system shall operate at all times during the
              preparation and cooking of food and shall be maintained in accordance with
              the manufacturer’s instructions and as specified in the approved document.
     5)       The development hereby permitted shall operate in accordance with the
              submitted Domino’s Fats, Oils, Grease and Food Waste Store Guide, which
              shall be adhered to at all times.
     6)       The development hereby permitted shall operate in accordance with the
              submitted Eddisons: Proposed Change of Use – 47 Huddersfield Road,
              Mirfield – Delivery Management Plan – October 2025 (Ref: 4851.DMP01
              Version 2), and the Delivery Management Plan shall be adhered to at all
              times.
     7)       The development hereby permitted shall not be open to customers outside
              the hours of 1100 to 2300 daily, and there shall be no deliveries to the
              premises, or deliveries dispatched to customers from the premises, outside
              these hours. No deliveries to the premises shall take place on Sundays or
              Bank Holidays.
                                             END OF CONDITIONS




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          8
