Appeal Decision
Inquiry held on 7-10 and 21 July 2026
Site visit made on 9 and 10 July 2026
by Stephen Wilkinson BA, BPl, Dip LA, MBA, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11th September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6005108
Land west of Little Smiths Farm, Drayton, OX14 4JP
•       The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•       The appeal is made by Edward Leeson against the decision of Vale of White Horse District
        Council.
•       The application Ref is P25/V0180/O.
•       The development proposed is for the erection of up to 31 dwellings with associated means of
        access, car parking, public open space, landscaping, sustainable drainage system (SuDS) and
        associated infrastructure (all matters reserved except for access).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for an outline application
   for the erection of up to 31 dwellings with associated means of access, car parking,
   public open space, landscaping, sustainable drainage system (SuDS) and
   associated infrastructure (all matters reserved except for access) at land west of
   Little Smiths Farm, Drayton, OX14 4JP in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref P25/V0180/O, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the
   conditions in the attached schedule
Preliminary Matters
2. For the purposes of this appeal the Development Plan comprises the Vale of White
   Horse Local Plan 2031(2016) Part 1 (LP1), Strategic Sites and Policies (2016) and
   Part 2, Detailed policies and Additional Sites (2019) (LP2) and the Drayton
   Neighbourhood Plan (DNP) (2015).
3. During the Inquiry the appellant confirmed that the appeal had been lodged on
   behalf of Eagle One Homes Limited.
4. Parties were consulted following the publication of the revised National Planning
   Policy Framework (the Framework) issued on 17 August 2026. Comments received
   have been taken into account in this decision.
5. The Council is preparing a Joint Local Plan (the JLP) with South Oxfordshire
   District Council which was submitted to the Secretary of State on 9 December
   2024. Following an interim report by the Examining Inspectors, hearings have
   commenced. Its draft policies were not referred to by the parties during the Inquiry
   although background evidence on the housing land requirement was. I accord this
   emerging plan only limited weight.
6. The Dovecote Residents Association and Residents First CIC were granted Rule 6
   status (the R6 party).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005108


7. The application was submitted in outline with all matters reserved apart from
   access. A set of revised plans were submitted with the appeal following the receipt
   of further information on land ownership. The change involved a minor alteration to
   the site’s southern boundary. Given the small scale of this suggested change I am
   satisfied that no party will have been prejudiced. The revised plans on which the
   decision is made are; location plan 2409 200B, parameter plan 2409 228B,
   illustrative open space plan 2409 SK002A and illustrative masterplan 2409 220H.
8. A draft S106 Agreement was presented in advance of the Inquiry. A completed
   Agreement dated 30 July 2026 was received after the Inquiry. This is discussed in
   this decision.
Main Issues
9. In advance of the Case Management Conference, held on 11 May 2026, the
   Council indicated that it would not defend its second Reason for Refusal relating to
   the impact of the existing sewerage treatment works on the living conditions of
   future occupiers of the appeal site. Accordingly, the main issues on which this
   decision is made are:
     •     Whether or not the Council has a policy compliant housing land supply,
     •     The location of the appeal scheme having regard to the settlement boundary and
           any conflict with the spatial strategy of the Development Plan, and
     •     Whether there is sufficient infrastructure to support the appeal proposal.
These matters will be taken into account in determination of the planning balance.
Reasons
ISSUE 1
Housing Land Supply
10. The parties differ on three elements of how housing land supply is calculated.
    These relate to whether the housing requirement for the City of Oxford should be
    included in that for the district for the purposes of planning decisions, the
    contribution that specific sites make to the supply and the operation of a discount
    allowance to address the non-implementation of permissions.
11. The Council and Appellant agree that given the age of the Development Plan the
    District’s local housing need (LHN) is based on the standard method. There is a
    policy requirement that Council’s should maintain a five-year housing land supply
    (5YHLS). The assessment period is from 1st April 2025 to 31st March 2030 and the
    housing requirement is 4,982 dwellings (including a 5% buffer) or 996 dwellings per
    annum (dpa).
12. However, the parties do not agree on the supply. The Council’s position is that
    there is 5.34 years housing land supply (YHLS) whereas the appellant adopts a
    series of positions based on their analysis of sites and an allowance for non-
    implementation. These vary from its primary position of 3.63YHLS but they
    advance a secondary position of 3.27 YHLS. They acknowledge however that a
    range between these figures may also be appropriate.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005108




Unmet need of Oxford City Council
13. The Council is one of the Oxfordshire Districts included in a Strategic Housing
    Market Assessment (SHMA) required to accommodate part of the housing demand
    for the City of Oxford. This was agreed through a Memorandum of Cooperation in
    2016 and is included in policy LP2 CP4a. The requirement is for 2,200 dwellings
    (183dpa) for the local plan period up to 2031. The requirement to address Oxford’s
    housing need is retained in the emerging Joint Local Plan.
14. Given the age of their respective Development Plans both the Council and Oxford
    calculate local housing need using the standard method. This is consistent with
    Annex D to the Framework. There is no basis in policy for including the unmet need
    of Oxford in the Council’s housing requirement. The Council has been consistent in
    adopting this approach since its review of its adopted policies1 until it received the
    revised local housing need figure in December 2024.
15. The emerging JLP retains the housing requirement for Oxford on the basis that
    large-scale allocations should be appropriately planned with strategic infrastructure.
    I am satisfied that planning for such growth should be accounted for through the
    Local Plan process and not addressed through the development management
    process.
16. A distinction can be made between the circumstances underpinning the judgement
    in the Dorchester Living case2 concerning a Development Plan of which one part
    was out of date and the other less than five years old and the case before me. This
    is not the situation in this appeal. The Council’s approach by negating the
    requirement for Oxford through the Development Management process does not
    undermine the Government’s commitment to deliver 1.5m new homes within this
    Parliament. This is being planned for in its JLP.
17. LP2 identifies that Oxford’s unmet housing need should be directed towards the
    Abingdon on Thames and Oxford Fringe sub area (the sub area) given its public
    transport infrastructure and linkages to the city. Supporting text to LP2 policy 4a
    identifies that the Council’s approach is not designed to ring fence allocations to
    meet Oxford’s unmet need within the district but instead this should be addressed
    through a combination of strategic allocations across the district.
18. The Examining Inspector’s report for Part 1 of the plan highlights the difficulties
    involved in attempting to identify the ‘origin’ of residential occupiers of housing in
    the sub area between the District or Oxford.
19. This is recognised by both parties3. I acknowledge that to achieve balance in this
    equation removal of the Oxford requirement would require a limited decrease in the
    supply of housing attributed to sites allocated in the sub area. Given the difficulties
    inherent in this process the removal of dwellings from the supply to reflect those
    which may be occupied by residents from Oxford is a notional exercise in the
    absence of any agreed planning framework but the appellant’s suggestion that the
    entire supply should be discounted from three sites lying within the sub area,

1
    CD7.03
2 High Court judgement Dorchester Living v SSLUHC [2024] EWHC 2332 (Admin)

3
    Statement of Common Ground para 5.16


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decision 6005108


       amounting to 173 dwellings is excessive. It would not account for those residents in
       these sites who had moved from within the district and not from Oxford.
20. I accept however, that a proportionate reduction in dwellings located on these three
    could be made but it would only lead to a limited reduction to the overall supply. I
    acknowledge that this approach appears to be counter to that adopted by an
    Inspector colleague in the Sunderland Road decision4, but I am unaware of the
    evidence which informed his conclusions in that case.
21. I have considered the Council’s argument that the revised housing projections
    included in the JLP are lower than those included in the LHN as measured by the
    standard method but this is a matter for Examination at the JLP and not for
    determination through this decision.
Disputed housing sites
22. The calculation of the five year housing land supply (5YHLS) represents a snapshot
    in time based on the evidence of the main parties. For this decision the assessment
    period runs from 1.04.25 until 31.03.2030. The parties differ on how national and
    local factors determine the health of the development market. Whilst I acknowledge
    that the Council has a track record of delivery with Housing Delivery Test (HDT)
    scores of 177%, 193% and 192% for the last three years, this cannot be relied on
    as a marker of future delivery. The financial reports submitted by the Housebuilding
    Companies attest to this issue given the gravity of emerging international conflicts
    and their impact on costs, interest rates and buyer confidence. For this reason, I
    have altered some of the suggested trajectories. My assessment is based on an
    analysis of prospects for housing delivery specific to each site.
23. The Glossary to the Framework requires that sites have a realistic prospect of
    development within five years and identifies two categorises summarised as
    follows:
       Category a) have detailed planning permission where there is a presumption that
       they will be delivered unless there is clear evidence that homes will not be
       delivered, and
       Category b) includes sites with outline planning permission but should only be
       considered deliverable where there is clear evidence that homes will be delivered
       within the five year period.
24. The difference between the parties is 1,008 dwellings.
Category A sites
885 Westview
25. Both parties agree that works have lawfully commenced. The Council’s evidence
    indicates that there has been no progress since July 2019 when a Lawful
    Development Certificate was issued. I consider that this site should be retained in
    the supply as there is no clear evidence that it will not be delivered. The delay is not
    sufficient evidence to merit deletion from the Council’s figure.
1022 Greensands


4
    APP/ P0240/W/18/32192133219213


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005108


26. This is a brownfield site with the benefit of outline planning permission granted on
    appeal in 2017 for 75 units which includes ten units of specialist housing.
    Applications for RM for the specialist housing have been approved and the units
    have been completed. A further application for RM for the remaining dwellings was
    allowed on appeal in January 2021. I accept that the permission remains extant
    although it is understood that there is still an outstanding planning condition in
    respect of land contamination.
27. A fresh planning permission is anticipated from the new site owners although
    nothing has been received. Even allowing for the Council’s own suggested lapse
    period from the time of the submission of an application to the commencement of
    development of around 2 years the completion of 65 dwellings over two years as
    the Council’s trajectory suggests would be unlikely. Whilst I accept that homes will
    be delivered on this site within the assessment period there would be delays in
    delivery from the Council’s suggested trajectory and for this reason 29 units are
    deleted from the supply.
1055 Long Reach
28. This site has been included in the Council’s trajectory since 2019. A lawful
    Development Certificate confirmed that demolition had been carried out and that
    the approved access had been ‘pegged out’. Despite the lack of progress to date
    the site should be retained as there is no clear evidence that homes will not be
    delivered within the assessment period.
1178 Ferndale Street
29. Several conditions have not been discharged covering surface water, foul drainage
    and arboricultural matters. The appellant considers that the passage of time
    indicates that the site should not be included in the supply. The Council’s survey
    evidence which includes Building Control records, an officer survey and aerial
    imagery identifies that works were underway in April 2025. The site should be
    retained in the supply.
1356 Land of Oxford Road
30. The Council state that demolition of the existing dwelling, evidenced by a Building
    Notice and officer survey had been completed in 2023 following the grant of
    permission earlier in the year. The Appellant states that this is insufficient. However
    there is no evidence that the dwelling will not be delivered.
1455 Grange Cottage
31. The parties have starkly contrasting evidence on whether the two dwellings have
    been completed. The Council relies on the receipt of a Building Control Notice
    dating from October 2023, a month before the expiry of the permission and whilst
    the appellant states that this is insufficient evidence I find that the Council’s
    evidence is to be preferred.
1469 18 Market Place
32. Permission was granted for a single dwelling in November 2020. The Council’s
    evidence includes a CIL form, dated 26 February 2021 and a Building Control
    Notice demonstrating that works had commenced in advance of expiry of the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005108


     permission. Whilst the appellant states that permission has not commenced no
     clear evidence is presented to counter that of the Council.


1489 Bow Bank
33. Permission was granted in January 2021 and the Council’s evidence of both a CIL
    form, Building Control Notice and Google earth imagery demonstrates that building
    materials were on site in July 2023 and June 2024. The appellant contends that
    works had not commenced but offers no clear evidence. The Council’s evidence on
    this is to be preferred.
1639 Wootton Business Park
34. The Council included this site in the supply given that it had an extant permission
    for an office and 58 dwellings. Whilst the office has been completed (evidence that
    the scheme has commenced) none of the dwellings have and a new application for
    offices has been recently granted conditional permission on the site of the housing
    included in the original permission. Three conditions attached to this second
    permission have been discharged. Whilst the prospects for this site contributing to
    housing supply maybe frustrated there is no clear evidence which would support
    the appellants contention that homes will not be delivered as housing delivery
    remains a possibility.
1642 Land at Kiln Lane
35. The Council accept that the planning permission for the development of seven units
    has now expired. Accordingly, 7 units should be deleted from supply.
1685 Home Farm
36. The Councils evidence which includes a BCN and Google Street Earth
    demonstrates that construction is underway. Whilst progress has been slow and a
    further permission has been granted the appellant has not provided evidence to
    demonstrate why an adjustment is necessary from the Council’s supply.
1726 Land south of Park Road
37. The dispute between the parties relates to whether the permission granted for 60
    self contained flats is for Class C2 or C3 accommodation and accordingly how
    many units will contribute to the supply. Through the application of a standard
    metric the contribution to supply would reduce from 60 to 32 units if this is a C2
    scheme.
38. Throughout the officer’s report on this application there are consistent references to
    the scheme being an extra care facility although the description of development
    indicates that this could be within Class C2 or C3. The Design and Access
    statement identifies that whilst all units are self-contained they would allow needs to
    be tailored to residents as they age. The floor plans indicate that the only shared
    facilities are for three rooms for communal living, dining and ‘activities’. These
    communal facilities are modest in scale given that 60 self-contained units designed
    to accommodate up to 120 residents are proposed. I conclude that the site is for 60
    dwellings within Class C3.
1740 3-7 Marlborough Street

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005108


39. The appellant revised the suggested trajectory from three to six units of the nine
    permitted. However, given that the site is under construction I find that this is not a
    compelling argument to reduce all of the permitted dwellings from the supply given
    that there are over three years of the assessment period remaining.
1745 Land at Fernham Road
40. This permission for 8 dwellings expired on12 May 2026 with no evidence of any
    building works commencing. These units are therefore deleted from the supply.
41. Accordingly, 44 dwellings should be reduced from the Councils Category A sites.
Category B sites
41 Land to the west of Great Western Parkway – phases 3P and 6T
42. This is a large site with outline permission for 4,000 dwellings. It is divided into sub
    areas with anticipated development phased and delivered by several developers.
    The Council’s evidence identifies that reserved matters have been approved for
    882 dwellings and that the rate of progress to date demonstrates that these will be
    delivered within the five-year period.
43. The differences between the parties relate in respect of two parcels within this large
    site and their anticipated trajectory of 525 dwellings. The Council, despite receiving
    suggested build out rates from two developers have increased these to reflect how
    well previous phases of development have been delivered. The assumptions which
    inform the Council’s trajectory are speculative when compared to those suggested
    by the developers which reflect their local views of site development. Whilst the
    Council has determined Reserved Matters the developers’ projections are to be
    preferred in this instance. Accordingly, I am reducing 90 units from phase 3P and
    175 units from phase 6T.
44. Accordingly, 265 dwellings should be deleted from the Council’s supply to reflect a
    reduction in build out rates.
1237 Monks Farm
45. This is an allocated site and it is understood most of the site benefits from either
    outline or full planning permission. Despite concerns5 raised by the appellant on
    viability leading to a reduction in the amount of affordable housing a revised draft
    S106 Agreement includes a policy compliant amount of affordable housing. The
    Council’s suggested trajectory for this site is based on developer evidence and that
    infrastructure matters have now been resolved. The applications for approval of RM
    were submitted earlier than anticipated and it is considered will be approved by the
    end of the summer 2026. Accordingly, the Council’s figure is to be preferred.
1255 & 1256 North of Abingdon on Thames
46. The site has outline planning permission for 196 dwellings and applications for the
    approval of RM for a further 142 dwellings have yet to be submitted. The Council
    relies on evidence from sites across the district that it would take around 2 years
    from submission of applications for RM to building work commencing. However,
    whilst agents acting on behalf of the developers have indicated a programme for
    the submission of RMs for each phase resulting in all the dwellings being
5
    CD11.47


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005108


        completed within the 5 years the lack of progress to date on the approval of the RM
        means that the anticipated trajectory is likely to slip and for this reason the
        Council’s suggested trajectory requires modification. 70 dwellings should be
        deleted from the trajectory.
1270 East of Kingston Bagpuize
47. The site has outline planning permission for 660 dwellings including a 70 unit care
    home and detailed permission for road infrastructure. The Council is in receipt of a
    signed proforma dating from December 2025 from the developer confirming their
    intentions to submit applications for RM and a Sn273 application. This has been
    honoured and the sn73 application was programmed for decision on 22nd July. In
    this case the Council’ projections adhere to the developers progress in addressing
    outstanding matters. Whilst this evidence is not supported by the appellant who
    considers that delays will occur when compared to the Council’s evidence I am
    satisfied that the 140 dwellings will be delivered within the assessment period.
1636 Rogers Concrete
48. The site has outline planning permission for 85 dwellings on a brownfield site. A
    developer has been selected leading to amendments to the outline scheme
    included in a S73 application. This is likely to be determined over the summer.
    However, the application for RM remains outstanding. Whilst the Council has
    modified projections received from the developer on their suggested completion
    rates given that the Council has adopted its standard of around 2years from receipt
    of applications for RM until completions I anticipate that only 55 units could be
    completed in the period 2027/28-29/30. Accordingly, the appellants figure is to be
    preferred. 30 units should be deleted from the Council’s supply.
1735 Land at Crab Hill
49. This is a site allocation for 1,500 homes with outline permission for 1,534 units with
    RM approval for 1,213 of which 804 are complete.
50. The parties differ on the housing delivery trajectory for just one phase located in the
    south-west part of the site. The Council’s latest figures are based on a proforma
    partially completed by the developer earlier this year which demonstrates their
    intention to submit applications for RM by October 2026. Given the Council’s
    standard lead in times from submission to commencement of completions of just
    under two years it anticipates that up to 130 dwellings would be completed within
    the assessment period. Even allowing for the Council’s moderated position6 there
    would be a build period of around 20 months until the end of the assessment
    period. I regard these figures as over optimistic and accordingly the trajectory
    should be amended to remove 65 dwellings from the supply.
51. Accordingly, 430 dwellings should be reduced from the Councils Category B sites
    as not all of the dwellings would be delivered on the sites within the assessment
    period.
52. In conclusion overall 474 dwellings should be removed from the Council’s supply.
53. In the calculation of the supply of housing land derived from just these sites I find
    that the supply amounts to around 4,850 dwellings rounded to 4.9YHLS.

6
    Rebuttal Appx


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6005108




Allowance for non delivery
54. The appellant has included in their supply figure a percentage discount for a non-
    implementation or lapse rate to account for the expiry of permissions. There is no
    evidence before me to support this approach which importantly it is not advocated
    by the Framework or the PPG. Whilst I acknowledge that some of my Inspector
    colleagues have agreed a percentage discount this may reflect the evidence before
    them.
55. The definition of ‘deliverable’ included in the Glossary to the Framework does not
    refer to a non-implementation allowance but the assessment of supply through the
    application of the two distinct categories of sites requires the decision maker to
    explore the prospects for their delivery. As demonstrated above this has identified
    that whilst some sites were appropriately included in the assessment period
    included in Category a), their permissions have expired before implementation.
56. For these reasons I am satisfied that the application of an allowance would lead to
    unnecessary and unjust reduction of the Council’s supply figures. Accordingly, no
    reduction from the Council’s supply figure is to be assumed on this basis.
Conclusions on HLS
57. I find that the Council has a 5YHLS of around 4.9 years. In arriving at this figure I
    have not included an allowance for /non delivery for the reasons stated above.
    Neither have I calculated a specific figure for the number of dwellings which should
    be discounted from the supply for Oxford.
58. Whilst the Council advance an argument that the JLP now identifies that the LHN
    based on the standard method is presently higher than the figures anticipated in the
    JLP I am only concerned with the supply figures before me.
59. Even if I were to make further reductions in supply from the three sites identified by
    the appellant to account for the unmet needs of Oxford this would result in only
    marginal reductions to my supply figure. There would be no change to my
    conclusions on this issue that the Council does not have a policy compliant amount
    of housing land.
ISSUE 2
Location of the appeal site
60. The appeal site comprises two small fields of 2.53ha7 and includes a northern
    extension to provide for access through Bisby Close which in turn links through to
    the junction of Halls Close with the High Street. The two fields are currently
    cropped for hay and divided by an access track serving Little Smiths Farm which
    lies to the east.
61. Boundaries to the west and north comprise thick tree belts beyond which are
    recently completed residential developments at the Dovecote and Bisby Close. The
    site’s southern boundary is tree lined with lengths of high hedge along the
    Bridleway 192/1/20, Drayton East Way, used as a pedestrian/cycle way beyond
    which are arable fields.
7
    The inclusion of the access through Halls Close and Bisby Close within the site boundary extends the site’s area to around 2.64ha


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   9
Appeal Decision 6005108


62. Policy LP1CP3, Identifies Drayton as a ‘Larger Village’ within the settlement
    hierarchy, characterised by a more limited range of employment, services and
    facilities than Service Centres and Market Towns. The policy requires that
    unallocated development, such as the appeal scheme, will be limited to providing
    for local needs, employment, services and facilities within local communities. ‘Local’
    is not defined in this policy but the hierarchy of settlements indicates that
    development should be proportionate to their size and function. In this respect
    development in larger villages is required to support their vitality and sustainability
    and local services8 and not the needs of the wider District.
63. Policy LP1CP4 includes a presumption in favour of sustainable development
    located within the existing built-up area of each settlement type including Larger
    Villages. Whilst the policy allows for development beyond built up areas this should
    only be through allocations included in the Development Plan which should be
    adjacent or well related to the existing built-up area of the settlement or meet
    exceptional circumstances. Consistent with this, the policy specifies that
    development in open countryside will not be appropriate unless supported by other
    relevant policies of the Development Plan. The appeal scheme conflicts with this
    policy given that it is not an allocated site. The appellant has not made an explicit
    needs case to address the exception included in this policy.
64. The DNP includes at policy P-LF2 a defined settlement boundary. Given that this
    does not embrace the allocated sites and other more recent developments it is out
    of date. The policy seeks to restrict ribbon development along the roads serving
    the village. The appeal scheme does not conflict with this policy.
65. Policy LP1 CP8 identifies the sub-area strategy to address Oxford’s unmet needs
    based around strategic allocations and whilst there is no housing allocations
    included for Drayton the policy identifies it as having a strategic employment site.
    The policy is refined by policies LP2 CP4a and CP8a which include five additional
    housing allocations to address Oxford’s unmet need. Although Drayton is located
    within the sub-area it is not one of the larger villages which has an allocated
    housing site. However, whilst the appeal scheme does not comply with the sub
    area strategy, policy LP2 CP4a allows some development to come forward through
    the Development Management process as long as it is supported by other policies.
66. Drayton includes services and amenities consistent with its designation as a ‘larger
    village’. These include a post office, public house, convenience store and primary
    school. The site’s location allows access to these by walking or cycling. The village
    is serviced by two bus services, the 34 and X2 which provide connections to local
    centres including Wantage, Harwell Campus, Didcot, Abingdon and Oxford.
67. Despite its location in relation to shops and services and the existing built-up area
    the appeal site lies in open countryside and is not included in any site allocations.
    The appellant has not advanced a case to justify the scheme based on a need to
    maintain the vitality and sustainable of local services. Accordingly, I conclude that
    the appeal scheme conflicts with policies LP1 CP3 and CP4 with limited conflict
    with policies LP1 CP8 and LP2 CP4a and CP8a given that housing on windfall
    sites9 in the sub area may be allowed through the Development Management
    process.


8
    LP1 figure 4.1 page 39
9
    Defined in the Glossary to the Framework as sites not specifically identified in the Development Plan


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    10
Appeal Decision 6005108


ISSUE 3
Infrastructure
68. The Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulations 2010 include tests for
    planning obligations: they must be necessary to make the development acceptable
    in planning terms, be directly related to the development, and be fairly and
    reasonably related in scale and kind. The Council submitted a CIL compliance
    schedule which references the S106 Planning Obligations SPD with additional
    comments from the County Council which together identify how each suggested
    obligation is consistent with its adopted policies and the requirements of the
    Regulations.
69. Whilst not being a party to the S106 Agreement the R6 party contributed to the
    roundtable discussion raising concerns on the planning merits of several areas of
    the draft Agreement concerning the proposed areas of public open space within the
    scheme. These concerns can be summarised as:
       •    the proposed stewardship model given that management may be split
            between the Parish Council and a Management Company,
       •    limiting the liabilities of occupiers for public open space on transfer
       •    the governance of the management company, and
       •    transparency of the estate management.
70. The scheme before me is in outline and consideration of these matters is
    premature at this stage of the planning process. Whilst the completed Agreement
    provides an opportunity for the Parish Council to manage one area of public open
    space this has not been finalised, and it would be inappropriate to require the
    Agreement to resolve concerns on a stewardship model at this point. Furthermore,
    the liabilities of occupiers, governance and estate management issues are more
    likely to be determined on transfer of the site from the appellant to the housebuilder
    and then on sale to individual occupiers. Obligations designed to address these
    concerns on third parties who are unknown at this stage would not be enforceable.
    I find that the key principles included in policy DP3 of the Framework would not be
    undermined by the structure of this S106 Agreement.
71. The S106 Agreement includes a series of covenants in favour of the County and
    District Councils.
Obligations in favour of the County Council
72. These include highway improvements for the provision of a pedestrian footway
    along the eastern edge of Halls Close and an uncontrolled pedestrian crossing on
    the High Street. These measures will require a Traffic Regulation Order.
73. An obligation covers a contribution of £41,106 for local bus services and a further
    contribution of £25,000 for Public Rights of Way (PRoW) directed to Drayton East
    Way and other PROWS in the area. These obligations are consistent with the
    Regulations in seeking to enhance existing infrastructure given the increase in
    residents occupying the site and would support modal choice. They are consistent
    with the County’s Local Transport and Connectivity Plan.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6005108


74. Given the site’s location allowing access to a range of transport modes to shops
    and services I consider that the obligation within Schedule 10 requiring payment of
    £200.00 for each dwelling for Green Travel vouchers is unnecessary.
75. Other obligations include a contribution of £333,416 to the provision of secondary
    education and a further £35,411 towards Special Education Need provision. A
    Statement of Common Ground identifies that both parties accept the suggested
    contributions. These contributions are derived from the County’s estimates for
    school building costs and would be directed to schools in the Abingdon area.
    Furthermore, they are supported by the County’s standard formula based on child
    yield arising from the occupation of 31 dwellings. These contributions are
    consistent with LP1 CP7 in respect of infrastructure being necessary and
    proportionate to the need arising from the appeal scheme.
76. Other obligations in favour of the County require a payment of £3,158 towards
    household waste and recycling. These reflect the County’s obligations for the
    management of waste and are necessary.
77. The County’s standard monitoring fee of £5,992 is included as an obligation to
    ensure that all obligations are tracked and accounted for. This is appropriate.
Obligations in favour of the District Council
78. The Agreement includes an obligation requiring that 35% of all dwellings are
    affordable as defined by the Glossary to the Framework and with a tenure mix
    consistent with the Council’s housing needs. This would lead to the provision of 10
    dwellings on site and requires a financial contribution of £137,937.00 for that part of
    a single dwelling which cannot be provided. This is linked to an open market value
    of a house in the area. These obligations are consistent with policy LP1CP24.
79. Within the scheme obligations require that 15% of the site area is laid out as public
    open space. This will include the provision of a play area likely to be a locally
    equipped play area or LEAP which will be offered to the Parish Council for public
    management. This is consistent with LP2DP33 and is supported by policies DEV5
    and DEV6 included in the Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 2021. The
    Agreement allows for a contribution of £30,000 in the event that public open space
    and the play area is transferred to the Parish Council.
80. The S106 Agreement requires the provision of waste bins for each dwelling at a
    cost of £226.00 This is consistent with policy DEV15 of the SPD and is clearly
    proportionate and directly related to the development. Other obligations are
    included for Street Numbering at £281.00 per 10 dwellings.
81. Consistent with policy LP2 DP20 and policy DEV20 of the SPD, obligations include
    financial contributions for off site public art of £409.00 per dwelling together with a
    maintenance fee for a period of 15 years.
82. There are several monitoring fees including for the BNG of £9,617.29, and other
    District Council monitoring fees of £1,836. This a composite figure and is in
    accordance with the PPG10.
83. The S106 Agreement allows for a series of enhancements of existing habitats and
    creation of additional ones on the site in existing hedgerows and through the

10
     REF: 036Reference ID23b-036-20190901


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    12
 Appeal Decision 6005108


      creation of species rich grassland, ponds and other semi natural habitats which will
      be secured through a Habitat Management Plan for 30 years. The extent of ‘off site’
      provision will be addressed on approval of RM. These measures are necessary and
      consistent with the Environment Act 2021.
 84. I conclude that the obligations would provide for the infrastructure, which is
     necessary, directly required and fairly and reasonably related in scale to this
     development. To conclude, I am satisfied that each of these obligations fall within
     the provisions of Regulation 122(2) of the CIL Regulations.
 Other Matters
 85. The Council and Interested parties have raised several matters which whilst not
     forming reasons for refusal require addressing. These relate to Heritage, Best and
     Most Versatile Agricultural Land, Landscape, Highways and the impact of the local
     sewerage treatment works on living conditions and the impact on the capacity of
     the local primary school.
 Heritage
 86. LP1 policy CP39 seeks to preserve and enhance heritage assets and LP2 policies
     DP36, DP37 and DP38 require development to preserve the significance of
     heritage assets with specific reference to the setting and appearance of
     Conservation Areas and the setting, architectural and historic significance of listed
     buildings.
 Drayton Conservation Area (the CA)
 87. Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
     places a statutory duty on decision makers to pay special attention to the
     desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of that area.
 88. Drayton CA is itself a designated heritage asset designated in1969 and covers the
     historic core of the village centred on the High Street. Only the proposed access by
     Halls Close lies within the CA and the body of the appeal site lies around 130m to
     the south. The CA includes a broad range of buildings dating from the seventeenth
     century within a historic street pattern. Its significance is derived from its historic
     relationship with the surrounding farmland. The High Street’s grassed verges form
     an element of the CA’s character.
 89. In terms of the setting of the CA the body of the appeal site makes only a limited
     contribution to the significance of the CA due to its location behind housing in both
     Halls Close and Bisby Close. The rural setting of the site has already been
     compromised by the development of Bisby Close which significantly restricts views
     towards the CA.
 90. However, there would be direct impacts arising from the proposed pedestrian
     footway along the edge of 44 High Street involving the removal of an existing
     grassed verge. The existing verge appears to have been created on the
     development of Halls Close in the late twentieth century and makes only a limited
     contribution to the significance of the CA. Accordingly, the loss of the verge would
     result in less than substantial harm to the CA at this point.
91. The harm I have found, expressed in the terms of the Framework, would be at the
    lower end of less than substantial, but nevertheless of great weight. The extent of

 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6005108


     this harm should be weighed against the public benefits of the appeal scheme. I
     return to this later in this decision.
Listed Buildings
92. In respect of the impact of the proposed scheme on the setting of listed buildings,
    Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    places a statutory duty on decision makers, to have special regard to the
    desirability of preserving listed buildings or their setting. None of the assets would
    be physically affected by the appeal scheme with the effects limited to their setting.
    The Framework defines ‘setting’ as the surroundings in which a heritage asset is
    experienced.
93. Historic England’s guidance (The Setting of Heritage Assets, Planning Note 3)
    advises that the setting itself is not a heritage asset. Its importance lies in what it
    contributes to the significance of the asset or the ability to appreciate that
    significance.
94. There are four listed buildings within the vicinity of the appeal site none of which
    have an historical relationship to it.
Parish Church
95. The Grade ii* Parish Church of St Peter, dates in part from the thirteenth and
    fourteenth centuries. Its significance derives from its architectural and historic and
    community value which arise from its relationship to the surrounding rural area.
96. The significance of the parish church derives from views from surrounding areas
    including the appeal site towards its tower. In the context of the site these views
    have been diminished by the recently completed housing scheme in Bisby Close
    and the extent of tree cover on the northern boundary. From within the site, only
    limited views of the top section of the church tower are possible; these would be
    unaltered by the scheme’s development. Given this context the appeal scheme
    would have a neutral impact on the significance of the Parish Church.
97. Given the distance and the limited intervisibility between the Church and the site
    the appeal scheme would not undermine the significance of this asset which is
    principally contained within its immediate fabric and context as I have set out.
Manor House and barn
98. The significance of the Grade ii* Manor House lies in its architectural form and
    history probably dating from the mid fifteenth century with additions dating from the
    eighteenth and twentieth centuries. It includes communal and social values derived
    from it being a focus for the village and symbol of local society. Its edge of
    settlement location contributes to its significance as an ancient Manor related to
    surrounding farmland and the village.
99. Lying around 30m to the southwest of the Manor House is a Grade ii listed barn,
    dating from the early eighteenth century. Its significance derives from its vernacular
    architecture and materials.
100. These buildings both individually and together reflect the historic settlement
   pattern of Drayton in relation to its rural surroundings and are significant.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
  Appeal Decision 6005108


  101. Whilst the appeal site lies within 200m of these two assets its location is within
     their extended setting which development could erode. There is, however, no
     evidence which identifies any historical relationship between them. Physically, there
     is an intervening belt of trees beyond which is residential development in Chiers
     Close and Bisby Close. These developments reduce the appreciation of its
     significance from an extended setting. Accordingly, harm arising from the appeal
     scheme on the significance of both the Manor and the Barn would be neutral.
  56 and 58 High Street
  102. These buildings were originally built as a farmhouse but now occupied as a single
     dwelling included as single Grade ii listed heritage asset. This asset‘s value is
     derived from it being a historic farmhouse dating from the eighteenth century. Its
     significance is derived from its vernacular design and use of materials comprising
     brick and with an old plain tile roof and also from its location at a bend in the High
     Street which makes it prominent in views within the CA. However, it does not have
     any intervisibility with the appeal scheme and there is no record of historic links to
     the site. The appeal scheme would have a neutral effect on this asset.
       44 High Street
  103. This is a Grade ii listed building dating from the mid seventeenth century which
     includes period features including a Queen post roof with plain tiles. It makes an
     important contribution to the CA given its position on the High Street. The grassed
     verge along the flank of the property appears to date from the latter part of the
     twentieth century with no historical significance. Although it lies away from the
     appeal site the suggested highway works along the site’s eastern boundary with
     Halls Close would result in a less than substantial harm to this building.
Conclusions on heritage
104.   Policy HE6 of the Framework requires that substantial weight must be given to the
       asset’s conservation and given the duties of the decision maker under S66(1) and
       Section 72 (1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       special regard is to be had to the desirability of preserving buildings and their
       setting and the character and appearance of the CA.
105.   However, the harm I have found regarding the highway works on both the CA and
       44 High Street, would be at the lower end of less than substantial, but nevertheless
       of great weight. This harm should be weighed against the public benefits of the
       appeal scheme. I do this later in this decision.
Best and Most Versatile Agricultural Land (BMV)
106.   There is broad agreement between the main parties that the site comprises Grade
       2 Agricultural Land. This classification identifies the site as within the Best and Most
       Versatile Agricultural Land as defined in the glossary to the Framework.
107.   I acknowledge however that given the extent of Grade 2 Agricultural Land in the
       local area its loss to development would not undermine the extent of productive
       land. The proposed loss of BMV agricultural land conflicts with policy LP1 CP43
       and is considered as part of the overall planning balance.




  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
  Appeal Decision 6005108


Landscape
108.   The site lies in the Lowland Village Farms as defined in the Oxfordshire Wildlife and
       Landscape study and within the Local Character Area 80, Sutton Courtney, and the
       Landscape Character Assessment (2017) which identifies the site as lying within
       Steventon to Sutton Courtney.
109.   Whilst the surrounding landscape shares many of the features of these
       designations which is a varied and gently rolling landscape of medium to large
       sized arable fields, the site comprises two small fields surrounded by hedgerows. It
       is accepted that the proposed development would make a significant impact on the
       site consistent with this form of housing development but harm arising would be
       limited to the site itself and development would be read as an extension of the
       existing settlement; there would be no wider landscape impacts affecting the
       designated landscape character areas.
110.   The site’s existing boundaries to the north and west comprise deep belts of shrubs
       and trees limiting views from the surrounding residential developments located in
       Bisby Close and the Dovecote. Whilst views from Little Smith’s Farm would be
       significantly impacted the suggested mitigated planting could limit the extent of
       visual harm arising.
111.   Whilst the site’s eastern boundary is a post and rail fence to Little Smith’s Farm
       beyond this is a broad band of mature trees. To the south from Drayton East Way
       the high and thick hedgerow almost reduce entirely all views into the site and just
       beyond the farm access, the hedge becomes gappy but landscaping within the site
       could limit views of the housing. Visual impacts from the site’s development would
       be entirely contained.
112.   For these reasons I find that the appeal scheme does not conflict with LP1 CP44.
Sewerage Treatment Works
113.   The Council’s second reason for refusal reflected concerns from Thames Water on
       the impact of the local sewerage treatment works (SWT) on the living conditions of
       future residents of the appeal scheme through odour, noise, external lighting and
       insect nuisance. Since the Council’s decision the appellant has provided an
       Amenity and Odour Assessment demonstrating that these adverse impacts could
       be mitigated.
114.   Accordingly, I find that the appeal scheme does not conflict with policy LP1 DP24
       which requires that development is located appropriately.
  Highways
115.   Traffic generated by the appeal scheme would be around 16 vehicles per hour at
       the busiest period, the morning peak. Cumulatively when this amount is added to
       that generated by residential properties in Bisby Close and Halls Close there would
       be around 31 vehicles during this peak period. I am satisfied from the evidence
       before me that this can be accommodated on the existing highway network.
116.   Suggested changes to the traffic infrastructure involving a footway of between 1.7-
       1.8m width along the east side of Halls Close and an unsignalled pedestrian
       crossing would benefit existing residents of both Halls Close and Bisby Close. The
       design of the proposal accounts for the Road Safety Audit completed as part of the

  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
      Appeal Decision 6005108


           application. I am satisfied that these proposals would not prejudice highway safety
           and satisfy policy TR3 of the Framework.
   117.    I acknowledge concerns from interested parties over the potential impacts of
           construction traffic on highway safety. However, at this stage in the planning
           process it is not possible to understand the number, type and frequency of vehicle
           movements. A condition requiring full details of these matters together with
           appropriate measures designed to fully address highway safety is considered
           necessary and is included in the schedule of conditions attached to this decision.
   118.    For these reasons, I find that the appeal scheme would not conflict with Policy TR3
           of the Framework.
Capacity of the local primary school
   119.    The County’s Education team have not requested a contribution for primary
           education despite the site lying within the catchment of the local primary school.
           Despite a recent expansion in capacity required to accommodate larger year
           groups following recent housing growth it is already full in most year groups.
   120.    I recognise that the school does not have sufficient space to accommodate the
           additional children of primary school age who may live at the appeal site. However,
           whilst regrettable that there is a possibility that children may have to be educated
           beyond the village leading to increased use of the private car to enable access
           there is insufficient evidence before me that this amounts to a significant objection
           to the appeal scheme.
   121.    All of the above matters are taken account of in the overall planning balance.
Planning balance and conclusions
Benefits of the appeal scheme
   122.    The appeal scheme includes a range of benefits which are identified below:
   123. Given my findings on housing land supply, I find that the provision of 20 market
        homes would make a contribution to in part address the undersupply of housing
        land across the district. Furthermore, the provision of 10 units of affordable housing
        together with a financial contribution could also address the affordability issue and
        the needs of people on the housing waiting lists across the district. It could also
        partially address the demand from Oxford given its location within the sub area.
   124. A plan led solution to addressing this undersupply is likely to continue for several
        months with February 2027 identified by the Council as the earliest date for its
        adoption. Accordingly, I place substantial weight on the housing benefits of the
        scheme.
   125.    There will be economic benefits derived from both the employment of construction
           workers and through an increased spend in local shops and services from new
           households created by the scheme. These benefits would contribute to the local
           economy consistent with policy LP1CP3. The Framework recognises the
           importance of economic growth and I accord this matter moderate weight.
   126.    I recognised that the public open space provision at around just under half the site
           area would be a benefit of the scheme. However, this would make only a limited
           contribution to the open space needs of a broader catchment of local residents

      https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
  Appeal Decision 6005108


          given its relative self-containment. Accordingly, I give this matter only limited
          weight.
127.      The site’s location allows a choice of transport modes in how occupiers would
          access shops and services. This is a particular benefit of the scheme derived
          primarily from its location which I accord significant weight and means that the
          suggested Travel Pan would have a strong possibility of delivering modal shift.
          Furthermore, the programme of works proposed for adjacent highways would
          benefit residents of the whole village. Accordingly, I accord these improvements
          moderate weight.
128.      The provision of 10% BNG is compliant with the Environment Act 2021. I regard
          this as meeting the minimum statutory requirements and is neutral in the planning
          balance. The fact that this site lies in flood Zone 1 is a function of the site and not of
          the proposed scheme and is accorded neutral weight.
Heritage balance
129.      The analysis above demonstrates that of the five heritage assets, harms would
          affect just two, the Conservation Area and 44 High Street.
130.      I find that the appeal scheme would lead to less than substantial harm to the
          significance of the CA, as a designated heritage asset. Whilst the harm would be
          less than substantial and lies within the low range of the scale of harm, I find that
          this would be overcome by the range of social, economic and environmental public
          benefits which are referred to above.
131.      Given the limited scale of the proposed highway works to the verge along the east
          side of Halls Close, I find in this case, that any harm to 44 High Street would be
          less than substantial and lies within the low range of the scale of harm.
132.      Nevertheless, less than substantial harm does not equate to a less than substantial
          planning objection and bearing in mind the statutory duty set out in the Planning
          (Listed Buildings and Conservation) Act 1990 the harm still attracts considerable
          importance and weight. However, I find that the extent of the harm arising in each
          case would be overcome by the range of economic, social and environmental
          public benefits arising from the scheme.
  Conclusions
133.      Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
          planning decisions are made in accordance with the development plan unless
          material considerations indicate otherwise. In this case I have found that the appeal
          scheme conflicts with policies LP1, CP3 and CP4 with limited conflict with policies
          LP1 CP8 and LP2 CP4a and CP8a given that housing on windfall sites 11 in the sub
          area may be allowed through the Development Management process.
134.      Annex A to the Framework identifies that the degree of weight to be applied to the
          policies of the Development Plan rests on the extent to which they are consistent
          with those of the Framework.
135.      When read as a whole these policies require development proposals to be
          proportional to the size of existing settlements. The settlement strategy included in

  11
       Defined in the Glossary to the Framework as sites not specifically identified in the Development Plan


  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    18
  Appeal Decision 6005108


          LP1 CP3 accords with the essential thrust of the Frameworks policies which
          support sustainable patterns of development by reducing dependence on private
          transport. When read together with policy LP1 CP4 development will be allowed at
          Larger Villages but only through allocated sites and outside these sites,
          development in the countryside will not be appropriate unless specifically supported
          by other relevant policies in the Development Plan.
136.      Policy LP1 CP8 establishes sub area strategies including one for Abingdon on
          Thames and the Oxford fringe. This reinforces the settlement strategy which in turn
          is refined by policies LP2 CP4a and CP8a with additional housing allocations to
          address the unmet need from Oxford. These include allocated sites at 4 Larger
          Villages but not at Drayton. However, policy LP2 CP4a does not allow for
          development in the countryside unless supported by other policies.
137.      Policy S3 of the Framework includes a presumption in favour of sustainable
          development and includes reference to policy S5 relating to the principle of
          development outside settlements; Drayton falls within the definition of a settlement
          identified within Annex B and the site lies outside its built up area. Policy S5 is an
          important material consideration in the overall planning balance.
138.      Policy S5 defines categories of development which should be approved unless the
          benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects
          when considered against the national decision-making policies included in the
          Framework. For residential development policy S5ji refers to whether development
          would address unmet need (evidenced through less than 5YHLS) and that it should
          be physically well related to an existing settlement.
139.      The effect of this policy undermines the essential thrust of policies LPC3 and C4
          and to a lesser extent policy LP1 CP8 and policies LP2 4a and 8a. Accordingly, I
          give only moderate weight to the conflict between the appeal scheme and these
          policies.
140.      The appeal scheme would be consistent with policy S5 of the Framework in respect
          of addressing unmet housing need both for market and affordable housing given
          the 5YHLS position. Furthermore, my conclusions on both landscape and the site’s
          connectivity by a range of transport modes are consistent with the site being well
          related to Drayton. There is no evidence before me to demonstrate that the scale of
          the scheme cannot be accommodated within existing infrastructure12.
141.      Although I find that the scheme’s location on BMV agricultural land conflicts with
          policy N2 this is outweighed by the public benefits of the scheme. Harms relating to
          heritage assets are also outweighed by the public benefits consistent with policy
          HE6 and environmental and highway safety can be addressed through planning
          conditions and S106 Agreement.
142.      Furthermore, the economic benefits would support local services and employment
          and there would be environmental benefits.
143.      The scheme does not conflict with other policy areas other than by not being an
          allocated site in the countryside. However, its location does not undermine the
          principles upon which the Council’s settlement strategy rests, in seeking a
          sustainable pattern of development. This together with the absence of

  12
       Officer’s delegated report


  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   19
  Appeal Decision 6005108


       demonstrable harm undermines the Council’s concerns that by allowing this
       scheme a precedent would be established.
144.   I acknowledge that the Council has a successful track record of housing delivery,
       as evidenced through its Housing Delivery Test results for the last three years but
       the under supply of housing land runs counter to the Framework’s objective to
       deliver a substantial increase in the supply of homes.
145.   I conclude that in this instance the limited adverse impacts of the proposed scheme
       would not significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits when assessed
       against the policies of the Framework. As such the proposed development benefits
       from the Framework’s presumption in favour of sustainable development.
146.   In this case therefore, material considerations, including the Framework outweigh
       the conflict with the development plan as a whole and indicate that planning
       permission should be granted for development that is not in accordance with it.
147.   The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted subject to
       conditions and the completed S106 Agreement.
Conditions
148.   The suggested conditions were considered during the Inquiry and since reviewed in
       the context of policy DM6 of the Framework and the Government’s PPG. Their
       wording set out in the schedule below reflects that discussion. The appellant
       indicated they were content with the proposed pre commencement conditions. I am
       satisfied that the through the Inquiry process the main parties have addressed the
       requirements of DM3c. The numbers referred to below relate to the corresponding
       condition in the schedule.
149.   Whilst the Rule 6 Party suggests that a Community Liaison Framework (CLF) is
       included as a planning condition, I do not consider this would be necessary or
       proportionate for a site of this size which is likely to be delivered within a single
       phase. Policy DM6 of the Framework requires that planning conditions should only
       be attached to permissions where they are necessary, relevant, enforceable,
       precise and reasonable. I acknowledge the Rule 6 party’s comments that the CLF
       would not be viewed as a ‘gateway’ designed to frustrate the delivery of the
       scheme but changes made to a number of conditions including condition 18 negate
       a requirement for this. Their suggested condition would therefore be unnecessary
       and potentially unenforceable given the involvement of unnamed third parties.
150.   I have amended the standard conditions relating to the life of the permission and
       the submission of reserved matters (RM) (conditions 1 and 2) to expedite its
       implementation. This reflects the housing supply position. To provide certainty, the
       plans on which this decision is based (condition 3) are identified; these have been
       amended to reflect the revisions discussed at the beginning of the Inquiry.
151.   I have imposed a condition regarding the proposed dwelling sizes to address local
       housing needs (condition 4) and consistent with this, condition 5 requires
       adherence to standards for space and accessibility.
152.   To ensure that biodiversity enhancements are provided consistent with the
       ecological statements submitted with the appeal I have imposed condition 6
       requiring that suggested enhancements are included with the applications for RM
       regarding layout and appearance. Consistent with this condition I have imposed

  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   20
  Appeal Decision 6005108


       condition 16 in respect of the need for full details of updated ecological appraisals
       identifying amongst other things practical measures to protect local habitats. Other
       details required to be submitted at this stage include condition 7 for a lighting
       strategy designed to mitigate for local bat populations. For the same reasons
       condition 23 is imposed requiring that an arboricultural statement and tree
       protection plan is submitted. This could also assist in the protection of boundary
       screening.
153.   To ensure that landscaping will be managed in a way which will lead to
       enhancements across the site in the long term and will be of an acceptable
       standard I have imposed conditions 8 and 9 requiring details of the management of
       open space within the site and the details of hard and soft landscaping. This
       addresses the Rule 6 party’s concerns regarding boundary treatment and is
       consistent with policy DP4 of the Framework.
154.   A series of conditions are imposed to ensure highway safety both during
       construction and after completion of the whole scheme. These include condition 10
       in requiring details of cycle/pedestrian connections, full engineering details for the
       access (condition 17), and details for the off site highway works (condition19).
155.   I have imposed condition 11 requiring the submission of details of the location of
       the electric vehicle charging points within the site; this is designed to support
       sustainable modes of travel. To ensure that living conditions of future occupiers of
       the site will be protected, condition 12 requires a waste management plan.
156.   Given the nature of the development on a greenfield site I have imposed a
       condition requiring the submission of details of a sustainable drainage scheme
       (SUDS) in order to avoid flooding across the site and land adjoining (condition 13)
       and for the same reason condition 15 requires details to be submitted for the
       realignment of the watercourse which lies on the northern boundary of the site. To
       ensure the efficacy of these proposed works a SUDS compliance report is required
       by condition 24 to ensure that the scheme has been built as required by the
       submitted drawings. Also to maintain effective drainage across the site I have
       imposed a requirement for the submission of details of a foul drainage system
       (condition 14). Consistent with a need to manage foul waste is a requirement for all
       sewerage upgrades to be completed in advance of the site’s occupation given the
       additional demands arising from the scheme.
157.   To protect the living conditions of surrounding occupiers during the construction
       programme I have imposed condition 18. This is extensive in scope in requiring the
       submission of details of a range of matters involved in construction. Whilst this
       does not include an option appraisal on means of access as the R6 party
       requested, I am satisfied that this has been fully considered by the Highway
       Authority consistent with policy TR6 of the Framework. Condition 26 requires
       details of the STW upgrades to protect the living conditions of the future occupiers
       of the site.
158.   Conditions 20, 27 and 28 require land contamination surveys to be completed and
       appropriate action to be taken as a result of these surveys. I understand that this is
       required because of the area of made-up ground in the south of the site.




  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   21
  Appeal Decision 6005108


159.   Conditions 21 and 22 are required to address the archaeological interest of the site
       given local records. Consistent with the Frameworks intentions to encourage modal
       choice I have imposed a planning condition requiring details of a residential travel
       pack (condition 25).

  Stephen Wilkinson
  INSPECTOR




  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   22
Appeal Decision 6005108


                                           Schedule of Conditions

    1. The development hereby permitted shall be begun no later than whichever is the
       later of the following dates:
           a) the expiration of two years from the date of this permission; or
           b) the expiration of one year from the final approval of the reserved matters
               or, in the case of approval on different dates, the final approval of the last
               such matter to be approved.

    2. Within a period of two years from the date of this permission all of the reserved
       matters shall have been submitted for approval in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority. The reserved matters shall comprise the following details:
          a. The scale of the development;
          b. The layout of the development;
          c. The external appearance of the development
          d. The means of access, not approved by this permission, and
          e. The landscaping of the development.

         The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.

    3. Except as controlled or modified by conditions of this permission, the
       development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the details
       shown on the following approved plans:
          • Site Access Point and Forward Visibility Envelope (ref. P22-2021 Figure
             3.1) (dated 15/01/2025)
          • location plan, 2409 200B,
          • parameter plan, 2409 228B,
          • illustrative open space plan, 2409 SK002A and
          • illustrative masterplan, 2409 220H.

    4. The provision of residential accommodation (excluding affordable housing)
       across the site shall comprise:
       5.9% one bedroom
       21.7% two bedrooms
       42.6% three bedrooms
       29.8% four (or more) bedrooms

         A variation will only be permitted if there is a demonstrable housing need for a
         different mix.

    5. The reserved matters applications submitted shall contain full details of the
       space standards of all dwellings including meeting the following requirements:
          a. All one and two-bedroom market dwellings shall accord with the
             Department for Communities and Local Government's 'Technical Housing
             Standards - Nationally Described Space Standard March 2015' as
             amended 19th May 2016 or any replacement Government standards.
          b. 15% of market dwellings and all affordable housing shall be constructed
             to M4(2) Category 2 Accessible and Adaptable Dwellings as set out in the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         23
Appeal Decision 6005108


                   Building Regulations Approved Document M: Access and Use of
                   Buildings - Volume 1: Dwellings.

    6. Concurrent with the first reserved matters application for layout and/or
       appearance, details (including specification, position, height, orientation) of a
       scheme of features to be provided for protected and priority species, shall be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The scheme
       shall be designed in conjunction with a suitably qualified ecologist and shall be
       based on Section 8 of the Ecological Appraisal report (Malford Environmental
       Consulting, dated 04 June 2025). Bird/bat boxes on buildings shall be integrated
       into the fabric of the development.

         A minimum number of biodiversity enhancement features shall be provided
         onsite as follows:
            • 30 integrated bird nest boxes for house sparrow Passer domesticus or
                swift Apus apus,
            • 15 integrated bat boxes or access tile features (with appropriate bat-safe
                roofing membrane),
            • six bat boxes on retained trees,
            • eight bird nest boxes on retained trees, and
            • one hedgehog fence tunnel within each length of close-boarded fencing
                or walling forming a plot boundary (arranged so that each plot is
                connected to at least two separate adjacent plots or to one other plot and
                open/public space as appropriate).

         Thereafter, the development shall be implemented in accordance with the
         approved details. All features shall be provided prior to first use and shall be
         retained and maintained thereafter.

    7. Concurrent with the first reserved matters application for appearance, layout or
       landscaping, a sensitive lighting strategy for bats shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The strategy shall protect
       the conservation status of local bat populations, by:

         a) identifying those areas/features on site that are likely to be both sensitive for
            bats and vulnerable to disturbance from artificial lighting, including: known or
            potential breeding sites, resting places, foraging areas or important routes
            used to access key areas of their territory.
         b) demonstrating that the design and siting of the proposed lighting installation
            will not disturb or prevent bats using the areas identified in a) (through
            provision of appropriate lighting plans, isolux contour maps and technical
            specifications)


         All external lighting shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and
         locations set out in the approved strategy. Under no circumstances should any
         other external lighting be installed without the written approval of the local
         planning authority.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   24
Appeal Decision 6005108


    8. Concurrent with the reserved matters application for landscaping, a maintenance
       schedule and a long-term management plan (for a minimum period of 20 years),
       for the soft landscaping works shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
       the local planning authority. The Landscape Management Plan shall include:
       a) Details of long-term design principles and objectives;
       b) Management responsibilities, maintenance schedules and replacement
           provisions for existing retained landscape features and any landscape to be
           implemented as part of the approved landscape scheme including hard
           surfaces, street furniture within open spaces and any play/youth provision;
       c) Management responsibilities and maintenance schedules for boundary
           features around the perimeter of the site;
       d) A plan detailing which areas of the site the Landscape Management Plan
           covers and also who is responsible for the maintenance of the other areas of
           the site;
       e) Summary plan detailing different management procedures for the types of
           landscape on site e.g. Wildflower meadows, native or ornamental
           hedgerows.

         The schedule and plan shall be implemented in accordance with the agreed
         details.

    9. Concurrent with the reserved matters application for appearance, layout or
       landscaping, full details of a hard and soft landscaping scheme shall be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. These
       details shall include:
       a) Existing trees, hedgerows and other landscape features to be retained
          (noting species, location and spread);
       b) Soft landscaping including a planting plan, to include schedules of new trees
          and shrubs to be planted (noting species, plant sizes and numbers/densities)
       c) Pit design for tree planting within streets or areas of hard landscaping;
       d) Existing and proposed levels comprising spot heights, gradients and
          contours, grading, ground modelling and earth works;
       e) Hard landscaping materials;
       f) Locations and specifications for street furniture and minor artefacts including
          signs, seats, bollards, cycle racks, lighting columns, planters, refuse bins,
          play areas and equipment;
       g) Existing and proposed services above and below ground;
       h) The location and specification of all external and internal boundary
          treatments and means of enclosure including particulars of height, materials,
          brick bonds and fencing styles; and
       i) an implementation programme.

         The scheme shall be implemented in accordance with the implementation
         programme and thereafter be maintained in accordance with the approved
         scheme.

         In the event of any of the trees or shrubs so planted dying or being seriously
         damaged or destroyed within 5 years of the completion of the development, a
         new tree or shrub or equivalent number of trees or shrubs, as the case may be,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   25
Appeal Decision 6005108


         of a species first approved by the local planning authority, shall be planted and
         properly maintained in a position or positions first approved in writing by the local
         planning authority.

    10. The reserved matters applications submitted shall contain full details of the
        connection onto the East Way bridleway to the south of the site. The approved
        connection shall be provided in accordance with the approved details prior to the
        occupation of the final dwelling.

    11. The reserved matters applications submitted shall contain full details of active
        provision of electric vehicle charging points (EVCP) which shall be provided as
        follows:
            a. A minimum of 1 per household for each of the houses with on plot
               parking; and
            b. A minimum of 1 per every 10 flats (with unallocated parking, or 1 for every
               dwelling if there are allocated spaces or garages).

    12. Concurrent with the first reserved matters application for appearance, layout or
        landscaping, a Waste Management Plan shall be submitted to and approved in
        writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Waste Management Plan shall
        include bin presentation points, bin stores (if applicable) and swept path
        analysis.

         Thereafter the development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
         details.

   13. No development shall commence until a detailed sustainable drainage scheme
       sufficient for the associated phase and any upstream catchments, has been
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. This shall
       be based on the principles outlined within the Flood Risk Assessment and
       Surface Water Drainage Strategy, REF: P22-2021 Rev E dated 12/06/2025 by
       Pegasus Group, sustainable drainage principles and an assessment of the
       hydrological and hydrogeological context of the development.

         The scheme to be submitted shall include:
         • Drainage Catchment Plans and outline strategy for the entire development;
         • Information on proposed discharge rates with the overall discharge from the
            site restricted to 4.8l/s for the worst case 1 in 1yr storm and 4.8l/s for the
            worst case 1:100yr + 40% storm;
         • A compliance report to demonstrate how the scheme complies with the
            Local Standards and Guidance for Surface Water Drainage on Major
            Development in Oxfordshire;
         • Detailed hydraulic calculations including node references with consideration
            for the worst case 1:100 + 40% event based on using the latest FEH input
            data;
         • Fully detailed sustainable surface water drainage layouts;
         • Proposed site levels, floor levels and an exceedance plan;
         • SUDS features and sections;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   26
Appeal Decision 6005108


         •     Landscape plans with sustainable drainage features integrated and
               coordinated as appropriate;
         •     Drainage Construction Details;
         •     Maintenance and Management Plan covering all surface water drainage and
               SUDS features.

         No building shall be occupied until the surface drainage works to serve that
         section of the development have been carried out and completed in accordance
         with the approved details.
.
    14. No development shall commence until a detailed foul drainage scheme sufficient
        for the associated phase or sub phase and any upstream catchments, has been
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.

         No building shall be occupied until the foul drainage works to serve that section
         of the development has been carried out and completed in accordance with the
         approved details.

    15. No development shall commence until a detailed design for the realignment of
        the existing watercourse flowing across the northern boundary of the site has
        been submitted to and approved by the local planning authority. The scheme
        should provide volumetric calculations on a level for level basis before and after
        to illustrate that there is no net loss of storage within the watercourse. Sections
        through the proposed watercourse should be provided.

         No building shall be occupied until the realignment of the existing watercourse
         has been carried out and completed in accordance with the approved details.

    16. No development shall take place, including vegetation clearance, demolition or
        ground works, unless and until a construction environmental management plan
        for Biodiversity (CEMP: Biodiversity) is submitted to and approved in writing by
        the local planning authority. The CEMP (Biodiversity) shall include the following:

         a) Updated ecological appraisal shall be undertaken by a suitably qualified
            ecologist. Where previous ecological surveys are more than three years old,
            the appraisal shall assess whether existing survey information remains valid
            and identify any further survey work necessary to inform the CEMP and
            associated mitigation measures.
         b) Risk assessment of potentially damaging construction activities.
         c) Identification of biodiversity protection zones.
         d) Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working practices)
            to avoid, reduce or mitigate the impacts on important habitats and protected
            species during construction. These shall include measures to (1) protect
            retained hedgerows, ditches and other boundary vegetation, (2) avoid harm
            to badgers, hedgehogs and other small animals during vegetation clearance
            and throughout the construction process; (3) time vegetation clearance
            and/or provide ecological supervision to avoid harm to nesting birds; and (4)
            clear vegetation sensitively to avoid harm to reptiles and common
            amphibians.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   27
Appeal Decision 6005108


         e) The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
            features.
         f) The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be present
            on site to oversee works.
         g) Responsible persons and lines of communication.
         h) Use of protective fences, exclusion barriers and warning signs.

         The approved CEMP (Biodiversity) shall be adhered to and implemented
         throughout the construction period strictly in accordance with the approved
         details.

    17. Prior to commencement of any works, full engineering details of the access and
        (and emergency access and foot/cycleways) serving the site shall be submitted
        and approved by the Local Planning Authority. Thereafter, prior to occupation,
        the means of access road and foot/cycleways shall be laid out, constructed, lit
        and drained.

    18. Prior to the commencement of development, a detailed Construction Traffic
        Management Plan (CTMP) shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority. The CTMP shall include as a minimum:

         a) Measures to manage vehicle movements at the site access point.
         b) The operational times for deliveries and how this will be managed.
         c) Traffic management measures required for safe routes to site.
         d) Construction vehicle routing and route management,
         e) Wheel washing or other measures to prevent mud on the highway
         f) Details of temporary traffic management works as considered necessary by
            the Highway Authority, to facilitate safe access and egress by construction
            traffic including, but not limited to, the use of signage and banksmen
         g) Pre-commencement and post-completion highway condition surveys at and
            on the immediate approaches to the development’s site access
         h) Measures to protect pedestrians and highway users
         i) Contact details for a named point of contact prior to and during the
            construction period, for construction traffic queries or complaints.

         The approved CTMP shall be implemented prior to any works being carried out
         on site and shall be implemented throughout the whole construction period.

    19. No development shall commence until a scheme for the off-site highway works
        has been submitted to and agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
        These works include, but are not limited to:

         •    Proposed pedestrian footway along the eastern edge of the Halls Close
              carriageway linking to the High Street (B4016)
         •    Provision of an uncontrolled pedestrian crossing with dropped kerbs and
              tactile paving to the west of the Halls Close junction.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   28
Appeal Decision 6005108


         The approved works shall be implemented in full before the first occupation/use
         of the development or in accordance with a programme of implementation
         agreed in writing with the Local Planning Authority.

    20. Prior to the commencement of the development a phased risk assessment shall
        be carried out by a competent person in accordance with current government
        and Environment Agency Guidance and Approved Codes of Practice such as
        Land Contamination: Risk Management 2020 and BS10175:2011 +A2:2017
        Investigation of potentially contaminated sites. Each phase shall be submitted to
        and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

         Phase 2 shall include a comprehensive intrusive investigation in order to
         characterise the type, nature and extent of contamination present, the risks to
         receptors and if significant contamination is identified to inform the remediation
         strategy.

         Phase 3 requires that a remediation strategy be submitted to and approved by
         the LPA to ensure the site will be rendered suitable for its proposed use.

    21. Prior to any demolition and the commencement of the development a
        professional archaeological organisation acceptable to the Local Planning
        Authority shall prepare an Archaeological Written Scheme of Investigation,
        relating to the application site area, which shall be submitted to and approved in
        writing by the Local Planning Authority.

    22. Following the approval of the Written Scheme of Investigation referred to in
        condition 21, and prior to any demolition on the site and the commencement of
        the development (other than in accordance with the agreed Written Scheme of
        Investigation), a programme of archaeological mitigation shall be carried out by
        the commissioned archaeological organisation in accordance with the approved
        processing, research and analysis necessary to produce an accessible and
        useable archive and a full report for publication which shall be submitted to the
        Local Planning Authority within two years of the completion of the archaeological
        fieldwork.

    23. Prior to the commencement of any site works or operations, including demolition
       and site clearance relating to the development hereby permitted, an
       Arboricultural Method Statement and accompanying Tree Protection Plan shall
       be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
       Arboricultural Method Statement must include the following:

         a) A specification of any pruning or tree surgery works to any trees to be
            retained, to prevent accidental damage by construction or demolition
            activities;
         b) The specification and location of temporary tree protective fencing and any
            ground protection required to protect all retained trees in accordance with the
            current edition of BS 5837 ''Trees in relation to design, demolition and
            construction'', and details of the timing and duration of its erection;




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   29
Appeal Decision 6005108


         c) The definition of areas for the storage or stockpiling of materials, temporary
            on-site parking, site offices and huts, mixing of cement or concrete, and fuel
            storage;
         d) The means of demolition of any existing site structures, and of the re-
            instatement of the area currently occupied thereby;
         e) The route and method of installation of drainage or any underground services
            in the vicinity of retained trees; consideration will be made to avoid the siting
            of utilities and service runs within the Root Protection Area (RPA) of all trees
            to be retained. Only where it can be demonstrated that there is no alternative
            location for the laying of utilities, will encroachment into the RPA be
            considered. Methodology for any installation works within the RPA will be
            provided and must be in compliance with the current edition of NJUG
            'Guidelines for the planning and installation and maintenance of utility
            apparatus in proximity to trees'.
         f) The details and method of construction of any other structures such as
            boundary walls in the RPA of retained trees and how these relate to existing
            ground levels;
         g) The details of materials and method of construction of any roadway,
            driveway, parking, pathway or other surfacing within the RPA, which is to be
            of a 'No Dig' construction method, in accordance with the principles within
            Arboricultural Association Guidance Note 12 "The use of cellular confinement
            systems near trees" and in accordance with current industry best practice;
            and is appropriate for the type of roadway required in relation to its usage.
         h) Provision for the supervision of ANY works within the RPA of trees to be
            retained, and for the monitoring of continuing compliance with the protective
            measures specified, by an appropriately qualified arboricultural consultant, to
            be appointed at the developer's expense and notified to the Local Planning
            Authority, prior to the commencement of development; and provision for the
            regular reporting of continued compliance or any departure there from to the
            Local Planning Authority.


         Thereafter the development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
         details with the agreed measures being kept in place during the entire course of
         development.

    24. Prior to 90% of occupations, a SUDS Compliance report prepared by an
        appropriately qualified Engineer must be submitted to and approved by the Local
        Planning Authority. This must appropriately demonstrate that the sustainable
        drainage system has been installed and completed in accordance with the
        approved scheme (or detail any minor variations). This report should as a
        minimum cover the following;

              •    Inclusion of as-built drawings,
              •    Inspection details of key SUDS features such as flow controls, storage
                   features and volumes and critical linking features or pipework undertaken,
                   with appropriate photographs and evidence of inspections incorporated,
              •    Details of any remediation works required following the initial inspection,
              •    Evidence that remedial works have been completed.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    30
Appeal Decision 6005108


              •    Confirm details of any management company set up to maintain the
                   system.

    25. Prior to first occupation a Residential Travel Information Pack shall be submitted
        to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority, in consultation with
        the Local Highway Authority.

    26. No development shall be occupied until confirmation has been provided that
        either:

             a. all sewage works upgrades required to accommodate the additional flows
                from the development have been completed; or
             b. a development and infrastructure phasing plan has been agreed with the
                Local Authority in consultation with Thames Water to allow development
                to be occupied.
         If a development and infrastructure phasing plan is agreed to be required no
         occupation shall take place other than in accordance with the agreed
         development and infrastructure phasing plan.

    27. The development shall not be occupied until any previously approved
        remediation strategy has been carried out in full and a validation report
        confirming completion of these works has been submitted to and approved in
        writing by the Local Planning Authority, in accordance with Policy DP27 of the
        adopted Local Plan 2031 part 2.

    28. The developer shall confirm in writing to the Local Planning Authority the
        presence of any unsuspected contamination encountered during the
        development. In the event of any contamination to the land and/or water being
        encountered, no development shall continue until a programme of investigation
        and/or remedial works to include methods of monitoring and certification of such
        works undertaken. Where land contamination investigation/remedial works are
        required this must be carried out by a competent person in accordance with
        current government and Environment Agency Guidance and Approved Codes of
        Practice such as Land Contamination: Risk Management 2020 and
        BS10175:2011 +A2:2017 Investigation of potentially contaminated sites and
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.



                                           End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    31
Appeal Decision 6005108




Documents

All documents can be found at the following link:
https://valeofwhitehorse.planning-register.co.uk/


Documents presented during the Inquiry
      ID.1      Appellant openings
      ID.2      Council Openings
      ID.3      Rule 6 Openings
      ID.4      R6 Party’s speaking notes in Chief
      ID.5      Summary Table of HLS
      ID.6      Schedule of revised plans and plans
      ID.7      Extracts from V3 of S106 Agreement
      ID.8      Rule 6 summary schedule
      ID.9      Summary schedule of disputed housing sites
      ID.10     Email of 7 July 2026 from Ms E Wade, Parish Councillor
      ID.11     Email of 6 July 2026 from Gary
      ID.12     Appeal ref APP/X2220/W23/3324453
      ID.13     Appeal ref APP/V3120/W/22/3310788
      ID.14     Appeal ref APP/Q3115/W/23/3323268
      ID.15     High Court judgement Dorchester Living v SSLUHC [2024] EWHC 2332 (Admin)
      ID.16     HLS roundtable agenda
      ID.17     Site visit itinerary
      ID.18     Revised conditions dated 09.07.26
      ID.19     Note on off-site BNG contributions
      ID.20     Summary of S106 Obligations
      ID.21     Rule 6 Closings
      ID.22     Council Closings
      ID.23     Appellant Closings




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            32
Appeal Decision 6005108


APPEARANCES

       FOR THE APPELLANT:
       Mr Robson of Counsel, assisted by Ms M Critchlow of Counsel instructed by
       Mr S Tofts, MPlan, MRTPI of Eagle One Homes Ltd called:
       Mr R Grant BA(Hons), PGDip, MBA, MRTPI
       Mr Rawlinson BA (Hons)
       Mr E Leeson, Principal Planner Origin 3
       Mr C Rawlinson Eurling BEng (Hons),CEng, MCIHT, CMILT
       Mr A Madden LLB (Hons) Partner, Hugh James Solicitors

       FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:


       Ms Parekh of Counsel instructed by Vale of White Horse District Council
       called:
       Ms H Reid BSc, MSc, MRTPI, MIED, Director, Lambert Smth Hampton
       Mr M Reynolds BSc(Hons), MSc, MRTPI, Managing Director Context Planning Ltd
       Mr A. Akram, Senior Transport Development Officer, Oxfordshire County Council
       Ms S. Wright, Senior Planning Officer (Majors), Vale of White Horse District
       Council
       Ms K. Chesterman, Senior Infrastructure Negotiator, Oxfordshire County Council


       FOR THE RULE 6 PARTY
       Nigel Billingham


       INTERESTED PARTIES:
       Ms E Wade, Councillor Drayton Parish Council




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   33
