Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 July 2026
by Claire Coles MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005088
Leydens Farm, Lydens Lane, Hever, Kent TN8 7EP
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Leydens Farm Ltd against the decision of Sevenoaks District Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/02484/HOUSE.
•      The development proposed is formation of ancillary building in residential curtilage.


Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised during the
         course of the appeal. The Council and appellant were given the opportunity to
         comment on the revisions, however, no response was received from either party.
3.       A Unilateral Undertaking (UU) under Section 106 of the Town and Country
         Planning Act 1990 (S106) was submitted with the application. This undertaking
         would ensure the pool building approved under reference 25/01208/HOUSE dated
         31 July 2025 could not be erected should planning permission be granted for the
         ancillary building (named office building in the UU) the subject of this appeal. I
         have taken the UU into account in coming to my decision.
4.       Whilst, in certain circumstances, a proposal can be amended through revised
         plans during an appeal, in line with the Wheatcroft principles1, I can see that there
         are substantial differences between the appeal proposal and that of the revised
         scheme. In this case, it is my view that the appeal must be determined on the
         basis of the plans as originally submitted to the Local Planning Authority (LPA) and
         upon which it based its decision, and which have been subject to consultation. To
         do otherwise would prejudice the interests of the LPA, interested third parties and
         consultees, who have not been consulted on the revised scheme and who may
         have observations to make. I have therefore proceeded to determine the appeal
         on the basis of the plans as originally submitted. The merits of the revised scheme
         would, if necessary, be a matter for the main parties to consider as part of a fresh
         proposal away from this appeal.
Main Issues
5.       The main issues are:

1
    Bernard Wheatcroft Ltd v Secretary of State for the Environment (JPL, 1982, P37)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005088


       • Whether the development comprises inappropriate development in the Green
         Belt having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan
         policies;
       • The effect of the development on the openness of the Green Belt and the
         purposes of including land within it;
       • The effect of the development on the natural beauty of the High Weald National
         Landscape;
       • Whether there are other considerations weighing in favour of the development;
         and
       • Whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly
         outweighed by other considerations. If so, does this amount to the very special
         circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
       Whether the development comprises inappropriate development in the Green Belt
       having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan policies.
6.     Policy GB7 of the Framework identifies development which is not inappropriate in
       the Green Belt. Policy GB7 b identifies the following as not inappropriate:
       ‘the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building, provided
       that the existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in
       planning terms, and any extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate
       increase in size compared to the original building. In the case of proposals for a
       replacement building, it should be for the same use and not materially larger than
       the one it replaces’.
7.     The proposed development would not reuse, extend or alter an existing building.
       Planning permission was granted for the erection of a pool building (ref:
       25/01208/HOUSE) in 2025. The pool building has yet to be erected. The appeal is
       accompanied by a Unilateral Undertaking (UU) under Section 106 of the Town and
       Country Planning Act 1990 which would prevent the construction of the pool
       building approved by the Council should the appeal be allowed.
8.     The replacement of the pool building with the outbuilding would not comply with
       Policy GB7 b of the Framework as the outbuilding would not be in the same use as
       the pool building (although they are both proposed as ancillary outbuildings).
       Although within the residential curtilage, the size and scale of the proposed
       outbuilding mean this would not be ancillary in function with three offices, a
       kitchen, male and female toilets and a waiting area. The similarities between the
       proposal, and the office building refused under appeal ref:
       APP/G2245/C/21/3271033 suggests the building is likely to be used, at least in
       part, by the commercial uses on the site.
9.     The proposed development would not meet the criteria in Policy GB7 of the
       Framework which identifies development which is not inappropriate in the Green
       Belt.
10. Policy GB3 of the Sevenoaks Allocations and Development Management Plan
    (ADMP) states that outbuildings located more than 5m from the existing dwelling


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005088


     will be permitted where the building, including the cumulative impact of other
     outbuildings and extension within the curtilage of the dwelling, would be ancillary to
     the main dwelling in terms of function and design and would not materially harm the
     openness of the Green Belt. The appellants state the proposed outbuilding would
     be an ancillary outbuilding, however, I have already identified that the building is
     likely to be used, at least in part, by the commercial uses on the site and would be
     unlikely to be ancillary to the main dwelling in terms of function. The appellants
     have suggested the outbuilding could be the subject of a restrictive condition
     limiting its use to ancillary to the main dwelling, however, I am not convinced that a
     restrictive condition would outweigh the harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
     Even if I were satisfied of this, a restrictive condition would not meet the criteria set
     out in Policy DM6 of the Framework as it would not be relevant to the development
     as the outbuilding would be functionally more akin to a commercial use rather than
     an ancillary outbuilding.
11. The Green Belt Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) provides further
    guidance on development in the Green Belt and states that in order to minimise the
    impact of outbuildings on the openness of the Green Belt, the Council will seek to
    restrict any outbuildings to a limit of 40sqm. The proposed outbuilding would have a
    footprint which is significantly larger than recommended in the SPD. Whilst it is
    acknowledged that the supporting text in the SPD does not carry the same weight
    as Policy, it is indicative of the size threshold considered acceptable by the Council
    for outbuildings within the Green Belt.
12. In conclusion, for the reasons identified above, the proposal would be inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt, contrary to Policy GB3 of the ADMP, Section 5 of
    the SPD and Policy GB7 of the Framework.
       The effect of the development on the openness of the Green Belt and the
       purposes of including land within it.
13. Leydens Farm is located within the open countryside and comprises a group of
    buildings accessed via a long drive from Lydens Lane. The buildings comprise a
    number of former farm buildings that are now used for a car sales business,
    including repair and restoration facilities, equestrian facilities and residential
    dwellings. A public footpath runs alongside the buildings from Lydens Lane and
    continues through the fields beyond Leydens Farm.
14. The orientation and location of the proposed outbuilding would spread development
    within the confines of the residential curtilage (which also includes a tennis court
    and a swimming pool) further to the rear of the appeal site, encroaching into the
    open gardens and fields behind the house. I note the retention of the hedging
    providing screening from the public footpath of the proposed development, and that
    the hedging could be retained by condition, however, openness can be perceived
    visually and spatially and factors to be considered include the duration of the
    development and its ability to return to its original state as well as the degree of
    activity to be generated.
15. The scale of the proposal would visually and spatially encroach into the openness
    of the Green Belt and if the outbuilding were to be occupied to its full potential,
    would result in a significant level of activity at the building.
16. The pool building the subject of permission 25/01208/HOUSE, which the appellant
    is suggesting would not be built if this appeal were allowed, is larger in terms of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005088


     footprint and volume than the appeal proposal. Both proposals would be located
     within the residential curtilage and screened by the hedging, however, in terms of
     the effect on the openness of the Green Belt, the appeal proposal would have a
     greater effect on openness as it would be located further from the cluster of
     residential buildings on the site and would extend built development to the
     southeast, encroaching further into the Green Belt.
17. The purposes of the Green Belt include safeguarding the countryside from
    encroachment. Given the relative relationship between the proposed pool building
    and proposed outbuilding with the other farm buildings, the proposed outbuilding
    encroaches considerably more into the countryside than the proposed pool
    building. Consequently, the development would not safeguard the countryside from
    encroachment.
18. For these reasons, I conclude the proposed outbuilding, even taking into account
    the UU preventing the pool building being built, would result in harm to the
    openness of the Green Belt and the purposes of including land within it. As a result,
    it is contrary to the Framework which seeks to keep land permanently open and
    safeguard the countryside from encroachment.
     The effect of the development on the landscape and scenic beauty of the High
     Weald National Landscape (HWNL).
19. The appeal site is located within the HWNL. Policy EN5 of the ADMP provides the
    highest status of protection to the HWNL in relation to landscape and scenic
    beauty. The Framework states that substantial weight should be placed on the
    importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas. The
    Levelling-up and Regeneration Act (2023) amended Section 85 of the Countryside
    and Rights of Way (CROW) Act, to create a new duty on planning authorities to ‘seek
    to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the area’
    when considering developments in National Landscapes. The new duty replaces the
    previous requirement for relevant authorities to ‘have regard’ to the purpose of
    National Landscapes and is intended as a more proactive and strengthened
    requirement.
20. The HWNL comprises small fields and woodlands with groups of agricultural or
    former agricultural buildings and settlements in a hilly landscape.
21. The proposed outbuilding comprises a substantial, single storey timber clad
    building with casement windows and gable ended porch over the steps to the
    glazed front entrance. The scale, layout and materials of the building reflect the
    appearance of an agricultural building to some extent. However, the windows and
    porch result in a more commercial appearance.
22. The proposal extends built development at Leydens Farm further to the southeast
    in the residential curtilage. This is a limited incursion of built development into the
    National Landscape, but the proposal would have a commercial appearance and
    nature. Taking account of this, the proposal affects the landscape and scenic
    beauty of the area.
23. The proposed building would be likely to be visible in closer views, although it is
    acknowledged additional planting could be provided and retained by condition.
    Despite this, the screening would not wholly overcome the effect of the building on



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005088


     the natural beauty of the area, even taking into account the trade off with the pool
     building.
24. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would not conserve and enhance
    the natural beauty of the area. As such, it is contrary to Policy EN5 of the ADMP
    and the Framework that seek to protect the landscape and scenic beauty of the
    National Landscape, and conserve and enhance the character of the landscape.
Other considerations
25. The appellant suggests that an alternative outbuilding could be built under
    permitted development, but I have little evidence to support this claim. I am
    therefore unable to conclude that this offers a realistic or probable prospect and
    consequently does not represent a legitimate fallback position. It is open to the
    appellant to have the matter determined under Sections 191 or 192 of the Town
    and Country Planning Act 1990. Any such determination would be unaffected by
    the outcome of this appeal. I have therefore considered the appeal on the basis of
    what is proposed and its consequent effects.
Conclusion
26. I have found that the proposed outbuilding, even taking account of its proposed
    replacement of the pool building, would not comprise appropriate development in
    the Green Belt as defined by Policy GB3 of the ADMP and the Framework. It
    would harm the openness of the Green Belt and conflict with the purposes of
    including land within it. In addition, it would not conserve and enhance the natural
    beauty of the High Weald National Landscape.
27. Taking all matters put to me into account, the substantial weight to be given to
    Green Belt harm and any other harm is not clearly outweighed by other
    considerations, either individually or cumulatively, sufficient to demonstrate very
    special circumstances. Therefore, the proposed outbuilding is contrary to Policies
    GB3 and EN5 of the ADMP and the Framework that seek to protect the Green Belt
    from inappropriate development.
28. For these reasons, I conclude that the development does not accord with the
    development plan and is dismissed.




Claire Coles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
