Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Paul Martinson BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005950
111-115 Grainger Street, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE1 5AE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Lewis Davison against the decision of Newcastle Upon Tyne City Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/0080/01/DET.
•    The development proposed is Change of Use from Former Skipton Building Society Staff Room
     (Class E) to 1no. Flat (Class C3), and LBC for the removal of modern partition wall to front (south)
     room; installation of brick air vents to the rear; bin and cycle storage at the ground floor; changing
     modern opaque glazing to rear to clear; removal of modern metal security bars to the rear; and,
     installation of secondary glazing.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have taken into account the national decision-making (DM) policies contained
       within the new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’), as
       published on 17 August 2026. Any reference to the Framework below is therefore
       a reference to this new version.
3.     The new Framework is similar in terms of its provisions for new development in
       respect of noise and odour as well as the ‘agent of change principle’ to the
       previous iterations of the Framework, specifically paragraphs 187 e), 198 and 200.
       Framework DM Policy P3: 2 sets out that new development should provide healthy
       living conditions for occupiers and users in terms of avoiding exposure to levels of
       air, noise, artificial light or other sources of pollution which could have an
       unacceptable adverse effect on health and the quality of life. Where necessary
       suitable mitigation measures should be incorporated to secure acceptable living
       conditions.
4.     In terms of the effect of development on existing activities, DM Policy P4: 2 sets
       out that where the operation of an existing activity could have a significant adverse
       effect on a proposed new development in its vicinity, development proposals
       should: a. Identify the nature of the potential impacts, informed where necessary
       by early discussions between the applicant (i.e. the ‘agent of change’) and those
       existing uses which could be affected by the proposal to inform the scope for
       mitigation; and b. Be able to demonstrate that suitable mitigation can be provided
       before first occupation of the development, if it is to be acceptable. Planning
       conditions or obligations should be used to secure agreed mitigation measures.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005950


5.     The appellant has provided a new noise assessment, a new odour assessment,
       and amended plans at appeal. The amended plans show the proposed Mechanical
       Ventilation system with Heat Recovery (MVHR) utilising a vent at rooftop level
       rather than at first floor level as previously proposed. I note that an appeal should
       not be used to evolve a scheme, and it is important that what is considered by the
       Inspector is essentially what was considered by the Council, and on which
       interested parties’ views were sought. However, in this instance, the submitted
       evidence has resulted in little change to the overall scheme. The Council has had
       the opportunity to comment, albeit it has chosen not to do so. I am therefore not
       convinced that any other party would be prejudiced were I to take this into account
       as part of the appeal. My decision is on this basis.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are whether the proposal would provide acceptable living
       conditions for future occupiers with particular regard to noise and odour and the
       effect on the operation of an existing hot food business.
Reasons
7.     The appeal site is 111-115 Grainger Street (No 111-115), a four storey building in
       central Newcastle. The building is in commercial use on the ground floor and the
       first floor includes an office and staff room associated with that use. The remaining
       section of first floor, to the front of the building and facing onto Grainger Street,
       comprises a first floor flat. There are two flats per floor across the rest of the floors
       of the building.
8.     Whilst fronting a main shopping street to the front, the building backs onto the
       Grainger Market to the rear, with its lean-to roof adjoining the rear elevation of the
       market building at roughly the first-floor level. The covered market includes various
       hot food outlets. A tall flue associated with a hot food takeaway projects out of the
       lean-to roof and curves over in an arc towards the first floor elevation of the appeal
       building. This elevation includes two windows serving the staff room and office,
       immediately adjacent to the flue, both of which are obscure glazed with security
       bars.
9.     The proposal would involve the conversion of the staff room and office sections of
       the first floor of the building to a new flat, to broadly reflect those elsewhere in the
       building. The proposed plans show the bedrooms to be located to the rear of the
       building with refurbished windows incorporating replacement clear glazing and
       involving the removal of the security bars.
10. The existing flue terminating in very close proximity to the bedroom windows of the
    proposed flat has potential to vent noise and odour directly towards it. Such flues
    can generate noise during operation. Whilst noise levels on the site visit appeared
    to be consistent with the town centre location, I am mindful that such flues can be
    highly intermittent in terms of noise and odour extraction, as set out by the
    Council’s Environmental Health Officer. Based on the operator’s licence, such
    noise and odour could occur at any time up until 11.00pm.
11. Furthermore, the close proximity of the flue to the rear elevation in a dip created by
    that elevation and the adjacent upward sloping roof as well as the projection at the
    adjacent building to the north, is likely to restrict the movement of air to allow for
    the dissipation of odours, concentrating the impact on the two adjacent windows.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005950


12. Based on the above, in the absence of appropriate levels of mitigation, the
    proposed flat would likely experience intermittent high levels of noise and odour
    through the bedroom windows, which could have an unacceptable adverse effect
    on the living conditions of future occupiers.
13. The above assessment is supported by the appellant’s odour assessment, which
    detected significant odour presence associated with the flue and determined that
    this resulted in substantial impacts particularly in relation to proposed Bedroom 1,
    where the odour was present 90% of the time.
14. Similarly, the noise assessment found that the noise levels arising from the flue
    exceeded the upper limits of the WHO guidelines for noise during daytime and
    nighttime. However, whilst the noise assessment states noise from the flue is
    unlikely to occur at night, this is due to the current operating hours of the existing
    hot food business. This could change significantly in the future, without planning
    permission, as a new business could operate until 11.00pm under the
    aforementioned licensing restrictions.
15. Both the noise and odour assessments proposed similar mitigation to address the
    above issues. The first element of mitigation would be the sealing of the existing
    windows serving Bedroom 1 and Bedroom 2 as part of their refurbishment, and the
    provision of secondary glazing comprising a secondary single pane of glass
    located 200mm from the existing glazing. The sealing of the windows would be
    provided alongside the proposed MVHR system. The proposed air intake at roof
    level would allow for air movement within the flat without the need for the proposed
    refurbished windows being open.
16. The appellant refers to windows being sealed but openable for purge ventilation. In
    my experience, it is difficult to predict the exact behaviour of future occupants who
    may wish to have windows open for longer periods, including overnight,
    particularly in fine weather, despite the presence of the MVHR system.
    Experiencing noise and odour from the flue could influence these patterns of
    behaviour causing future occupiers to seek to shut windows against their wishes,
    to the detriment of their living conditions.
17. Moreover, given the close proximity of the flue and age of No 111-115, it is
    considered highly likely that odour, in particular, will still have the ability to
    permeate into the flat despite the use of the MVHR system and refurbishment
    works to seal the windows. This is supported by the comments of the Council’s
    Environmental Health Officer.
18. The second strand of the proposed mitigation relates to remedial work to the flue
    which the appellant argues could be secured through a Grampian condition,
    although I am not provided with any proposed wording for such a condition.
    However, the works to the existing flue are not clearly detailed within either the
    noise assessment or the odour assessment.
19. The noise assessment sets out that an adequately specified in-duct attenuator
    could reduce noise levels from the extract fan such that the impact on the
    proposed flat bedrooms is acceptable, even with open windows. However, this
    statement is not evidenced and the precise effect of the in-duct attenuator on noise
    levels is not considered in the assessment.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005950


20. The odour assessment simply refers to ‘potential options’ which are described as
    ‘additional/alternative’ to the MVHR. These include extending the height of the flue
    to carry odours away from the dip, however it is unclear if this would then increase
    odour and noise emissions experienced in the floors above. Similarly, it is unclear
    if directional cowls would also preserve the living conditions of the other occupiers
    of the building. Reference is also made to filtration and neutralisation, including:
    carbon filtration and electrostatic precipitators. However, it is unclear if these works
    alone would result in the reduction of odour to an acceptable level, mindful of the
    close proximity of the flue.
21. Based on the above, there is a lack of detail or clarity over which mitigation
    methods would be employed and the precise effect on odour or noise ingress
    following the completion of those methods. Whilst I appreciate that precise detail
    can be secured by a planning condition, I require some clarity of the form that
    proposed mitigation would take, its precise effect on odour and noise emissions
    and whether it is achievable both operationally and with this particular flue in this
    location. As these matters remain unclear, it has not been adequately
    demonstrated that acceptable living conditions for future occupiers can be
    provided.
22. I am provided with a copy of a letter from the operator of the hot food business
    associated with the flue. This gives written permission in principle for remedial
    works to the flue albeit subject to receiving and reviewing the drawings and
    specifications from the company carrying out the work. Nonetheless, given that it
    has not been demonstrated that the noise and odour arising from the flue could be
    adequately mitigated, I cannot be certain that the proposal would not place
    unreasonable restrictions on the operation of the existing hot food business
    following its completion.
23. For the above reasons it has not been adequately demonstrated that the proposal
    would provide acceptable living conditions for future occupiers with particular
    regard to noise and odour. Similarly, I cannot be certain that the proposal would
    not place unreasonable restrictions on the operation of the existing hot food
    business.
24. The proposal would therefore conflict with Policy CS14 of the Core Strategy and
    Urban Core Plan and Policies DM23, and DM24 of the Development and
    Allocations Plan insofar as they seek to preserve the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers and avoid unreasonable restrictions being placed on
    existing businesses through new development.
25. For the same reasons, there would also be conflict with Framework DM Policies
    P3 and P4, described above.
Other Matters
26. The Grainger Market and the buildings forming its eastern front comprising the
    appeal site are a Grade I listed building. Its significance derives in part from its
    illustration of nineteenth century market architecture incorporating commercial and
    residential premises on a grand scale.
27. The precise detail of the alterations to the windows could be secured by a planning
    condition to avoid any harmful impact on existing fabric. Overall, owing to the
    limited changes proposed, the proposal would have a neutral effect on the listed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005950


         building and as such its special interest and significance would be preserved in
         accordance with the provisions of section 66(1) of the Act1. I note the Council
         concluded similarly.
28. The appeal site lies within the Newcastle Central Conservation Area (the CA) that
    covers a large swathe of the core of the city. The character of the conservation
    area changes frequently, reflecting the city’s many periods of growth and
    development. Significance derives, in part, from its wealth of historic buildings
    spanning multiple periods and its discernible historic street layouts. Grainger Town
    is a particularly important part of the city, based around the classical Tyneside
    streets built by Richard Grainger between 1834 and 1839 with a high proportion of
    buildings in the area of special architectural or historic interest. As a building
    comprising shops and flats, forming the east front of the covered Grainger Market
    to which it is connected at the rear, the appeal property contributes significantly to
    the character and appearance of the CA and thus its significance.
29. The external changes to the building would be limited to the refurbishment of the
    windows of which there are limited public views. Subject to appropriate conditions,
    the proposal would therefore preserve the character and appearance of the CA
    having regard to the provisions of section 72(1) of the Act. The Council concluded
    similarly in this regard.
Other Matters
30. I am directed to a pair of linked appeals2 relating to noise. Whilst I appreciate that
    the Inspector considered that a MVHR system addressed the potential for noise
    being experienced in nearby residential properties, I note that this was principally
    in relation to traffic noise rather than from a nearby flue. Moreover, whilst there is
    reference in the appeal to cooking smells, this was in relation to a proposed flue
    rather than an existing situation and nothing before me indicates that the proximity
    and circumstances were the same as the appeal scheme. This therefore carries
    limited weight in my assessment.
31. Whilst I note that the Council has recently approved a development at 86-92
    Grainger Street which included sealed windows to the Grainger Street and Bigg
    Market facades, I cannot be certain that the effect in terms of noise and odour
    would be similar to that at the appeal site, particularly as this is not in relation to an
    existing flue at close proximity. I can therefore give this only limited weight.
32. I appreciate that the appellant sought to engage with the Environmental Health
    Officer, post decision. The lack of contact in this regard is regrettable; however,
    this is a matter for the Council and does not carry significant weight in my
    assessment.
Conclusion
33. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

Paul Martinson
INSPECTOR


1
    Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
2
    APP/M4510/W/20/3263441 and APP/M5410/W/20/3263625.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  5
