Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by D R Kay BA Dip.Arch RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005194
35 Denmark Road, Poole, BH15 2DE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Tapper against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole
     Council.
•    The application Ref is P/25/04005/OUT.
•    The development proposed is Outline planning permission with all matters reserved for the
     demolition of existing workshop / store and re-development of the site with 9 flats.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The appeal scheme relates to an outline proposal, with all matters reserved for
      future consideration. I have therefore determined the appeal accordingly. A set of
      detailed drawings were submitted with the appeal, including floor plans, elevations,
      sections and a site plan, indicating an approach to development of the site. I have
      taken these drawings into account as being indicative for illustrative purposes only.
3.    The description of development on the application form and in the plans initially
      submitted related to 10 flats. The description of development changed during the
      application to 9 flats, with amended drawings, and I have used the amended
      description agreed by the parties in the header and in my determination.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
           •    whether the appeal site would be a suitable location for the proposed
                development, having regard to local and national planning policy; and
           •    the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the local
                area, having particular regard to the significance of heritage assets; and
           •    whether the development would provide acceptable living conditions for
                future occupiers and the effect of the development on the living conditions
                of occupiers of existing neighbouring properties with regard to overlooking
                and privacy; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on international and nationally designated sites of
                importance for biodiversity.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005194


Reasons
Location of Development
5. The existing building on the appeal site is described by the Council as being within
   use Class E(g)(iii) of the Use Classes Order 1987 (as amended). The proposal for
   9 flats would change the use to a C3 residential use class. The site is located within
   an area which is surrounded by residential development. Further, it is not located
   within an area allocated for employment in the Poole Local Plan (2018) (the Local
   Plan).
6. Policy PP2 of the Local Plan directs residential development to the most accessible
   and therefore sustainable locations, these being the town centre, district and local
   centres and locations close to the sustainable transport corridors. The appeal site is
   located a short distance outside the defined town centre boundary, though it is
   within 500 metres walking distance of the town centre, the central railway and bus
   stations. It is therefore located within a sustainable transport corridor thus
   representing a highly sustainable location for residential development. This would
   also reflect the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the
   National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework).
7. However, Policy PP2 also makes recommendations for the density of development
   relative to the location of development sites. For locations within sustainable
   transport corridors, the table in Policy PP2 recommends a density of 50 homes per
   hectare. As the appeal site is 0.4 hectares that would equate to 20 homes.
   However, Policy PP2 acknowledges that the housing density needs to be
   considered on a case-by-case basis. Owing to the proximity and density of
   development immediately surrounding the appeal site, it would not be appropriate
   for it to be developed to such a density. The proposal is for 9 units, and I will
   examine the effects of the proposed density of development further below.
8. For the above reasons, I conclude that the principle of residential development of
   the appeal site would be acceptable. It therefore follows that I find it would accord
   with the spatial location elements of Policy PP2 of the Local Plan.
Character and Appearance and Heritage Assets
9. The appeal site consists of a rectangular portion of land described as being around
   0.4 hectares in area. A substantial portion of the site is covered by a building which
   occupies the full width of the site. It is believed to have been constructed in the mid-
   20th century. It is two-storeys in height to its front and rear portions, with a single-
   storey section to the middle. All the building is flat roofed, with a mix of brickwork
   and horizontal painted timber cladding to its principal elevation, which faces
   Denmark Road, and with brickwork and render to its other elevations.
10. The principal elevation is set back by some distance from the rear of the footpath,
    such that it is almost in line with the rear elevation of the adjacent residential
    property at number 37 Denmark Road (No 37) to its north-east boundary, and
    around 2 metres behind the rear elevation of number 1 Cranes Mews (No 1), a
    residential property adjacent to its south-west boundary. The frontage between the
    principal elevation and the rear of the footpath is entirely covered in tarmac surface,
    providing parking space for up to 14 vehicles. A drop kerb is present to the full
    length of the frontage, though an on-street parking bay restricts access to the drop
    kerb and frontage for part of its length.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005194


11. The appeal site sits outside of, but adjacent to, the Heckford Park Conservation
    Area (the CA), the south-western boundary of which abuts a substantial portion of
    the north-eastern boundary of the appeal site. The CA derives its significance,
    insofar as it relates to this appeal, from the area’s historic origins as part of the
    Manor of Canford in the parish of Longfleet. The area underwent significant
    development in the Victorian era, resulting in the laying out of a regular pattern of
    streets, providing terraces of residential dwellings of human scale, set behind small
    frontage gardens, the dwellings being characterised by two-storey bay windows
    with gable roofs, and with good levels of detail and quality of materials to their
    principal elevations, much of which utilises polychromatic brickwork, providing a
    consistent character.
12. The property at No 37, and the terrace within which it is located to the north-east,
    are the only properties on Denmark Road which follow this pattern of development,
    and which are consequently included within the CA. The properties to the north-
    western side of Denmark Road, and to the south and south-west of the appeal site
    on Cranes Mews are properties of a mix of architectural styles, materials and ages,
    all of which lie outside the CA. Due to the age and design of the existing building on
    the appeal site, I find it does not contribute positively to the setting of the CA or the
    way in which it is experienced.
13. The indicative appeal proposal would replace the existing building with two blocks
    of development. Block A would be three-storeys in height, though the upper storey
    would be partially within the roof space, and would be located to the front of the
    site, its principal elevation would be in line with that of the adjacent property at No
    37. This block would be sited alongside the gable wall of No 37 and would house
    six flats. It would be of a consistent depth as No 37, though its eaves level would be
    higher. It would have a three-storey rear offshoot which would follow the pattern of
    the adjacent terrace in the CA, though it would be both wider, longer and taller.
14. To the rear of the site would be Block B which would be two-storeys in height,
    though a portion would be single-storey, providing a roof terrace to its flat roof,
    enclosed by a head height obscure glazed balustrade to its open two sides. The
    block would occupy almost the full width of the site; its principal elevation being
    sited around half a metre in front of the principal elevation of the detached property
    immediately adjacent at number 2 Cranes Mews (No 2).
15. The distance between the opposing elevations of the two blocks would be limited,
    being around 7.4 metres, being used to provide access to Block B, access to three
    separate cycle stores, and to provide external amenity space for occupants of the
    flats. There would be no on-site vehicular parking, just parking for cycles. Access
    for pedestrians, cyclists and for waste disposal, would be along the south-western
    gable of Block B via a path of around 2 metres width.
16. To accommodate the third-floor within the roof space, the eaves level of Block A
    would be at a higher level than that at No 37. The suggested materials and use of
    two-storey bay windows would at first appear acceptable. However, to cater for the
    six flats, the floor-to-floor heights of Block A would be significantly less than those
    in No 37, resulting in a mismatch in window alignments between adjacent
    properties. Further, to minimise the overall height of Block A resulting from its
    three-storey nature, the roof configuration, both to its main roof and that of the rear
    offshoot, have been proposed in a double gable with an internal valley. This is at
    odds to the general pattern of roofs on other properties within the area and the CA.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005194


17. I find the relationship of Block A with the property at No 1 would be extremely
    incongruous in the Denmark Road street scene; the eaves of Block A would tower
    above the eaves of No 1. This relationship would be further visible in views from
    Cranes Mews, where the three-storey rear offshoot form of Block A would dominate
    the rear of No 1, which would be exacerbated by the fall in ground levels between
    properties. The mass and proximity of the rear offshoot of Block A would also be
    very dominant in views from No 2, which would only be separated from it by around
    8 metres, and would be a full storey lower in height.
18. The pattern of double gable and flat valleys has also been proposed in Block B to
    the rear of the site. Whilst its relationship to the property at No 2 would be less
    incongruous, the very close relationship between Block A and Block B would be
    evident, as would the somewhat forced fenestration positioning proposed in an
    attempt to mitigate overlooking and privacy issues, which would be at odds with the
    character of development in the area. Whilst the existing building has impacts on
    views from Cranes Mews, I find the proposal would not represent an improvement,
    particularly in the height and mass presented in views from this vantage point.
19. Accordingly, I find that the indicative proposals are illustrative of a cramped form of
    overdevelopment, which would be detrimental to the character and appearance of
    the surrounding area. It would therefore harmfully fail to preserve or better reveal
    the significance of the setting of the designated heritage asset of the adjacent
    Heckford Park Conservation Area. For the purposes of the Framework, I would
    assess this harm as being at the lower end of the less than substantial harm range.
20. Where harm to designated heritage assets has been found to be less than
    substantial, paragraph 215 of the Framework requires that this harm is weighed
    against the public benefits of the proposal. I will weigh this harm to the CA against
    the public benefits of the proposal later in my planning balance.
21. For the above reasons, I conclude the proposal would conflict with Policies PP27
    and PP28 of the Local Plan and with Chapter 16 of the Framework. These require,
    among other things, development to reflect or enhance local patterns of
    development and neighbouring buildings in layout, built site coverage, scale, height
    and visual impact, and to conserve the historic environment.
Living conditions
22. The illustrative plans submitted with the application provide floor plans with layouts
    for individual apartments. Examining these plans, it is evident that many of the flats
    would only just be compliant with the minimum space standards laid down in the
    Technical Housing Standards - Nationally Described Space Standard (the NDSS),
    the requirement for a 1-bedroom 2-person flat being 50 Sq.m. and for a 1-bedroom
    1-person flat being 37 Sq.m. (subject to it having a shower room not bathroom).
    The proposed flats could, therefore, not be described as spacious, but would just
    meet the required minima.
23. The proposals illustrate a possible design to provide 9 flats on the site. This is
    significantly less than the 20 homes that would be suggested by the targeted
    density of development of Policy PP2 of the Local Plan, for the area of site and its
    sustainable location. However, the site is within an area where it is very closely
    surrounded by other residential properties which are mostly two-storey dwellings,
    with development right up to the site’s boundary on three sides. This places severe
    restriction on what may be acceptable in terms of the density of development, due

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005194


     to the potential harms to the living conditions of occupiers of surrounding
     properties. This is recognised in Policy PP2 by the density needing to be examined
     on a case-by-case basis.
24. The indicative proposals demonstrate significant manipulation of the design to try
    and provide adequate privacy between occupiers of Block A and Block B. This has
    resulted in patterns of fenestration, such as high-level slot windows, larger areas of
    blank walls with roof windows introduced instead of within walls, to prevent direct
    overlooking between the two blocks. This would result in occupiers of the appeal
    flats having poor access to natural light and very poor outlook in many cases,
    resulting in poor living conditions.
25. However, I find the proposals have failed to consider their potential impact on the
    occupiers of surrounding properties. The bedroom windows to the first floor of the
    Block A flats would be little more than 8 metres from the first-floor windows of the
    property at No 2. The offset angle on plan would be less than 45 degrees, such that
    there would be severe overlooking, harmfully affecting the privacy of both the
    existing occupiers of No 2 and those of the appeal properties.
26. The Council have raised issue with the lack of external amenity space for future
    occupiers of the proposal. Having examined the evidence before me and having
    reviewed the location of the appeal site and its proximity to surrounding amenity
    facilities, I find that it would not be uncommon for occupiers of flats within a site
    within close proximity to the urban centre of a town such as Poole, to have more
    limited private amenity space. Indeed, the density of homes proposed in Policy PP2
    for sites, like the appeal site, located within sustainable transport corridors, district
    & local centres, would leave little opportunity for any significant amounts of private
    external amenity space for occupants of flat developments, other than small
    balconies, and that would be on a case-by-case basis.
27. Occupants of the appeal site would have some access to limited external amenity
    space, but they would also have access to significant external amenity space within
    a short walking distance to communal park, sports and shore front recreational
    sites, together with sustainable access to the recreational facilities of the town
    centre. This would be compensatory for the more limited private amenity space on
    the site.
28. I therefore find that the indicative plans submitted with the proposal, illustrate that
    the level of development proposed, would result in cramped, over-development of
    the site. It would not be capable of providing acceptable living conditions for
    occupiers of the proposed flats, through inadequate outlook, light and privacy. I find
    it would also harmfully affect the privacy of occupants of surrounding properties,
    notably No 2 Cranes Mews, through overlooking, which would also be experienced
    reciprocally by occupants of the appeal flats.
29. For the above reasons, I conclude the proposal would conflict with Policies PP27
    and PP28 of the Local Plan and with paragraph 135 of the Framework. These
    require, among other things, development to reflect or enhance local patterns of
    development and neighbouring buildings in layout, built site coverage, scale and
    height and to not result in harmful impact upon amenity for both local residents and
    future occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005194


Effect on Designated Habitats Sites
30. The appeal site lies within the vicinity (beyond 400m but within 5km) of the Dorset
    Heathlands SPA (Special Protection Area), Dorset Heathlands Ramsar Site and the
    Dorset Heaths SAC (Special Area of Conservation) These Habitat Sites are all
    recognised for their national and international importance for nature conservation.
    They host protected priority habitats and species including Hen-harrier, Merlin,
    European nightjar, Woodlark and Dartford warbler, as well as other typical species
    of forest and heath areas.
31. The appeal site also lies within the vicinity of the Poole Harbour SPA, SSSI and
    Ramsar Site’s. These Habitat Sites are recognised for their national and
    international importance for nature conservation. They host protected priority
    habitats and species including Little egret, Eurasian spoonbill, Common shelduck,
    Pied avocet, Black-tailed godwit, Mediterranean gull, Sandwich tern and Common
    tern, as well as other typical species of tidal mudflats and saltmarshes, reedbeds,
    freshwater marshes and wet grasslands.
32. Evidence shows that these protected Habitat Sites are under significant pressure
    from an increasing number of people living nearby. As the population grows,
    urbanisation and increased visitor number effects from human pressures and
    damage caused by domestic pets have the potential to cause ongoing adverse
    effects on the protected habitats and species.
33. The Dorset Heathlands Planning Framework 2020-2025 – Supplementary Planning
    Document (SPD), sets out a strategy for the avoidance and mitigation of impacts of
    new residential development upon the Dorset Heathlands, through financial
    contributions from developers for mitigation schemes within the area. The SPD
    defines the mitigation process and contribution requirements for different forms of
    development.
34. Similarly, the Poole Harbour Recreation 2019-2024 – Supplementary Planning
    Document (SPD), sets out a strategy for the avoidance and mitigation of impacts of
    new residential development upon Poole Harbour, including tourism development,
    through financial contributions from developers for mitigation schemes within the
    area. The SPD defines the mitigation process and contribution requirements for
    different forms of development.
35. The appeal proposal would create 9 additional residential units, which would,
    without mitigation and in combination with other development proposed in the area,
    be likely to have a significant effect on the nearby European Habitat sites. It would
    therefore be subject to the requirements of the SPD’s for financial contributions
    towards mitigation.
36. These contributions for mitigation would normally be secured through a signed
    s106 agreement with the Council or Unilateral Undertaking (UU) from the appellant.
    The appellant submitted a signed and dated UU with their final comments.
    However, the submitted UU utilised the Council’s standard Fast Track UU form,
    intended for use only during the planning application process. The submitted UU
    specifically notes that it is related to a planning application, which it references.
    Paragraph 4 of the UU notes, at sub-paragraph (a), that the deed shall be
    determined and have no further effect if the Planning Permission is refused. The
    UU therefore carries no legal weight as it is now determined by refusal of the
    planning permission.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6005194


37. In the absence of a valid signed s106 agreement with the Council or Unilateral
    Undertaking (UU) from the appellant, which would secure mitigation, a Likely
    Significant Effect (LSE) of the appeal development on the European Habitat Sites
    cannot be ruled out.
38. For the above reasons, I conclude the development would be contrary to Policies
    PP32 and PP39 of the Local Plan, which require, among other things, that
    development protects all types of nature conservation, habitats and internationally
    designated sites, and protects the Dorset Heathlands and Poole Harbour through
    the provision of mitigation measures. The development would also be contrary to
    the policies within Chapter 15 of the Framework, which require, among other
    things, that development protects and enhances biodiversity.
Other Matters
39. I have had regard to all evidence before me, and the comments made by a
    significant number of residents of the surrounding area. Whilst I acknowledge the
    concerns of residents in relation to the lack of parking provision with the proposal, I
    am mindful of local and national policy, which seeks to encourage the use of
    sustainable means of transport. Accordingly, Policies PP34 and PP35 of the Local
    Plan, and the Council’s Parking Standards - Supplementary Planning Document
    (the SPD), which identifies that for sites defined within Zone A of the Parking SPD,
    they are not required to provide parking, subject to providing adequate cycle
    storage and pedestrian access. As the proposal would meet these requirements, I
    do not find it would be contrary to Policies PP34 and PP35 of the Local Plan.
Planning Balance
40. The Council cannot demonstrate a 5-year Housing Land Supply (5YHLS) as
    required by the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The Council
    have stated that as of 1 April 2024, they had a housing land supply figure of
    2.1years, allowing for a 20% buffer, which is a serious deficit.
41. In accordance with the Framework, the less than substantial harm to the
    designated heritage asset (the CA) must be weighed against the public benefits of
    the proposal. It would provide 9 new dwellings, which in the context of the Council’s
    serious 5YHLS deficit, would make a valuable but moderate contribution. There
    would be similar moderate public benefits from the contribution to the local
    economy during construction, and to the support for local services from future
    occupiers. The proposal would be in a sustainable transport location, and the likely
    speed of build-out of such a smaller site is acknowledged in the Framework.
42. Cumulatively, the public benefits of the proposal are moderate. They are therefore
    insufficient to provide the clear and convincing justification to override the less than
    substantial harm to the CA, which the Framework requires me to assign great
    weight to its conservation.
43. Given the shortfall in housing land supply there is no dispute that, owing to footnote
    8, paragraph 11(d) of the Framework is engaged. Paragraph 11(d)(i) indicates that
    permission should be granted unless the application of policies in this Framework
    that protect areas or assets of particular importance provides a strong reason for
    refusing the development proposed. Footnote 7 of the Framework lists protected
    Habitats sites and designated heritage assets as such assets of importance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005194


44. I have concluded that the proposal would result in likely significant harmful effect to
    a protected European Habitat site, which on its own, provides a strong reason for
    refusing the development. Paragraph 195 of the Framework confirms that the
    presumption in favour of sustainable development does not apply in these
    circumstances. Having undertaken the necessary heritage balance, I have also
    found the proposal would cause unjustified harm to the significance of the CA, as a
    result of development within its setting. Hence the proposal would conflict with
    national policy to protect designated heritage assets. This provides a further strong
    reason for refusal of the proposal. Consequently, irrespective of the level of the
    Council’s 5-YHLS shortfall, paragraph 11(d)(ii) is not engaged, and the proposal
    does not benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable development in this
    instance.
45. In considering the broader planning balance, I have also found that the proposal
    would create undue harm to the character and appearance of the area, and, as a
    result of over-development of the site, it would not provide adequate living
    conditions for future occupiers in terms of outlook, light and privacy, and that there
    would be harm to the privacy of occupiers of neighbouring properties and future
    occupiers of the appeal development. I have therefore, found it would conflict with
    the development plan policies in these regards, and with the development plan
    when considered as a whole. These conflicts attract full weight in the planning
    balance. They are also consistent with the Framework.
Conclusion
46. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal proposal would be
    contrary to the development plan, read as a whole, and that the material
    considerations I outline above, including policies in the Framework, would not
    outweigh that conflict. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



David Kay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
