Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 June 2026
by N Armstrong BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005682
Unit 9 Latimer Industrial Estate, 343-453 Latimer Road, Kensington and Chelsea,
London W10 6RQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
    planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by 7LR Limited against Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•   The application Ref is PP/25/06763.
•   The development proposed is demolition of existing building and redevelopment for a five storey
    building comprising flexible Class E floorspace and seven residential units with associated
    landscaping, cycle parking and other works incidental to the application proposal.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of existing
   building and redevelopment for a five storey building comprising flexible Class E
   floorspace and seven residential units with associated landscaping, cycle parking
   and other works incidental to the application proposal at Unit 9 Latimer Industrial
   Estate, 343-453 Latimer Road, Kensington and Chelsea, London W10 6RQ, in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref PP/25/06763, subject to the
   conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The appeal form refers to a different planning application reference number to that
   used in the banner heading above. However, from the evidence before me, I am
   satisfied that the reference in the banner heading is that used by the Council for the
   purposes of consultation and publicity on the application.
3. The appellant submitted a certified copy of a completed Unilateral Undertaking
   (UU) dated 18 February 2026 with the appeal. A further completed version of a UU
   dated 6 June 2026 was then submitted during the course of the appeal following
   discussion with the Council, followed by another version dated the same with all
   plans initialled. The Council has had the opportunity to comment on the latest
   amended version of the UU, and I will consider this further in my reasoning below.
4. The Council had not advertised the planning application by press notice in
   accordance with the relevant legislation. The Council has subsequently published a
   press notice advertising this as a major application and affecting the setting of a
   Conservation Area. The Council has stated that no further representations were
   received following this.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005682


Background and Main Issues
5. The appeal follows the Council’s failure to determine the application within the
   prescribed period. However, the Council has since confirmed that had it been in a
   position to determine the application, it would have resolved to grant planning
   permission, subject to the completion of a legal agreement or undertaking, and
   conditions set out in a Committee Report submitted in response to the appeal.
6. Notwithstanding the Council’s position, there are objections to the proposed
   development from interested parties that raise concerns on a range of matters,
   which I have had regard to in my assessment.
7. The Council has previously refused planning permission for a similar form of
   development to that in the scheme before me on the appeal site. This was refused
   on the grounds of harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers due to the
   number and size of balconies to the front elevation that would lead to overlooking
   and noise disturbance. A subsequent appeal1 was dismissed due to the absence of
   a legal agreement or other suitable mechanism to appropriately mitigate the effects
   of that development. The Council states that there have been no material changes
   in policy or circumstances since the appeal decision, and it has given significant
   weight to that decision in the assessment of the proposed development.
8. From the information before me, the proposed development is effectively the same
   as the previous scheme, other than minor amendments to the internal layout and a
   reduction in the size of a fourth floor balcony to the front elevation. Whilst I have
   undertaken my own assessment of the proposed development, due to the
   similarities of the two applications, the previous appeal decision is a significant
   material consideration in this instance.
9. Having regard to the background set out above and the representations received, I
   consider that the main issues are:
             •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                  the area, including on the significance of the nearby Oxford Gardens –
                  St Quintin Conservation Area (the CA), a designated heritage asset,
                  through development within its setting;
             •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
                  occupants of neighbouring properties, with particular regard to privacy,
                  outlook, daylight, sunlight, noise and disturbance; and
             •    whether the proposed development would make an appropriate contribution
                  toward highway improvements, carbon off-setting, air quality, tree planting,
                  car-free housing, employment and skills, local procurement strategy,
                  monitoring of energy demand and public art.
Reasons
Character and appearance
10. The appeal site comprises an existing light industrial unit of limited architectural
    merit, located to the western side of Latimer Road, within a group of similar one
    and a half storey light industrial and warehouse units (Units 1–14 Latimer Road)

1
    Appeal Decision ref: APP/K5600/W/25/3367853, dated 29 October 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6005682


     within the Freston/Latimer Road Employment Zone. The surrounding area
     comprises mixed use development, with predominantly commercial uses to the
     western side of Latimer Road close to the appeal site, and predominantly two and
     three-storey terraced residential properties to the eastern side of the road.
     Significantly taller buildings at Imperial College are located to the south-west of the
     site within the adjoining borough, beyond the intervening and raised railway line,
     embankments and overhead lines to the rear of the appeal site.
11. Policy SA9 of the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea New Local Plan
    Review July 2024 (the KCLP) allocates the site at Units 1-14 Latimer Road for
    mixed use development to provide homes on the upper floors and retention of
    existing Class E use ground floor floorspace. Amongst other things, the policy aims
    to provide an active street frontage to Latimer Road, achieve high quality design
    that reflects the mixed character of the area and respects the Employment Zone
    identity, and preserve the significance of designated heritage assets.
12. Objective 8 of the St Quintin and Woodlands Neighbourhood Plan 2015-2030 (July
    2018) (the NP) aims to regenerate Latimer Road as a successful mixed use street,
    combining commercial and housing use, keeping buildings occupied and in active
    use, and restoring its original street form. The NP makes provision for the potential
    redevelopment of Units 1-14, including the delivery of housing development, noting
    the street can make a significant contribution to the need for additional housing.
    Policy LR1 of the NP allows the residential use of upper floors in redeveloped
    buildings at Units 1-14, provided that the ground floor remains in commercial use.
13. The appeal site and other adjacent properties to the western side of Latimer Road
    in the immediate vicinity are situated outside of the CA, but adjacent to its
    boundary. The CA is predominantly residential in character, and the area as a
    whole displays the evolution of housing from the mid-Victorian period to the present
    day. From the information before me and my observations on site, the significance
    of the CA as a whole, insofar as it is relevant to this appeal is derived from its
    architectural and historic interest.
14. In order to restore the original urban form of the street, Policy LR5 of the NP allows
    increased building heights on the western side of Latimer Road, subject to,
    amongst other things, consideration of heights of nearby buildings which range
    from four storey at the southern end to two storey at the northern end, and taking
    account of building heights in the nearby London Borough of Hammersmith and
    Fulham. The reasoned justification for the policy refers to the need for a limited
    increase in building heights on the western side to incentivise redevelopment of
    existing buildings and to encourage additional housing into the street.
15. One action of the NP is to develop a set of Design Guidelines or a Development
    Code, in conjunction with the Council, to provide a framework for the incremental
    redevelopment of Units 1-14. The Council’s Units 1-14 Latimer Road Design Code
    SPD (the Design Code SPD) subsequently provides a set of design guidelines that
    aims to provide practical, robust and informed guidance to shape the future
    development of these units. It is therefore a material consideration relevant to the
    appeal.
16. The proposed development would introduce a much larger building onto the site
    than the existing in terms of its overall scale, massing and height, comprising a five-
    storey building with the fifth storey set back from Latimer Road and set in to parts of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005682


        its sides. This would be in line with the building heights set out in the Design Code
        SPD, subject to effects on neighbouring properties, which I consider further below.
        In addition, the third and fourth storeys would be set back from the two-storey
        commercial floors of the building, which aims to reduce its bulk and massing in
        views along Latimer Road.
17. The buildings to the eastern side of Latimer Road directly opposite the appeal site
    and either side of Latimer Place are three-storey, with some variation in their
    overall height and roof forms. They form part of a group of the tallest buildings on
    Latimer Road in comparison to other two-storey properties along the road. In this
    context, and notwithstanding the two-storey properties situated to the northern side
    of Units 1-14, the proposed development would not appear excessive in scale or
    out of character to any significant or unacceptable degree with the nearby
    buildings, and it therefore responds to its immediate setting.
18. The design approach for the proposed development is well articulated within the
    submitted Design and Access statement (DAS). Whilst it is a distinctive and
    contemporary form of development, the DAS demonstrates that it has regard to the
    site, its surroundings, local historic context and the requirements of the Design
    Code SPD. The built form would include contrasting horizontal components that
    distinguish the articulation between the tripartite zones of the front elevation. As
    well as the set back fifth storey, sections of the front elevation would incorporate
    primary and secondary frontages and chamfered edges to break up the overall
    massing. The use of brick would be in keeping with the prevailing material of the
    area, and the contrasting tones would add visual interest to the new building,
    alongside features such as bay windows and recessed balconies. Specific details
    of the brick could also be secured by condition to ensure this is suitable for its
    location. Having regard to its layout, scale, design and relationship with its
    surroundings, the proposed development would enhance the current appearance of
    the site, positively contribute to this part of the townscape and be sympathetic to
    local character.
19. Due to its street frontage onto Latimer Road and the degree of intervisibility with
    other surrounding development, the appeal site is within the setting of the CA.
    Given their layout and more modern appearance, the appeal site and the group of
    buildings at Units 1-14 do not make a positive contribution to the setting of the CA.
    When considered alongside the more modern buildings to the western side of
    Latimer Road, the proposed development would not affect the ability to appreciate
    the significance of the CA when considered as a whole. Although there would be an
    increase in the scale of development on the site, the proposed development would
    not result in unacceptable adverse impacts on important views out of the CA.
    Having regard to the contribution the site makes to the setting of the CA, the
    proposed development would not result in harm to the significance of the CA as a
    whole. It would therefore preserve the setting of the CA.
20. I have not been provided with full details of the development approved at the
    adjacent Unit 10 site2, granted planning permission in July 2024. However, the
    information before me indicates this is a five-storey development, therefore such
    scale, form and massing has been found to be acceptable in a very similar site
    context to the appeal site and surrounding buildings in the immediate vicinity.


2
    Planning application ref: PP/23/00778


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
Appeal Decision 6005682


21. Given the similarities between the proposed development and the scheme
    previously dismissed at appeal, the findings of that decision are a material
    consideration that I give significant weight to in my assessment. In this regard, the
    Council has concluded on both applications that the proposed development would
    positively contribute to the local townscape and preserve the setting of the CA.
    Furthermore, the previous Inspector found no reason to disagree with the Council’s
    assessment on character and appearance, also concluding that the proposed
    development would preserve the setting of the CA. For the reasons set out above, I
    have no reason to reach a different conclusion on these matters.
22. I conclude that the proposed development would not have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the area and it would preserve the setting of the CA. It
    would therefore accord with Policies SA9, CD1, CD2, CD4, CD10, CD12 and CD15
    of the KCLP, Policies LR1, LR5 and E2 of the NP and Policies D1, D3, D4, D5 and
    HC1 of The London Plan (March 2021) (the LP). The aims of Policies LR1 and LR5
    of the NP are referenced above. Taken together, the other policies aim for
    development to respect existing context, character and appearance, take
    opportunities to contribute positively and respond to local townscape, meet high
    standards of design, have regard to the setting of conservation areas, protect and
    enhance views and make the best use of land by following a design-led approach.
23. As they relate to small-scale alterations and additions and roof
    alterations/additional storeys to existing buildings, I do not find Policies CD10 and
    CD12 of the KCLP to be determinative to this main issue.
Living conditions
24. As established above, the properties directly opposite to and closest to the site are
    three-storey, and therefore taller than others along Latimer Road. These buildings
    include residential properties and The Latimer public house to the corner with
    Latimer Place, which features an outdoor seating area that was covered by an
    awning to its frontage on Latimer Road during my visit. Two-storey residential
    properties are located on Eynham Road beyond the railway line to the rear
    boundary of the appeal site.
25. Amongst other things, Policy CD9 of the KCLP requires development to ensure
    good living conditions for occupants of new, existing and neighbouring buildings.
    The policy seeks to ensure good standards of daylight and sunlight are achieved in
    existing properties affected by development, reasonable visual privacy for
    occupants of new development and existing properties, and that there is no harmful
    increase in the sense of enclosure to existing buildings and spaces, neighbouring
    gardens, balconies and terraces.
26. Policy LR5 of the NP aims to protect residents on the eastern side of Latimer Road
    and on Eynham Road from excessive increases in building heights, whilst
    achieving sufficient financial viability for redevelopment of Units 1-14. The policy
    allows increased building heights for these units, subject to meeting the Council’s
    and national requirements on standards of daylight, sunlight, and visual privacy for
    occupants of new development and for occupants of existing properties affected by
    development, and no harmful increase in the sense of enclosure to existing
    buildings and spaces and neighbouring gardens.
27. With regard to privacy, the supporting text to KCLP Policy CD9 states that a
    distance of about 18 metres between opposite habitable rooms reduces inter-

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6005682


        visibility to a degree acceptable to most people, but also notes there are instances
        in the historic fabric of the borough of distances less than this. The Design Code
        SPD states that private amenity space should be provided for each residential unit
        and ideally face the rear (west facing) elevation. However, where it is not possible
        to accommodate external amenity space for units facing Latimer Road, balconies
        will be acceptable on secondary elevations fronting the road where the distance
        between the buildings on the opposite side is increased.
28. The proposed five storey building would have a large number of windows to all
    levels on the front and rear elevations, with balconies/terraces to the front and rear
    elevations at the second, third and fourth floors. The submitted plans show that the
    front elevation of the proposed development would be beyond the 18 metres
    minimum distance away from other properties referred to in the KCLP. The
    balconies at second and third floor levels would be approximately 23 metres from
    the buildings opposite and approximately 25 metres away in the case of the fourth
    floor balcony. These balconies would also be within the secondary frontages of the
    proposed development, in accordance with the Design Code SPD.
29. Accordingly, the proposed arrangement would be acceptable and would not result
    in unacceptable overlooking of properties on Latimer Road. The majority of the
    proposed development’s front elevation would also face directly towards the break
    in the terraced properties on Latimer Road formed by Latimer Place, rather than
    towards the windows and external amenity spaces of the properties. Alongside the
    separation distance, this would further reduce the potential for any harmful loss of
    privacy arising from the proposed development.
30. Residential properties on Eynham Road would be situated approximately 50 metres
    from the rear of the proposed development. Consequently, whilst there may be
    longer-range views of the development from those properties, the separation
    distance and the intervening railway infrastructure would adequately mitigate any
    effects arising from the proposed development in terms of privacy. The location of
    balconies to the rear elevation of the development would also be in line with the
    Design Code SPD.
31. The same Daylight and Sunlight Report (DSR) submitted in support of the previous
    planning application for the site has been submitted with the appeal scheme
    application given the five-storey height of the proposed development. The DSR has
    assessed the effect of the proposed development on neighbouring buildings
    (Nos 266-282 Latimer Road) having regard to the relevant Building Research
    Establishment3 (BRE) guidelines.
32. The DSR also assessed the cumulative effect of the proposed development
    alongside neighbouring development for the similar scale five-storey building
    granted planning permission on the adjacent site at Unit 10. Due to the separation
    distance and relationship with properties on Eynham Road the DSR has not
    assessed these properties, stating the impact to these will be minimal and fully
    compliant with the BRE guidelines. From the information before me, I have no
    reason to take a different view.
33. The DSR concludes that the daylight and sunlight impact of the proposed
    development on the properties on Latimer Road would be minimal and compliant
    with the BRE guidelines. When considering the effect alongside the approved
3
    Site Layout Planning for Daylight and Sunlight – a guide to good practice (2022)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    6
Appeal Decision 6005682


     development at Unit 10, the DSR acknowledges that the maximum proportional
     Vertical Sky Component (VSC) reduction to windows would comply with the BRE
     guidelines, whilst No-Sky Line (NSL) reductions are mostly negligible.
34. The DSR notes that a first floor bedroom at 276 Latimer Road (No 276) will
    experience a proportional NSL reduction of 36%, whilst the BRE guidelines suggest
    any reduction should not be more than 20%. The BRE guidelines refer to applying
    the NSL in houses for living rooms, dining rooms and kitchens, and states that
    whilst bedrooms should be analysed, they are less important. The DSR
    acknowledges the loss of NSL but refers to the depth of this room and that the
    reduction will occur to the rear of it. Whilst the DSR relies on some assumptions for
    the internal configuration of rooms, it also states that the two windows serving this
    room will experience very small VSC reductions of less than 10% and retain VSC
    values of 28%, therefore exceeding, albeit slightly, the BRE default targets. Having
    regard to the BRE guidelines, the property will therefore retain acceptable daylight
    levels in this instance.
35. The DSR states that the ground and first floor of The Latimer (located at
    274 Latimer Road) are in commercial use as a bar and restaurant, therefore the
    DSR did not consider potential effects on those windows. Effects on daylight and
    sunlight to the residential use at the second floor level were considered to be
    minimal and compliant with the BRE guidelines. Representations submitted in
    response to the planning application before me suggest that the first floor has been
    developed into residential accommodation and therefore the DSR fails to assess
    the effects of the proposed development on this part of the property. A separate
    representation asks the Council to investigate the planning status of the first floor of
    No 274 having regard to the stated residential use of that floor and whether there
    has been a breach of planning control. The Council’s Committee Report notes this,
    but states that the application does not relate to the address at No 274 and does
    not make any further comment.
36. The first floor windows at No 274 are slightly higher on the front elevation in
    comparison to the first floor windows at No 276, whilst the first floor also has
    windows facing onto Latimer Place in its side elevation given the corner position.
    From the information before me, the status, use and layout of the first floor of No
    274 are not clear. However, whilst these windows have not been specifically
    referenced in the DSR, the layout of the proposed development in relation to
    existing buildings would be similar to the relationship between the approved
    development at Unit 10, which would have a wider frontage in comparison to the
    proposed development, and the buildings opposite. I acknowledge that there may
    be some potential for adverse effects on the daylight and sunlight received by first
    floor windows in the front elevation of No 274. However, having regard to the
    proposed layout, separation distances and set back upper floors of the proposed
    development, and the findings of the DSR in relation to nearby windows, in my
    judgement, and based on the evidence before me, even if the first floor is in
    residential use, the proposed development would not likely result in significant
    unacceptable effects from loss of daylight or sunlight to these windows of No 274.
37. Concerns have also been raised regarding the effect of the proposed development
    on external amenity spaces, which the BRE guidelines state can include gardens
    and roof terraces. In this context there are modest areas of gardens and amenity
    space to the frontages of properties between Nos 266-282 Latimer Road, some of
    which are close to existing street trees and other landscaping, which may have

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6005682


     some impacts on light to those spaces to a varying degree during the year. The
     DSR states that overshadowing of neighbouring amenity areas will be negligible
     and compliant with the BRE guidelines.
38. Interested parties refer to potential effects on a roof terrace to the three-storey
    property at No 276, and from what I was able to observe from street level, this
    appears to be situated behind the existing roof parapet. The submissions indicate
    the roof terrace functions as a vital, safe, private and light-filled environment relied
    upon by a disabled family member, and that the proposed development would
    threaten the useability and therapeutic value of this space.
39. No 276 is slightly off set from the appeal site rather than directly opposite. On this
    basis, and noting the separation between the set back upper storeys of the
    proposed development and the properties opposite, the proposed development
    would not result in a harmful loss of privacy for users of the terrace. Similarly, given
    the elevated height of the terrace at roof level and its position in relation to the set
    backs of the proposed development, in my judgement and based on the evidence
    before me, the proposed development would not likely result in a harmful or
    unacceptable loss of daylight or sunlight to this area.
40. Despite the increased scale of the proposed development on the site, its layout, set
    back from Latimer Road, separation from properties on the opposite side of the
    street and relationship with the open aspect formed by Latimer Place, would
    adequately mitigate any increased sense of enclosure in this area and potential
    effects on outlook. Buildings at Imperial College range from three-storey in height
    close to one end of Eynham Road to others much taller beyond these. However,
    the separation distance from the appeal site would also mitigate any increased
    sense of enclosure of the proposed development for occupants of properties in that
    street. Consequently, the proposed development would not appear as an excessive
    or overbearing building that would result in a harmful increase in the sense of
    enclosure for neighbouring properties, nor a materially harmful effect in terms of the
    outlook from surrounding properties on Latimer Road and Eynham Road.
41. The proposed balconies would be modest in size, which would limit the extent and
    nature of their use by future occupiers and visitors. The appeal site is also within a
    mixed use area, including The Latimer and its external seating area, which will
    contribute to some activity in this location, along with the railway line to the rear.
    Consequently, I do not find that the position and use of the balconies would result
    in unacceptable harm to occupiers of nearby properties with regard to noise and
    disturbance.
42. In addition, there is no compelling evidence before me that the proposed
    development would exacerbate any existing effects, or result in unacceptable
    effects, of reverberant noise from railway activity for occupants of existing
    properties in the area. There is also nothing before me to indicate that the proposed
    development would result in other potential harmful effects of pollution to
    neighbouring residents, including from light.
43. Having regard to its layout, scale and design, the proposed development takes
    account of the prevailing characteristics of the area, including the requirements of
    NP Policy LR5 and the Design Code SPD in terms of its relationship with
    surrounding development on Latimer Road and Eynham Road. There would be a
    notable change in the form of development on the site given the scale of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6005682


     proposed development. However, for the reasons set out above, I do not find that
     the proposed development would result in unacceptable effects for neighbouring
     residents in this urban context.
44. I am also mindful that the conclusions of the DSR and other effects on living
    conditions of neighbouring residents were found to be acceptable by the Inspector
    in the previous appeal decision for development of the site. As that is not materially
    different to the scheme before me, and recognising the importance of consistency
    in decision making, there is nothing substantive before me to reach a different view.
45. Consequently, I conclude that the proposed development would not result in
    unacceptable harm to the living conditions of occupants of neighbouring properties,
    with particular regard to privacy, outlook, daylight, sunlight, noise and disturbance.
    It would therefore accord with Policy CD9 of the KCLP and Policy LR5 of the NP,
    the aims of which are set out above. Furthermore, it would accord with Policies D6
    and D14 of the LP and Policies GB7, GB8 and GB10 of the KCLP. Taken together,
    these policies aim to avoid unacceptable impact on neighbouring properties.
Planning obligations
46. Policy IP1 of the LP states that where development generates a need either
    because of its individual or cumulative impact, planning obligations and
    contributions will be sought to secure the necessary infrastructure to make
    development acceptable. The Council’s Planning Contributions: Supplementary
    Planning Document (SPD) (September 2019) (the Planning Contributions SPD)
    also sets out the type of obligations and contributions that may be required.
47. As it has effectively been superseded by the appellant’s most recently submitted
    version of the UU dated 6 June 2026, I attach no weight to the UU dated 18
    February 2026 in determining this appeal. The most recent version of the UU would
    secure the necessary planning obligations highlighted by the Council within the
    Committee Report. These include financial contributions toward highway
    improvements, carbon off-setting, air quality and tree planting. In addition, it would
    secure schemes for car-free housing, employment and skills, local procurement
    strategy, monitoring of energy demand and public art. These are not fundamentally
    different to the obligations set out within the initial version of the UU submitted with
    the appeal, and the most recent UU has been agreed with the Council.
48. From the information before me, the planning obligations are necessary to make
    the development acceptable in planning terms, directly related to the development;
    and fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development. I am
    satisfied that the planning obligations would meet the requirements of the National
    Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the CIL Regulations.
49. Having regard to the submission of the completed UU, the proposed development
    would make an appropriate contribution toward highway improvements, carbon off-
    setting, air quality, tree planting, car-free housing, employment and skills, local
    procurement strategy, monitoring of energy demand and public art. It would
    therefore accord with Policy IP1 of the LP, the aims of which are set out above, as
    well as the Planning Contributions SPD.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6005682


Other Matters
50. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
    accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. My assessment is made having regard to relevant policies forming the
    development plan, including the NP, and despite the appellant’s description of the
    NP as a supplementary planning document. As set out in the Framework,
    supplementary planning documents add further detail to the policies in the
    development plan and can be used to provide further guidance for development on
    specific sites. Accordingly, whilst it is not part of the development plan, I have had
    regard to the Design Code SPD as a material consideration in this instance.
51. From the information before me, including the proposed plans submitted for the
    previous application at the site, the proposed development would result in a minor
    change from that scheme, as described above. The appellant has provided a
    statement of conformity highlighting that all supporting documents submitted with
    the resubmitted planning application have been reviewed and verified against the
    updated drawings. It is stated that each report continues to be fully relevant and in
    compliance with the most recent applicable planning policy and guidance, and I
    have no reason to disagree with that approach.
52. Whilst the approved development at Unit 10 did not appear to have been
    implemented at the time of my visit, there is no substantive evidence before me to
    indicate that it would not be implemented within the remaining period of the
    permission.
53. I also acknowledge the form of development that has been permitted on the site of
    Unit 1 Latimer Road, which has been highlighted as a good example of scale and
    design for the area. My assessment has been made on the basis of the submitted
    details and the proposed development’s site-specific context, which I consider to
    be acceptable for the reasons set out. Any future applications for proposed
    development elsewhere at Units 1–14 would also be assessed on their own merits
    having regard to the development plan and material considerations.
54. I acknowledge the attempts to secure a viable future for The Latimer following a
    period of closure, and this contributes to the mixed character of the area. Despite
    the increase in the scale of development on the site, there is no compelling
    evidence before me to demonstrate that the proposed development would result in
    adverse effects on the outdoor seating area or internally within the public house,
    and that would harm the financial viability of this business. The introduction of a
    mixed use commercial and residential development at the appeal site would bring
    additional residents and workers into the area, which would further contribute to its
    mixed character, and potentially benefit the ongoing use of the public house.
55. The Council does not raise any concerns that the proposed development would
    not meet relevant internal or external space standards or provide adequate living
    conditions for future occupiers. The Council also raises no objection on other
    matters, including the proposed land use, housing mix, transportation and
    highways, trees, flood risk and drainage, air quality, ecology, biodiversity, energy
    and sustainability, land contamination or effects on railway infrastructure. Based
    on the information available to me, there is no substantive evidence that harm
    would arise with respect to these matters. Furthermore, I am satisfied that, where



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6005682


       necessary, any additional mitigation measures required could be satisfactorily
       secured by planning conditions or obligations.
56. In the context of paragraph 125 of the Framework, substantial weight should be
    given to the value of using suitable brownfield land within settlements for homes
    and other identified needs, which should be approved unless substantial harm
    would be caused. For the reasons set out above, I do not find that the proposed
    development would result in substantial harm. The proposed development would
    also be in accordance with the aims of the Framework to make efficient use of
    land. It would also add to the supply of housing where evidence regarding the
    Housing Delivery Test indicates that the delivery of housing was substantially
    below the housing requirement over the previous three years.
57. In reaching my decision I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty
    (PSED) under the Equality Act 2010. Disability is a protected characteristic to
    which the PSED applies, and these rights are engaged in reaching my decision.
    However, they are qualified rights, and interference may be justified where in the
    public interest. The concept of proportionality is key. Notwithstanding the
    objections received, for the reasons set out above, I have found no harm to the
    roof terrace at No 276 and so there would be no adverse effects in that respect.
    The proposed development would not affect its useability and therapeutic value by
    any occupiers of No 276 with a protected characteristic were the appeal to be
    allowed. Consequently, it is proportionate for me to allow the appeal.
58. Interested party representations suggest an intention to review the NP. Any
    subsequent review of the NP and its policies, or the Design Code SPD, would be a
    matter for the Council, and my decision is made on the evidence before me and
    the policies currently in place.
59. I note concerns raised over the Council’s handling of both planning applications for
    the appeal site, including how they were considered by the Planning Committee.
    However, this is not a matter that I can consider as part of this planning appeal
    and does not alter my findings, in which I have had regard solely to the planning
    merits of the proposed development.
Conditions
60. The Council has suggested a number of conditions which I have considered
    against the tests set out in the Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. In
    some instances, I have made minor changes to wording to improve precision and
    enforceability. Where submissions and approvals are required prior to development
    commencing, the appellant has accepted these conditions.
61. I impose a condition specifying the relevant plans to provide certainty and ensure
    compliance with these. In order to protect the living conditions of neighbouring
    residents, highway safety and potential effects on trees, conditions requiring the
    submission of a Code of Conduct, Site Construction Management Plan,
    Construction Traffic Management Plan and tree protection are necessary.
62. A condition requiring a site-specific Air Quality Dust Management Plan, to include
    risk assessment and measures for dust pollution monitoring, is necessary prior to
    the commencement of development to ensure any impact on air quality is
    minimised and managed during demolition and construction works. I have
    combined the Council’s suggested conditions into a single condition to avoid

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6005682


     duplication and given that their requirements during demolition and construction
     works could be addressed through the necessary submissions.
63. Four conditions regarding land contamination are necessary to ensure that any
    contamination is dealt with properly, in the interest of public health and safety,
    which include approval before work commences. I have imposed a condition
    requiring a piling method statement before such works are undertaken to ensure
    they do not have an unacceptable impact on underground water utility
    infrastructure. In order to avoid adverse effects on air quality, conditions requiring
    approval of the details of any generators to be used are necessary, which I
    consider would be reasonable to secure prior to any being brought into use rather
    than prior to the commencement of any development in this instance.
64. To protect the living conditions of nearby residents and future occupiers of the
    development, conditions are necessary regarding noise assessment and mitigation
    measures, including from plant, machinery and equipment serving the building, and
    also to limit the operational hours of the commercial units. As these conditions
    relate to design matters of the development, I do not consider that these details are
    required prior to the commencement of any development. A condition requiring a
    Ventilation Strategy Report is also necessary to ensure impacts on air quality are
    satisfactorily minimised and managed.
65. I impose conditions requiring a Sustainable Drainage System Strategy for the
    development and subsequent verification of this to ensure a suitable surface water
    drainage scheme is designed, so as not to increase flood risk onsite or elsewhere.
    Conditions regarding detailed design, materials and landscaping, as well as
    landscape and ecological management, are necessary to protect local character
    and to improve biodiversity. To improve community safety and crime prevention, a
    condition is necessary to secure details to minimise the risk of crime and meet the
    security needs of the development. A condition requiring details of air source heat
    pumps is necessary to minimise effects on air quality and to protect the character of
    the area, whilst details of photovoltaic panels are incorporated into a separate
    design details condition.
66. To promote sustainable transport, details of cycle storage facilities are necessary.
    A condition requiring the removal of an existing section of dropped kerb and
    provision of a level footway is necessary to ensure the development would be
    acceptable in relation to the highway network. A Delivery and Servicing
    Management Plan is necessary to minimise the effects of such activities on
    highway safety and the living conditions of nearby residents. Finally, conditions are
    necessary to ensure a residential unit is accessible and makes satisfactory
    provision for people with disabilities and changing needs, and that any non-road
    mobile machinery complies with relevant emissions to minimise impacts on air
    quality.
67. The Council has also set out informative advice within the list of recommended
    conditions. These include matters of land contamination, air quality and dust
    management and monitoring measures, emergency power provision, a power
    resilience strategy, emergency generator alternatives, expected engagement with
    Network Rail prior to construction and what would be expected to manage
    construction works. Such advice would have no legal effect, and I have not,
    therefore, included them in the decision. However, the appellant has had sight of
    the Council’s conditions list and should be aware of the contents of such advice.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6005682


Conclusion
68. For the above reasons, the proposed development would comply with the
    development plan taken as a whole and material considerations do not indicate a
    decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted.

N Armstrong
INSPECTOR


                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
     the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
     drawing nos: Site Plan and Block Plan; A001 Rev P1 – Demolition Site Plan, A002
     Rev P1 – Demolition Plan Level 00, A003 Rev P1 – Demolition Plan Level 01, A004
     Rev P1 – Demolition Roof Plan, A005 Rev P1 – Demolition Front Elevation, A006
     Rev P1 – Demolition Rear Elevation, A007 Rev P1 – Demolition Side Elevation,
     A110 Rev P2 – Proposed Level 00 Plan, A111 Rev P2 – Proposed Level 01 Plan,
     A112 Rev P2 – Proposed Level 02 Plan, A113 Rev P2 – Proposed Level 03 Plan,
     A114 Rev P3 – Proposed Level 04 Plan, A115 Rev P2 – Proposed Roof Plan,
     A210 Rev P1 – Proposed Front Elevation, A211 Rev P1 – Proposed Rear
     Elevation, A212 Rev P1 – Proposed Side Elevation, A213 Rev P1 – Proposed Side
     Elevation, A310 Rev P3 – Proposed Section AA and A310 Rev P2 – Proposed
     Section BB.
     3) No development shall commence until a Code of Construction Checklist and a
     Site Construction Management Plan (SCMP) for the development have been
     submitted to, and approved in writing, by the local planning authority. The approved
     Checklist and SCMP shall be adhered to throughout the demolition and
     construction periods for the development.

     4) No development shall commence until a Construction Traffic Management Plan
     has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
     statement shall include:
     a) routeing of demolition, excavation and construction vehicles, including a
     response to existing or known projected major building works at other sites in the
     vicinity and local works in the highway;
     b) access arrangements to the site;
     c) the estimated number and type of vehicles per day/week;
     d) details of any vehicle holding area;
     e) details of the vehicle call up procedure;
     f) estimates for the number and type of parking suspensions that will be required;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          13
Appeal Decision 6005682


     g) details of any diversion or other disruption to the public highway during
     preparation, demolition, excavation and construction work associated with the
     development;
     h) work programme and/or timescale for each phase of preparation, demolition,
     excavation and construction work associated with the development;
     i) details of measures to protect pedestrians and other highway users from
     construction activities on the highway; and
     j) where works cannot be contained wholly within the site a plan should be
     submitted showing the site layout on the highway including extent of hoarding,
     position of nearby trees in the highway or adjacent gardens, pedestrian routes,
     parking bay suspensions and remaining road width for vehicle movements.
     The CTMP shall be adhered to throughout the demolition and construction periods
     for the development. A one-page summary of the requirements of the approved
     CTMP shall be affixed to the frontage of the site for the duration of the works at a
     location where it can be read by members of the public.
     5) No development shall commence until a scheme of details of the method(s) by
     which all existing street trees on the site and adjacent land are to be protected
     during site preparation, demolition, construction, landscaping, and other operations
     on the site, including erection of hoardings, site cabins, or other temporary
     structures, have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
     authority. The approved scheme shall be adhered to throughout the demolition and
     construction periods for the development.
     6) No development shall commence until a site-specific Air Quality Dust
     Management Plan (AQDMP) for the demolition and construction works has been
     submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local planning authority. The AQDMP
     shall include details of dust pollution monitoring and an air quality dust risk
     assessment that considers sensitive receptors off-site, and shall be undertaken in
     compliance with the methodology contained within Chapter 4 of the Mayor of
     London’s ‘The Control of Dust and Emissions during Construction and Demolition’
     SPG, July 2014 (and its subsequent amendments or any subsequent guidance)
     and the identified measures recommended for inclusion within the AQDMP. The
     approved AQDMP shall be adhered to and monitored throughout the demolition
     and construction periods for the development. Where agreed levels are exceeded,
     the demolition and/or construction works on site shall cease and not re-commence
     until action has been taken to ensure the levels of dust are reduced to comply with
     the agreed action level.
     7) No development shall commence until a Proposed Intrusive Site Investigation
     Design (PSID) for the site and surrounding area is submitted to, and approved in
     writing by, the local planning authority. The PSID shall be prepared in accordance
     with the Environment Agency’s current Land Contamination Risk Management
     Guidance and the Council’s guidance or any subsequent updates.
     8) No development shall commence (except for demolition above ground level) until
     the approved Proposed Intrusive Site Investigation Design has been fully
     implemented and a report including full details of the intrusive site investigation,
     Risk Assessment (RA), an Options Appraisal (OA) and a Remediation Strategy
     (RS) have been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local planning

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6005682


     authority. The intrusive site investigation, RA, OA, RS and any associated reporting
     shall be undertaken in line with the Environment Agency’s current Land
     Contamination Risk Management Guidance and the Council’s guidance or any
     subsequent updates.
     9) No occupation or use of the development shall occur until the approved
     Remediation Strategies are implemented and a Verification Report (VR) has been
     submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local planning authority. The VR shall
     include full details of requirements for ongoing monitoring and maintenance and be
     prepared in line with the Environment Agency’s current Land Contamination Risk
     Management Guidance and the Council’s guidance or any subsequent updates.
     Ongoing monitoring and maintenance shall be implemented in line with the
     approved Verification Report.
     10) A. If during development work unexpected contamination or ground conditions
     are encountered or suspected, on each occasion development work shall cease in
     the affected area, other than for actions to make the area safe and prevent further
     contamination or pollution occurring. Unexpected contamination shall be reported
     to the Council within 2 working days or as soon as possible if there are significant
     risks to people or the environment.
     B. Further Intrusive Site Investigation (FSI) shall be undertaken and a Remediation
     Statement (RS), addressing the unexpected contamination, shall be submitted to
     and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The FSI and RS shall
     include full details of requirements for ongoing monitoring and maintenance and be
     prepared in line with the Environment Agency’s current Land Contamination Risk
     Management Guidance and the Council’s guidance or any subsequent updates.
     11) No piling shall take place until a piling method statement (detailing the depth
     and type of piling to be undertaken and the methodology by which such piling shall
     be carried out, including measures to prevent and minimise the potential for
     damage to subsurface water infrastructure, and the programme for works) and
     piling layout plan including all Thames Water clean water assets, the local
     topography and clearance between the face of the pile to the face of a pipe, has
     been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
     approved piling method statement shall be adhered to throughout any piling works.
     12) No generator shall be installed or used on the site until an Emergency
     Generator Alternatives Report has been submitted to and approved in writing by
     the local planning authority. The report shall demonstrate the full range of non-
     combustion options considered and explain why a generator remains the only
     feasible option.
     13) A) No generator shall be installed or used on site until a Generator Report has
     been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
     report shall include:
     a) Full specification sheets for each unit, including manufacturer, model, thermal
     capacity, and stack height.
     b) Emission certificates showing NOx emissions for each unit are no greater than
     those in the approved Air Quality Assessment.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
Appeal Decision 6005682


     c) Results of a commissioning test, certified by an accredited laboratory,
     demonstrating each unit meets the NOx standard within ten minutes of startup.
     B) If any unit fails to meet the requirements on commissioning, no part of that unit
     shall be operated until it is either:
     a) Re-tuned to comply; or
     b) Fitted with secondary abatement so that the combined system achieves the
     agreed NOx limit.
     C) Any subsequently approved generators and any abatement plant shall be
     installed, maintained, and operated in accordance with the approved report and
     manufacturer’s instructions for the lifetime of the development.
     14) No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site clearance
     and demolition works) until a noise assessment of external noise levels, including
     reflected and re-radiated noise and details of the sound insulation of the building
     envelope, orientation of habitable rooms away from major noise sources, and of
     acoustically attenuated mechanical ventilation as necessary to achieve internal
     room and external amenity noise standards, in accordance with the criteria of
     BS8233:2014, has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
     authority. The approved details shall be implemented prior to occupation of the
     development and thereafter permanently retained.
     15) No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site clearance
     and demolition works) until details of an enhanced sound insulation value DnT,w +
     Ctr and L’Nt,w of at least 5Db above the Building Regulations value, for the
     floor/ceiling/wall structures separating different types of rooms/uses in adjoining
     dwellings (e.g. living room and kitchen above bedroom of separate dwelling) have
     been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
     approved details shall be implemented prior to occupation of the development and
     thereafter permanently retained.
     16) No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site clearance
     and demolition works) until details of the sound insulation of the floor/ceiling/ walls
     separating the commercial part(s) of the premises from dwellings above have been
     submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The details
     shall demonstrate that the sound insulation value DnT,w + Ctr and L’nT,w is
     enhanced by at least 15dB above the Building Regulations (for premises operating
     no later than 22:00) where there is potential for a premises to operate beyond this,
     an enhanced value of at least 20dB above the Building Regulations value is
     required and, where necessary, additional mitigation measures are implemented to
     contain commercial noise within the commercial premises and to achieve the
     criteria of BS8233:2014 within the dwellings/noise sensitive premises. The
     approved details shall be implemented prior to occupation of the development and
     thereafter permanently retained.
     17) No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site clearance
     and demolition works) until details of the external sound level emitted from
     plant/machinery/equipment and mitigation measures as appropriate have been
     submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The measures
     shall ensure that the external sound level emitted from plant/machinery/equipment
     will be lower than the lowest existing background sound level by at least 10dB(A) in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
Appeal Decision 6005682


     order to prevent any adverse impact. The assessment shall be made in accordance
     with BS4142:2014 at the nearest and/or most affected noise sensitive premises,
     with all machinery operating together at maximum capacity. A post installation
     sound assessment shall be carried out where required to confirm compliance with
     the noise criteria and additional steps to mitigate noise shall be taken, as
     necessary. The approved details shall be implemented prior to occupation of the
     development and thereafter permanently retained.
     18) No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site clearance
     and demolition works) until a Ventilation Strategy Report has been submitted to and
     approved in writing by the local planning authority. In order to mitigate air pollution,
     the assessment shall be supported with dispersion modelling and/or on-site
     monitoring to predict façade concentrations at sensitive receptor locations and
     specific ventilation requirements to ensure that the objectives for Nitrogen Dioxide
     (NO2) and Particulate Matter (PM10 and PM2.5) are not exceeded at the receptor
     locations.
     The Ventilation Strategy Report shall include the following information: Details and
     locations of the air intake locations at rear roof level of the buildings.
     a) Details and locations of ventilation extracts and chimney/boiler flues to
     demonstrate that they are located a minimum of two metres away from fresh air
     ventilation intakes, openable windows, balconies, roof gardens, or terraces.
     b) If part a) is not implemented, details of the independently tested mechanical
     ventilation system with nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and particulate matter (PM2.5,
     PM10) filtration with air intakes on the rear elevations to remove airborne
     pollutants. The filtration system shall have a minimum efficiency of 75% in the
     removal of nitrogen oxides/dioxides and particulate matter (PM2.5, PM10) in
     accordance with BS EN ISO 10121-1:2014 and BS EN ISO 16890: 2016. The
     whole system shall be designed to prevent summer overheating and minimise
     energy usage.
     The development shall be undertaken in accordance with the approved details and
     implemented prior to first occupation of the development, and maintained as
     approved thereafter.
     19) No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site clearance
     and demolition works) until a Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) Strategy with
     the following information has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
     planning authority:
     a) A detailed analysis of surface water run-off and attenuation volume.
     b) Information about the proposed SuDS types, their location, attenuation capacity,
     specification, structural integrity, construction, operation, access, and maintenance
     (more sustainable green SuDS should be favoured over attenuation tanks).
     c) Section/profile drawings of the SuDS, if relevant (green roofs, blue roofs, sub-
     base attenuation, permeable paving, planters, species, etc.).
     d) Drainage plans to show clearly how surface water run-off will be conveyed to the
     SuDS and any connections to the sewer system if necessary.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
Appeal Decision 6005682


     The approved SuDS Strategy measures shall be fully implemented prior to first
     occupation of the development and maintained thereafter in accordance with the
     approved details.
     20) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, or within any
     otherwise agreed implementation schedule set out within the approved SuDS
     Strategy, a signed verification report carried out by a qualified drainage engineer
     (or equivalent) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
     authority to confirm that the agreed SuDS Strategy and measures have been
     constructed as per the approved details. The verification report shall include:
     a) Details and locations of critical drainage infrastructure (such as inlets, outlets
     and control structures) including as built drawings.
     b) An operation and maintenance manual for the unadopted parts of the scheme as
     constructed.
     c) Proposed arrangements for future adoption by any public body, statutory
     undertaker or management company (where not previously provided).
     21) Detailed drawings or samples of materials as appropriate, in respect of the
     following shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
     authority before the relevant part of the development is commenced:
     a) Detailed elevation and section drawings showing all external materials, finishes
     and colour (scale 1:20);
     b) Detailed elevation and section drawings of the boundary treatments for all
     balcony and terrace areas (scale 1:10);
     c) Detailed elevation and section drawings of photovoltaic solar panels at scale
     (1:10);
     d) Windows schedule and detailed elevation and section drawings of all typical
     windows and doors, showing reveal, floor, soffit junctions, glazing thickness,
     framing (scale 1:10);
     e) Layout drawing showing arrangement of all external plant, including air source
     heat pumps, at the roof level (scale 1:50); and
     f) Details of the forecourt and materials.
     The development shall not be carried out other than in accordance with the
     approved details and shall thereafter be so maintained.
     22) Sample panels of facing brickwork showing the proposed colour, texture,
     facebond and pointing shall be provided on site, and approved in writing by the
     local planning authority before the relevant parts of the approved works are
     commenced, and the sample panels shall be retained on site until the work is
     completed in accordance with the panel(s) so approved.
     23) No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site clearance
     and demolition works) until a scheme of landscaping, to include all existing trees
     and shrubs, proposed trees and shrubs, paths and their surfacing materials, has
     been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
     approved landscaping scheme shall be carried out in the first planting season and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   18
Appeal Decision 6005682


     seeding seasons following the occupation of the development or the completion of
     the development, whichever is the sooner.
     24) No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site clearance
     and demolition works) until a landscape and ecological management plan (LEMP)
     has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
     content of the LEMP shall include details of the immediate and long-term
     maintenance of landscaping and retained and newly created on-site habitats to
     maximise their biodiversity value. The LEMP shall be carried out and adhered to as
     approved.
     25) A. No development shall commence above ground level (excluding site
     clearance and demolition works) until details of measures to minimise the risk of
     crime and meet the specific security needs of the development (informed by the
     principles and objectives of Secured by Design) have been submitted to and
     approved in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall be
     implemented in accordance with the approved details and retained thereafter.
     B. Prior to occupation of the development hereby approved, a satisfactory Secured
     by Design final inspection shall take place once all works have been carried out to
     ensure compliance in all areas and Secured by Design certification shall be
     submitted to and approved by the local planning authority.
     26) Prior to occupation of the development hereby permitted, a scheme of details of
     the installation of Air Source Heat Pumps that are to be provided for space heating
     and hot water shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local planning
     authority. The development shall be undertaken, implemented and maintained in
     accordance with the approved details.
     27) Prior to the occupation of the development hereby approved, details of cycle
     storage provision shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
     planning authority. Thereafter the approved cycle storage shall be provided prior to
     first occupation of the commercial and/or residential units to which they relate and
     kept available for the storage of bicycles by users and occupants of the
     development at all times.
     28) Prior to the occupation of the development, the existing section of dropped kerb
     servicing the unit shall be permanently removed, and the footway shall be
     reinstated to a level footway and full height kerb line, in accordance with details that
     shall first be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
     29) Prior to the occupation of the development hereby approved, a Delivery and
     Servicing Management Plan (DSMP), including details of how the building would be
     serviced and maintained, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
     planning authority. Thereafter the DSMP shall be adhered to at all times following
     occupation of the development.
     30) All non-road mobile machinery used during the course of the development that
     is within the scope of the GLA ‘Control of Dust and Emissions during Construction
     and Demolition’ Supplementary Planning Guidance dated July 2014, or any
     successor document, shall comply with the emissions requirements therein.
     31) Unit 1 as shown on approved drawing A112 Rev P2 – Proposed Level 02 Plan
     shall achieve compliance with optional requirement M4(3)(2)(a) of the Building


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   19
Appeal Decision 6005682


     Regulations and the specified unit shall not be occupied until Building Regulations
     approval has been issued certifying that these criteria have been achieved.
     32) The commercial units hereby approved shall only operate between the hours of
     07:00 and 22:00 on any day.
                                           END OF CONDITIONS




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       20
