Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 June 2026 by S Jamieson BA(Hons) MPlan MRTPI
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005269
85 Priory Road, North Cheam, Sutton SM3 8LY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
    (the GPDO).
•   The appeal is made by Mr K Ragupathy against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Sutton.
•   The application Ref is DM2025/01384.
•   The development proposed is 6m single storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Application for costs
3. An application for an award of costs has been made by Mr K Ragupathy against
   the Council of the London Borough of Sutton. This is the subject of a separate
   decision.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the proposed development would be granted planning
   permission by Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. Class A of Part 1, Schedule 2 of the GPDO sets out what constitutes ‘permitted
   development’, that is, development that can be undertaken without planning
   permission in terms of the ‘enlargement, improvement or other alteration of a
   dwellinghouse’ subject to certain limitations and conditions.
6. Paragraph A.1(g) states that development is not permitted by Class A if the
   enlarged part of the dwellinghouse would have a single storey and would extend
   beyond the rear wall of the original dwellinghouse by more than 8 metres in the
   case of a detached dwellinghouse, 6m in the case of any other dwellinghouses or
   exceed 4m in height. In this case the dwelling is a terraced property. The proposed
   rear extension would project 6m from the rear wall of the original dwellinghouse
   and would be less than 4m high.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005269


7. However, paragraph A.1(j)(iii) states that development is not permitted by Class A if
   the enlarged part of the dwellinghouse would extend beyond a wall forming a side
   elevation of the original dwelling and have a width greater than half the width of the
   original dwellinghouse. Paragraph A.1(ja) advises that development is not
   permitted if any total enlargement (being the enlarged part together with any
   existing enlargement of the original dwellinghouse to which it will be joined)
   exceeds or would exceed the limits set out in sub-paragraphs (e) to (j).
8. The parties agree that the proposal would extend the full width of the rear elevation
   of the appeal property. The dispute in this case concerns whether the existing
   projection to the rear of the property comprises part of the original dwelling for the
   purposes of the GPDO.
9. The term ‘original’ is defined within Article 2 of the GPDO as a house as it existed
   on 1st July 1948 or if built after this date, how it was originally built. No definitive
   evidence has been provided regarding the construction date of either the appeal
   property or the rear projection. However, both parties refer to a 1956 Ordnance
   Survey map. Consistent with my observations during the site visit, the map clearly
   shows a rear projection at the appeal property, together with similar projections at
   adjoining properties within the terrace and elsewhere in the surrounding area.
10. The consistent form and widespread occurrence of these projections indicated on
    the 1956 OS map to dwellings on Priory Road suggests that they were more than
    likely part of the original design and construction of these dwellings, rather than
    added individually at a later date. In the absence of persuasive evidence to the
    contrary, and given the short period between 1 July 1948 and the publication of the
    1956 map, I find on the balance of probabilities that the rear projection formed part
    of the original dwellinghouse. Consequently, the flank wall of that projection
    constitutes a side elevation of the original dwellinghouse for the purposes of Class
    A.
11. There are no other rear extensions to which the proposed extension would be
    joined. Nevertheless, the proposed extension would extend beyond a wall forming
    a side elevation of the original dwellinghouse and would exceed half the width of
    the original dwellinghouse. This is regardless of whether the rear projection would
    be demolished, as the limitations are based on the original dwellinghouse and
    apply even if part of the original is removed. It would therefore exceed the limits at
    paragraph A.1(j)(iii), thereby also failing to comply with sub-paragraph (ja) of
    Class A.
12. Consequently, the proposal would not be granted planning permission by Article 3,
    Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
Other Matters
13. I acknowledge the appellant’s desire to improve the living accommodation at the
    property and note that no objections were received from neighbouring occupiers. I
    have also seen the appellant’s concerns regarding the Council’s handling of
    previous applications and what are perceived to be inconsistencies in its decision-
    making. However, these matters are not determinative in the assessment of
    whether the scheme would constitute permitted development under Class A of the
    GPDO.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005269


14. I do not have full details of the examples of rear extensions cited by the appellant.
    In any event, and regardless of the Council’s interpretation of the GPDO under
    other applications, my own assessment of whether development is permitted under
    Class A is a matter of the particular facts and circumstances of the case before me.
    As such, the examples referred to do not provide a basis for reaching a different
    conclusion in this appeal.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. For the reasons given above, the proposed development would not be granted
    planning permission by Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Jamieson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
