Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 July 2026
by N Unwin BSc (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005963
Land adjacent to 82 Smithy Lane, Aughton, Lancashire L39 6SS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Crompton (Crompton Property Developments Ltd) against the decision of
     West Lancashire Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/0608/PNC.
•    The development proposed is for the conversion of agricultural buildings to 5 no. residential
     dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
   3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for the conversion of
   agricultural buildings to 5 no. residential dwellings at Land adjacent to 82 Smithy
   Lane, Aughton, Lancashire L39 6SS in accordance with the application
   2025/0608/PNC, and the details submitted with it, including plan nos 112-SLF-SK
   L01 A; 112-SLF-S G04; 112-SLF G03 B; and 112-SLF L03 B, and subject to the
   following condition:
           1) Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the
              development hereby permitted that was not previously identified shall be
              reported immediately to the local planning authority. Development on the
              part of the site affected shall be suspended until a risk assessment has
              been carried out and submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. Where unacceptable risks are found, the development
              shall not resume or continue until remediation and verification schemes
              have been carried out in accordance with details that shall first have been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
Preliminary Matters
2. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
   appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
   consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework.
3. I have taken the description of development from the application form and amended
   it for conciseness.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005963


Background and Main Issues
4. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q, of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
   (the GPDO), development is permitted for the change of use of a building and any
   land within its curtilage, from use as an agricultural building to a use falling within
   Class C3 (dwellinghouses) together with building operations reasonably necessary
   to convert that building for such a use, subject to limitations and conditions.
5. The local planning authority (LPA) may refuse the application where it considers that
   the proposed development does not comply with, or that the developer has provided
   insufficient information to enable the LPA to establish whether the proposed
   development complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions set out in
   paragraphs Q.1 and Q.2. The Council do not consider the proposal to conflict with
   paragraph Q.1 and conclude that the buildings have been in agricultural use as part
   of an established agricultural unit since before 24th July 2023, suggesting their
   agricultural use has not ceased. Whilst third parties have questioned this, there is
   limited substantive evidence for me to take an alternative view to that of the Council.
6. Conditions Q.2(1) (a)-(g) relate to transport and highway impacts; noise impacts;
   contamination risks on site; flooding risks on site; whether the location or the siting
   of the building makes it impractical or undesirable for the change of use; the design
   or external appearance of the building; and the provision of adequate natural light in
   all habitable rooms of the dwellinghouse.
7. The Council raise no objection to criteria (a), (b), (c), (d), or (g), and I see no reason
   to disagree. However, they do object on the basis of (e) whether the location or
   siting of the building makes it otherwise impractical or undesirable for the building to
   change from agricultural use to a use falling within Class C3, and (f) the design or
   external appearance of the building.
8. Against this background, I consider the main issue in this appeal to be, whether the
   proposal would be permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
   GDPO, having regard to Q.2 (1) (e) and (f).
Reasons
9. With regard to Q.2 (1) (e), Impractical or undesirable are not defined in the GPDO.
   The National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG) states that impractical reflects
   that the location and siting would “not be sensible or realistic”, and undesirable
   reflects that it would be “harmful or objectionable”.
10.When considering whether it is appropriate for the change of use to take place in a
   particular location, a local planning authority should start from the premise that the
   permitted development right grants planning permission, subject to the prior
   approval requirements.
11.The NPPG gives examples of what would not be sensible or realistic, such as an
   agricultural building on the top of a hill with no road access, power source or other
   services, or adjacent to other uses such as intensive poultry farming buildings.
12.The proposed five dwellings would include adjoining private gardens. The Council
   contend that the size of the proposed garden areas for dwellings three, four, and
   five would be disproportionately small when compared to the dwellings themselves.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6005963


13.The proposed garden areas of dwellings three, four, and five would primarily
   comprise rectangular section to the rear of the buildings, with an additional small
   strip along the eastern elevation of number five. These areas range from
   approximately 28.85 square metres to 70.13 square metres.
14.These proposed garden areas would be relatively modest in relation to the footprint
   of the buildings. Nevertheless, these dwellings are to be single storey and one-
   bedroom, limiting their internal floor area and number of occupiers. Whilst the
   internal configuration can be changed, there is little before me to suggest this would
   be the case, and the proposed dwellings would have more than one bedroom.
   Further, the mostly rectangular form of the gardens, adjacent to the proposed
   dwellings would allow them to function as useable external recreation areas for
   future occupiers. As such, I consider the proposed garden areas sensible and
   realistic, and not to be harmful or objectionable.
15.The application was accompanied by a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal and Bat
   Activity Survey Results Report both dated 2024. The Council say that these surveys
   are over one year old and updated surveys are required. The appellant has
   submitted updated reports confirming that bats were absent from the building and
   there is no evidence of current or historic bird nesting. Therefore, I do not consider
   the proposal to be harmful or objectionable with regard to priority species or their
   habitat.
16.As such, the location or siting of the buildings do not make it otherwise impractical
   or undesirable for their change from agricultural use to a use falling within Class C3.
17.With regard to Q.2 (1) (f), The area immediately surrounding the appeal site is rural
   in character with more dense clusters of dwellings found further along either end of
   Smithy Lane. These dwellings, including 82 Smithy Lane (no 82) adjacent to the
   appeal site, are set back from the highway by front gardens. The appeal site forms a
   collection of agricultural buildings well related to no 82 giving the appearance of a
   farmhouse and associated agricultural buildings. The appeal buildings are
   agricultural in nature and are mostly formed of what appear to be breeze block and
   corrugated metal walls.
18.The proposal would involve minimal external alterations which include the
   installation or replacement of windows, doors, roofs, or exterior walls. These
   alterations would retain the form and agricultural character of the existing buildings.
   The proposed garden areas are relatively modest and mostly located to the rear of
   buildings, providing screening from views from Smithy Lane. The appeal site is
   some distance from St Michael Road, limiting its prominence from this viewpoint.
   Whilst the garden areas would project beyond the adjacent rear garden of no 82 into
   the adjoining field, this is relatively minor. As such, these garden areas would be
   barely perceptible when viewed from the public realm.
19.Garden areas would be located along the side elevations of some of these
   buildings, with that of dwelling one located to the front of dwelling two. However,
   these would be somewhat screened by existing vegetation along Smithy Lane. Front
   gardens are a feature of properties within the surrounding area as is boundary
   treatment comprising hedging or fencing such as at no 82. Therefore, the proposed
   garden areas and any boundary treatment would reflect the existing character of the
   area. As such, the design or external appearance of the proposal would be
   acceptable.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6005963


20.Accordingly, drawing all of the above together, I conclude that the proposed
   development would be permitted development under Schedule 2 Part 3, Class Q of
   the GPDO.
Other Matters
21.Whilst some of the proposed modest garden areas may extend into the Green Belt
   with doors opening onto it, the Council have acknowledged this and raise no
   concerns regarding the effect on openness. There is little substantive evidence
   before me to suggest taking an alternative view.
22.Interested parties have raised concerns regarding discrepancies between plans
   submitted for previous applications and title deeds, and those of this appeal. Even if
   this is the case, my assessment is made based on the plans before me which
   appeared to reflect my observations on site.
23.Interested parties contend that a farm entrance has not been closed off and hedges
   and trees have been removed and not restored in accordance with previous
   permissions at the appeal site in addition to questioning the lawfulness of sections
   of hardstanding. Further concerns regarding damage to the road and vegetation
   have been raised since the appellant acquired the site. Nonetheless, my
   assessment is made based on the proposal and plans before me, and I cannot take
   these into account as part of my decision.
24.The area of hard standing between the buildings and the highway is of a sufficient
   size to accommodate vehicles including bicycles, and allow for turning within the
   appeal site.
25.Whilst concerns have been raised that local amenities are currently struggling with
   capacity, there is limited evidence of this before me. Further, the proposal would
   create five one-bedroom dwellings representing a relatively small increase on the
   use of local amenities.
26.The Holt Green Conservation Area (the CA) boundary lies approximately 150
   metres from the appeal site and therefore the proposal would not affect the CA
   through development within its setting.
27.Given the works are primarily limited to the existing buildings, the proposal is
   unlikely to affect the hunting area for buzzards.
Conditions
28.Paragraph W(13) sets out that prior approval may be granted unconditionally or
   subject to conditions reasonably related to the subject matter of the prior approval.
   The Council has suggested a condition which I have considered in light of the
   advice in the National Planning Policy Framework, PPG and parameters of the
   GPDO. Where appropriate, I have adjusted the wording of the condition to improve
   precision and enforceability.
29.Any prior approval granted for the development under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2,
   Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO is subject to the condition under Q.2(4) which specifies
   that the development must be completed within a period of 3 years starting with the
   prior approval date. Paragraph W(12) also requires development to be carried out in
   accordance with the details approved. As such and as I have listed the plans in my
   formal decision.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6005963


30.Given the appeal buildings agricultural use, and potential presence of asbestos and
   former well at the appeal site, a condition is necessary to ensure that, should any
   contamination be identified within the site, this is fully investigated and managed
   appropriately to protect surrounding and future occupiers.
Conclusion
31.For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed, and
   prior approval should be granted.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
