Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 June 2026 by R Pankhurst
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6005908
Sunnyside House, West Edge, Marsh Gibbon, Buckinghamshire, OX27 0HA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by James Lippett against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/25/3281/FA.
•   The development proposed is removal of a small section of boundary wall and creation of new
    vehicular crossing to create private access to the application site.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. A different Heritage Statement was submitted by the appellant with their appeal
   statement. The Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England sets out that the
   appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme, and that it is important that
   what is considered by the Inspector at appeal is essentially the same scheme that
   was considered by the Council and interested parties at the application stage.
4. The new Heritage Statement does not change the proposed development but is a
   significantly more detailed assessment than was submitted at application stage and
   contains material new information. As the appeal is proceeding under the
   Householder appeal process, there has been no provision for the Council or
   interested parties to comment on the new information. Consequently, it would
   prejudice other parties to the appeal if I were to consider that document. I have
   therefore considered the appeal on the basis of the information that was before the
   Council when it made its decision, and do not accept the new Heritage Statement.
5. The most recent iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework (Framework)
   was published in August 2026. With regard to the main issues of the appeal, the
   relevant policies are not materially different from the previous iteration of the
   Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation
   with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective cases would
   not be prejudiced.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6005908


Main Issue
6. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the Marsh Gibbon Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The Marsh Gibbon Conservation Area Appraisal (the appraisal) published in
   December 2008 explains that the character of the CA varies across the village, with
   a close-knit area of informally grouped cottages and farm buildings at Townsend, a
   historic central core focused around Church Street, Castle Street and West Edge,
   and a more open rural character at its eastern end. The appeal site lies within the
   central part of the CA, which is characterised by its informal historic layout,
   traditional stone-built development, extensive stone boundary walls and mature
   landscaping. Together, these elements create an attractive rural streetscape that
   contributes positively to the character and appearance of the CA.
8. The boundary wall of the appeal property is a notable feature within the street
   scene and forms part of the network of stone boundary walls the appraisal identifies
   as an important component of the CA. Its visual prominence, particularly at the road
   junction, contributes to the cohesive appearance of the local area and helps frame
   views of the buildings beyond.
9. The wall also forms part of the setting of the Grade II listed buildings nearby,
   including the Greyhound Public House, Fleur de Lys and Squirrels Thatch, all of
   which are experienced in conjunction with this and numerous other stone boundary
   walls when viewed from the public realm. The traditional limestone wall
   complements the materials, scale and historic character of these heritage assets
   and contributes to the attractive and unified townscape in which they are situated.
   Consequently, the wall makes a positive contribution to the setting of the listed
   buildings and the character and appearance of the CA, and thereby to the
   significance of these heritage assets.
10. Although the section of the boundary wall to be removed would be relatively
    modest in length, the significance of the wall derives not only from its materials and
    appearance but also from its continuity as a historic boundary feature, reflective of
    its enclosure of the former farmyard. Therefore, while some parts have been rebuilt
    relatively recently, this does not diminish the heritage value of the wall. The
    creation of a gap in the wall to create another vehicular access would interrupt this
    continuous section of boundary wall. It would also introduce another access point in
    a prominent location, close to the existing access to The Stonehouse. As a result,
    the frontage would appear more fragmented and less cohesive than it does now.
    This would detract from the positive contribution that the wall makes to the
    character and appearance of the CA.
11. Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    (the Act) requires me to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of the conservation area. Given my findings
    above, the proposed removal of a section of boundary wall and creation of new
    vehicular crossing would neither preserve nor enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA. Given its modest scale in relation to the wider CA, the harm
    to the significance of the CA as a whole would be limited..



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6005908


12. Section 66(1) of the Act requires me to have special regard to the desirability of
    preserving listed buildings or their setting, or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which they possess. In this case, the removal of a section of the
    wall would not materially alter the way in which the nearby listed buildings are
    experienced, as they would still be seen in conjunction with numerous stone
    boundary walls. The proposal would not therefore adversely affect the setting, and
    thereby the significance, of the listed buildings.
13. Nevertheless, the harm I have identified to the CA is a matter which I give
    considerable importance and weight. The Framework requires that this harm
    should be weighed against any public benefits of the proposal.
14. Whilst the proposal would provide the appellant with greater privacy, convenience
    and an independent means of access, these are private benefits that would
    primarily accrue to the occupiers of the property. I have seen no substantive
    evidence to demonstrate that the proposal would deliver wider public benefits. In
    particular, there is insufficient evidence before me to conclude that the creation of
    an additional access would result in any meaningful improvement to surveillance of
    the junction or otherwise benefit the wider public. Consequently, there are no public
    benefits that would outweigh the harm that I have identified to the character and
    appearance of the CA.
15. Accordingly, the proposed removal of a section of the boundary wall would harm
    the character and appearance of the Marsh Gibbon Conservation Area. It would
    therefore be contrary to Policy BE1 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan 2013-2033
    (September 2021) which requires development to contribute to heritage values and
    local distinctiveness. It would also conflict with the heritage policies of the
    Framework.
Other Matters
16. I have noted the appellant's concerns regarding the level of engagement that took
    place during the determination of the application. However, whether further
    discussions could or should have occurred is not a matter that goes to the planning
    merits of the proposal. Therefore, this does not outweigh the harm discussed.
17. I have taken account of the appellant’s claimed benefits, including the provision of
    independent access, improved residential amenity and increased surveillance of
    the junction. However, for the reasons already given, I have afforded limited weight
    to these benefits. Furthermore, it has not been demonstrated that any perceived
    difficulties associated with the existing access arrangements could not be
    addressed through alternative means that would avoid the identified harm.
    Consequently, they do not outweigh the harm that I have identified to the character
    and appearance of the CA.
18. I acknowledge no objections were raised by the Parish Council, the Highway
    Authority or neighbouring residents. However, the absence of objections does not
    indicate that a proposal is acceptable in planning terms.
Conclusion and Recommendation
19. The proposal would conflict with the development plan and there are no material
    considerations, including the benefits of the proposal, that justify granting
    permission. The benefits of the scheme would be substantially outweighed by its


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision 6005908


    adverse effects. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other
    matters raised, I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

R Pankhurst
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
20. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
