Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by R Sabu BA(Hons), MA, BArch, PgDip, RIBA, ARB
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006506
Waldens Manor, Waldens Road, Orpington BR5 4EU
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Richard Plasek against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 24/01895/LBC.
•    The works proposed are demolition of existing conservatory extension and existing bay window.
     Construction of single storey rear extension with light lantern. Single storey rear extension to existing
     basement to create habitable space.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed and listed building consent is refused for demolition of
       existing conservatory extension and existing bay window. Construction of single
       storey rear extension with light lantern. Single storey rear extension to existing
       basement to create habitable space.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Practice Framework (Framework) was
       published in August 2026. I have consulted the main parties and taken any
       comments into account in reaching my decision.
3.     As the appeal relates to a listed building consent, I have had special regard to
       section 16(2) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       (the Act).
4.     Although the application form and decision notice refer to Waldens Manor, as the
       list description names the building as Walden Manor, I have used Walden Manor
       in the main issue below.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve a Grade II listed building,
       Walden Manor, and any of the features of special architectural or historic interest
       that it possesses.
Reasons
6.     The building was first listed in 1954 and dates from the 17th century. As stated in
       the Heritage Statement, the building is a good example of a likely early 17th
       century vernacular building which was re-fronted and extended during the late 17th
       or early 18th century, with extensive surviving fabric and plan form from both
       phases of development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006506


7.     The building comprises two distinctive phases of development: a north frontage
       was added during the late 17th or early 18th century to a retained interior and rear
       wing retained from an early 17th century timber-framed building.
8.     In the 17th century the house passed through a number of owners including Caleb
       Trenchfield who was the son of one of the admirals of the navy under Charles I. In
       the 19th century, Walden Manor formed part of the Lullingstone Estate in the
       ownership of Sir Percival Hart Dyke of Lullingstone Castle, by which time it was
       likely part of a farmstead.
9.     Given the above, I find that the special interest of the listed building, insofar as it
       relates to these appeals, to be primarily associated with legibility of the phases of
       the building and evidence of historic fabric and plan form.
10. The proposal includes the demolition of the existing conservatory extension and
    bay window. Both features date from the late 19th and 20th century, however, given
    their modest scale do not detract from the significance of the building. As the
    conservatory and bay window do not provide a positive contribution to the
    significance of the building, their removal would not harm the special interest of the
    heritage asset.
11. The proposed rear extension would extend across most of the width of the two
    storey rear element of the building that dates from the 17th century. It would be
    single storey with a flat roof, and the height would be almost at the bottom of the
    first floor windows. I note the continuous parapet, brickwork detailing and open
    loggia. However, together with the lantern roof light, the height, width and massing
    of the extension would unacceptably obscure views of large parts of the historic
    rear elevation. Therefore, the scheme would diminish the legibility of the 17th
    century elevation, thereby eroding the special interest of the listed building.
12. The proposed extension would include details from the host building such as
    raised band of brickwork and would echo the materials such as brickwork.
    However, it would include full height doors with extensive glazing that would
    appear incongruous against the 17th century rear elevation. While the use of
    glazing may take the form of an orangery extension and the scheme would be
    clearly discernible from the host building, given the scale and form of the
    extension, it would nonetheless egregiously detract from the legibility and
    character of the rear elevation.
13. Precise details and materials could be controlled via a suitably worded condition.
    However, given the harm to the legibility of the rear elevation that would result
    from the scale and form of the proposal, such conditions would not make the
    proposal acceptable.
14. The Council do not appear to have concerns regarding the proposed basement.
    Given its location, I find that the proposed basement would preserve the special
    interest of the listed building.
15. Consequently, the proposal would fail to preserve a Grade II listed building,
    Walden Manor, and any of the features of special architectural or historic interest
    that it possesses.
16. In the terms of the Framework, the proposal would result in harm to the
    significance of a heritage asset, from work affecting the asset itself. The harm


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006506


       would be substantial as the proposal would seriously affect a key element of the
       asset’s significance. In this case, the proposal would unacceptably erode the
       legibility and character of the 17th century rear elevation.
17. Paragraph 1 of Policy HE6 of the Framework states that when considering the
    potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation (and
    the more important the asset, the greater the weight should be). This is
    irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm,
    substantial harm, or total loss of its significance.
18. The policy goes on to say that where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. Important public benefits can include securing the long-term reuse of a
    vacant or underused listed building and enabling energy efficiency and low carbon
    heating measures to be employed.
19. Public benefits such as enabling energy efficiency are not before me. Even if the
    proposal did result in any such benefit, they would not outweigh the harm
    identified, given the scale of the proposal. In any event, the continued viable use of
    the appeal property as a residential dwelling is not dependent on the proposal as
    the building has an ongoing residential use that would not cease in its absence.
20. As the proposal would unacceptably alter the legibility of the rear elevation, the
    harm to the designated heritage asset would be substantial. The Framework states
    that in this circumstance, consent should be refused unless it can be demonstrated
    that the harm is necessary to achieve substantial public benefits that outweigh the
    harm or loss, or if a number of factors apply. The listed factors are not applicable
    in this case, and the scheme would not give rise to substantial public benefits.
21. Given the above I find that the proposal would fail to preserve the special interest
    of the listed building. Therefore, it would conflict with Policy HC1 of The London
    Plan The Spatial Development Strategy for Greater London March 2021 and
    Policy 38 of the Bromley Local Plan (January 2019) which together require
    development proposals affecting heritage assets to conserve their significance and
    special interest by being sympathetic to the assets’ significance.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



R Sabu
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
