Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by J Heppell BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006117
Land centred on coordinates 496600 145414 at the access to Clockhouse Mews
from Huxley Close, Godalming, Surrey GU7 2AP
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Sewell against the decision of Waverley Borough Council.
    The application Ref is WA/2025/01842.
    The development proposed is full planning permission for the erection of a dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       Following the submission of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy
         Framework (Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
         were afforded the opportunity to comment on the implications of the new
         Framework for the proposal.
Main Issues
3.       The main issues in this appeal are:

          the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area with
           particular reference to an Area of Great Landscape Value (AGLV);

          the effect of the proposal on arboricultural interests;

          the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of Clockhouse Mews with
           particular reference to the outlook and daylighting of its shared outdoor space;
           and

          whether the proposal would provide suitable living conditions for future occupiers
           with particular reference to outdoor space and outlook.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.       Clockhouse Mews is a terrace of four houses which, together with an adjacent
         terrace of five dwellings known as Guildway Houses, benefits from a woodland
         setting despite its location in the built-up area. The proposal is for a two storey


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006117


         detached dwelling abutting its front boundary wall, following a refusal of a three
         storey dwelling1.
5.      The landscape quality of the site is recognised in its inclusion in an AGLV. The
        open countryside adjacent to this part of the built-up area is wooded, with
        remnants of the woodland extending into the built-up area immediately adjacent to
        the appeal site. Policy RE3 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 1: Strategic
        Policies and Sites February 2018 (LPP1) advises that, whilst the AGLV
        designation is a local landscape designation, it acts as a buffer to the Surrey Hills
        National Landscape (NL) and the same principles apply to its protection as apply
        to the NL.
6.      The proposed dwelling would be sited in front of Clockhouse Mews and would
        partially obscure it. Although the site contains only low level vegetation, it sits
        within a belt of trees which is integral to the AGLV. Despite only extending
        moderately into the tree belt, the proposal would be an incongruous, urbanising
        addition to the area which would harm the AGLV’s character and appearance.
        Notwithstanding the reduction in height and improved detailing compared with the
        previous proposal, the dwelling would harmfully impinge on the area’s open,
        woodland setting, and erode the physical link that the woodland provides to the
        countryside.
7.      The appellant has highlighted that the site is accessed via a private road and is
        concealed from public roads and important views. Whilst the proposal would not
        affect a wide area or public vantage points, and would be seen against a backdrop
        of trees, it would cause an unacceptable degree of localised harm to the area’s
        woodland setting. Although the immediate area has a more varied character than
        the adjoining residential estate, the proposal would disrupt the area’s appearance
        for the reasons I have identified, despite being well screened and visually
        contained. The adequate separation distance between the proposed dwelling and
        nearby properties is not in itself a sufficient justification for the proposal.
8.      I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of an
        AGLV, contrary to policies TD1 and RE3 of the LPP1 and policies DM1 and DM4
        of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 2: Site Allocations and Development
        Management Policies March 2023 (LPP2). Together these policies require new
        development to be of a high quality design that responds to the distinctive local
        character of the area and avoids harm to areas of landscape value.
Arboricultural interests
9.      The trees around the site are covered by a Woodland Tree Protection Order
        (TPO)2. The appellant’s arboricultural survey indicated that the proposal would
        encroach into the root protection area (RPA) of two category A wellingtonias,
        which are high quality trees with an estimated remaining life expectancy of at least
        40 years, and just outside the RPA of a third category A wellingtonia. The proposal
        would also encroach into the RPA of a horse chestnut, an English oak and a yew,
        which are all category B trees of moderate quality with an estimated remaining life
        expectancy of at least 20 years.



1
    LPA reference WA/2023/00518
2
    Group TPO WA125


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006117


10. The proposal was supported by an arboricultural site investigation report3 which
    concluded that, based on site excavations and a structural engineer’s report and
    subject to further arboricultural site investigations and advice to determine and
    confirm the final foundation design, piled foundations supporting a raised slab
    could be utilised without damaging significant roots. The Council nonetheless
    feared that the dwelling and its service trenches and soakaways would harm root
    systems, given the shallow rooting habits of the species concerned.
11. Owing to the quality of the trees and their location with an AGLV, it is appropriate
    to take a precautionary approach in respect of the conclusions of the arboricultural
    site investigation report. Given the need identified in the report for further site
    investigations, there is insufficient information before me to demonstrate that the
    roots of the trees would be adequately protected from damage during construction,
    raising the prospect of a potential risk to their long term survival as a result.
    Furthermore, a dwelling in close proximity to tree canopies could give rise to
    pressure from future occupiers to lop or fell trees, in order to reduce shadowing
    and potential damage to property, notwithstanding the proposed installation of
    gutter guards. Whilst the TPO would give the Council a measure of control over
    such matters, it does not guarantee the long term health of the trees in such
    circumstances.
12. I have noted that the proposal was assessed by two different tree officers over a
    period of time, and that their views did not necessarily align. I have had regard to
    the numerous amendments the appellant made in response to the arboricultural
    objection to the first application. However, neither of these matters alters my
    findings.
13. I conclude that the proposal would have an unacceptable effect on arboricultural
    interest, contrary to Policy NE1 of the LPP1 and Policy DM 11 of the LPP2, which
    together seek to retain areas of woodland and important groups of trees.
Living conditions of Clockhouse Mews
14. The area in front of Clockhouse Mews is used for the parking and turning of
    vehicles and has limited amenity value. Its outlook is principally that of the
    woodland in front of the site, albeit this is obscured to some extent by the
    boundary wall of the car park and the two garages within it. Although lower than
    the previously proposed three storey dwelling, the proposal would introduce a two
    storey dwelling which, whilst partially screened by one of the existing garages and
    set against a backdrop of trees, would extend above and adjacent to the garage.
15. Although the proposal would not be overbearing in the terms set out in the
    Council’s Residential Extensions Supplementary Planning Document Adopted
    October 2010 (SPD), it would significantly alter the outlook from the part of the car
    park nearest to it, which would be dominated by the proposed dwelling to a greater
    extent than it is by the existing garage. Notwithstanding that there is no right to a
    view, the proposal would result in an overbearing sense of enclosure which would
    be harmful to the living conditions of existing residents.
16. The Council’s concerns encompassed loss of daylight to the shared car park. The
    SPD explains that daylight is the amount of natural light that enters a building.
    Whilst not directly relevant, the appellant’s sunlight diagrams indicated that the

3
    By Arbtech Consulting Limited dated 29 November 2024


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6006117


       proposal would have only a limited effect on sunlight within the car park, being
       principally determined by the trees surrounding the site. As the evidence indicates
       that the nearby trees are the main factor affecting levels of light within the car park,
       the introduction of a two storey house would be unlikely to have an appreciable
       effect on levels of daylight within the car park. There is no evidence therefore that
       there would be a harmful reduction in daylight.
17. I nevertheless conclude that the proposal would harm the outlook from the shared
    car park to the detriment of the living conditions of existing occupiers. The
    proposal would conflict with Policy TD1 of the LPP1 and Policy DM5 of the LPP2,
    which together require development to be well designed and to avoid harm to the
    amenity of existing occupants by way of an overbearing appearance.
Living conditions of future occupiers
18. Policy DM5 of the LPP2 requires dwellings to have an area of external amenity
    space which is private, useable, secure and defensible and appropriately located.
    Where balconies are proposed, they should be 15sqm in area with minimum
    dimensions of 2m by 1.5m; and where gardens are proposed, they should be at
    least 10m deep and the width of the dwelling.
19. The proposed dwelling would be provided with a garden and balcony which the
    appellant’s plans show would together exceed the minimum required area for a
    balcony. As the policy does not express a preference for either balconies or
    gardens, and the scheme includes both, I am satisfied that together they would
    meet the needs of the occupiers of a one bed dwelling. Whilst the outdoor space
    would be at the front, the only passing traffic would be to the four dwellings in
    Clockhouse Mews, which would limit the extent of any overlooking.
20. The Council raised a concern that the outlook from the dwelling would be limited to
    hardstanding and boundary planting, resulting in a substandard living environment.
    The main outlook from the dwelling would be at the front, across the access road
    towards a belt of trees, whilst the windows at the side and rear would have a more
    limited outlook owing to the close proximity of adjoining trees. Taking account of
    the open plan design of the unit and the combined outlook from all the windows,
    there is no reason why the future occupiers of the dwelling should not enjoy
    satisfactory living conditions.
21. I conclude that the proposal provides sufficient outdoor space and a satisfactory
    outlook, such that future occupiers would enjoy suitable living conditions. The
    proposal would accord with Policy TD1 of the LPP1 and Policy DM5 of the LPP2,
    which together require development to be well designed and to provide adequate
    external space to ensure an appropriate living environment for future occupiers.
Planning Balance
22. The site is within a settlement where Policy S4 of the Framework applies.
    Therefore, development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in this Framework.
23. The Framework sets out the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, which
    include but are not restricted to the situations listed in Policy S4(2). Although none


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006117


       of the situations listed in the policy apply to the proposal, I am nonetheless
       required to consider whether the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
       outweighed by the harm I have identified in respect of character and appearance,
       arboricultural interests and the living conditions of Clockhouse Mews.
24. Policy HO7 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence.
    The Council confirmed that it cannot demonstrate a five year supply of housing
    land, with its current supply amounting to 1.28 years. As the proposal would
    provide a home which would contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, albeit in a modest manner for a single
    dwelling, substantial weight is given to this benefit.
25. Policy L2 encourages the effective use of land and requires substantial weight to
    be given to making better use of vacant and underutilised land. The proposal
    would make efficient use of a well contained site. Notwithstanding that the main
    demand locally is for larger dwellings, the delivery of a small home would be a
    social benefit, whilst economic benefits would accrue from the construction phase
    and from expenditure on goods and services by future occupiers. The proposal is
    capable of being constructed quickly. Compliance with the standards of the
    Council in respect of internal space and relationship with neighbours, amongst
    other matters, is a neutral factor.
26. Policy DP3 sets out key principles for well-designed places, by requiring proposals
    to respond to their context including their setting, in order to integrate with their
    surroundings and thereby maintain a strong sense of place. My conclusions
    regarding the proposal’s adverse impact on an AGLV and potential long term
    damage to nearby trees show that these requirements would not be satisfied. In
    these circumstances, Policy DP3(3) states that proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with these requirements. Furthermore,
    Policy P3 seeks to avoid adverse impacts on neighbouring residents, and I have
    identified that the proposal would impair the outlook from Clockhouse Mews.
27. The benefit resulting from the proposal’s modest contribution to meeting evidenced
    housing need, along with the other benefits outlined above, attracts substantial
    weight. Set against this, the harms I have identified would have a significant
    adverse effect. National decision-making Policy DP3 directs refusal in instances
    where proposals conflict with the Framework’s key principles for well-designed
    places. I conclude that the benefits of approving development would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
28. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole, and the
    material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal should
    be dismissed.

J Heppell
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
