Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026
by R Dickson BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16TH September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006244
159 Rush Green Road, Havering, Romford RM7 0PX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by M Sekyi against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Havering.
•   The application Ref is P1295.25.
•   The development proposed is change of use from residential use to a children’s home for up to two
    children (C2 use class).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from
   residential use to a children’s home for up to two children (C2 use class) at 159
   Rush Green Road, Havering, Romford RM7 0PX, in accordance with the terms of
   the application, Ref P1295.25, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: PA01 Rev A, PA02, and PA03.
     3)       The premises shall only accommodate a maximum of two children
              (disregarding staff) receiving care at any given time unless otherwise agreed
              in writing with the Local Planning Authority.
     4)       The use of the premises hereby permitted comprised of a C2 use shall only
              be used for the purposes of residential care and accommodation for children
              and not any other use falling within Class C2 of The Town and Country
              Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987.
     5)       Prior to the hereby permitted use commencing, a Noise Management Plan
              shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority
              to address concerns regarding possible noise from the hereby permitted
              change of use. Any modifications to the Noise Management Plan shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
              Noise Management Plan shall be adhered to at all times whilst the permitted
              use continues.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026, during the consideration of the appeal. I have taken account of
   this in making my decision. As the changes are not material to the issues before


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006244


     me and would not alter my conclusions, it has not been necessary to seek further
     comments from the main parties.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are:
       a) whether the site would provide a suitable location for the proposed children’s
       home,
       b) the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers,
       with specific regard to noise and disturbance, and
       c) the effect of the proposal on highway and pedestrian safety, and parking.
Reasons
Location
4. Rush Green Road is a busy road, predominantly lined with residential dwellings,
   with other business uses, including a fuel station, public houses, hot food
   takeaways and convenience stores, among other uses. The appeal site, 159 Rush
   Green Road, is a semi-detached dwelling with three bedrooms. It has hardstanding
   to the front for car parking.
5. Policy 6(i) of the Havering Local Plan 2016-2031 (2021) (Local Plan) seeks to
   support the provision of appropriate housing to meet the specialist needs of local
   people where it can be robustly demonstrated that there is an identified need within
   the borough. The proposal would provide specialist accommodation for two children
   of secondary school age, with two members of staff/carers working on a shift
   pattern. As such, the proposal would deliver housing which would meet specialist
   needs.
6. I have been provided with the comments of the Council’s Strategic Commissioner
    for children’s services, which identifies that there are a sufficient number of
    children’s homes within the borough, which is already beyond the requirements of
    the council. Despite these comments, I have no substantive evidence before me
    which sets out what the requirements of the Council are currently, or whether these
    requirements are likely to remain the case in the future.
7. I have also been provided with evidence from the London Borough of Havering
    Children’s Services Sufficiency Needs Assessment and Strategy 2025-2028 (2025)
    which demonstrates evidence of an ongoing need for new children’s homes,
    particularly for different types of specialist provision. It also identifies that the
    shortage of children’s homes has led to children being placed outside of the
    borough.
8. Nonetheless, Policy 6 of the Local Plan just requires evidence of an identified need
   within the borough. While I acknowledge the comments provided by the Council’s
   Strategic Commissioner, these are not substantiated with much explanatory
   information or evidence, whereas the Children’s Services Sufficiency Needs
   Assessment and Strategy provides a more detailed explanation. As such, on the
   strength of the evidence before me, I am satisfied that there is an identified need
   for the proposal, and therefore meets the requirements of Policy 6 of the Local
   Plan.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006244


9. Therefore, the site would be in a suitable location for a proposed children’s home.
   Although the proposal would not contribute to housing supply as advocated by
   Policy 3 of the Local Plan, it would nonetheless meet the objectives of Policy 6 of
   the Local Plan which aims to provide specialist accommodation to meet an
   identified need.
Living conditions
10. The existing property is a single-family dwelling. As such, for a family dwelling of
    this size, it might be expected that there would be a modest degree of noise and
    disturbance from the comings and goings of the occupants to attending work and
    school, as well as visitors, tradespeople and deliveries. The proposal would allow
    two children to be accommodated within the building, together with two members of
    staff/carers working on a shift pattern.
11. Given the size of the care facility proposed, the noise and disturbance would be
    unlikely to be much different from that of a family home. The appellant asserts that
    the future occupants would be attending local schools and would have a structured
    routine. However, there is disagreement between the parties about the care
    requirements of the future occupants and the associated increase in visitors to the
    property as a result.
12. I appreciate that the number of comings and goings to and from the property may
    increase slightly compared to the existing situation. However, given the limited
    number of occupants, the comings and goings to and from the appeal site as a
    result of additional support staff, professionals and family visits would likely be
    similar to that of the existing use as a family dwelling. As such, the proposed use
    would have limited harmful impact on the neighbouring occupiers, and it is likely
    that the proposed use would exhibit little in the way of outward signs of its use.
13. I acknowledge that there is some dispute about the number of people likely to be
    required in the children’s home to provide support to the occupants. While I have
    found that the proposed use would have limited harmful impact on the neighbouring
    occupiers, if the needs and requirements of the future occupants were to increase,
    it is necessary to impose a condition requiring a noise management plan to be
    submitted to and approved by the Council, to ensure that the impact of noise and
    disturbance on neighbouring occupiers can be adequately controlled even if the
    proposed use intensifies. The imposition of the condition reinforces my findings that
    the proposal would have limited harmful impact on the neighbouring occupiers.
14. Accordingly, the proposal would not harm the living conditions of the neighbouring
    occupiers, with specific regard to noise and disturbance. The proposal would
    therefore be in accordance with Policies 6, 7 and 34 of the Local Plan, and Policy
    H12 of The London Plan (2021) (London Plan), which collectively seek to ensure
    that developments, including for specialist accommodation, do not result in
    unacceptable levels of noise and disturbance, impacting unduly upon amenity.
Highway safety
15. There is hardstanding to the front of the appeal site which would accommodate car
    parking for two vehicles. Access to the rear of the site is provided between the
    appeal site and No 157. During my site visit, I observed an outbuilding to the rear of
    the site within the garden, and the appellant confirms that cycles could be stored at


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006244


     the rear of the building. The site is within an area defined as Public Transport
     Accessibility Level 3 (PTAL 3).
16. The future occupants would not be of driving age, therefore would not require their
    own vehicles at the appeal site. The proposed change of use would require two
    members of staff/carers working on a shift pattern, whose private vehicles could be
    accommodated on the hard standing at the front of the property. Taking into
    account visits from additional support staff, professionals and family members, the
    proposed use would result in a broadly similar impact with regards to the safety and
    convenience of the local highway network.
17. I acknowledge that change over-times between shifts could give rise to some
    potential to increase pressure on parking spaces, particularly where managing
    vehicle movements for members of staff who use a private vehicle. However, the
    site is within PTAL 3 and is well served by public transport, therefore members of
    staff/carers would have the option of using public transport. As such, the parking of
    private vehicles at the site within the off-street parking could be adequately
    managed through shift coordination.
18. During my site visit, I observed vehicles parked on the wide pavement Infront of the
    dwellings on Rush Green Road. There is limited information before me, including
    my observations on site, regarding the on-street parking arrangements outside the
    appeal site. However, given the scale of the proposal, the parking requirements
    would be accommodated within the driveway of the appeal site. As such, it would
    be unlikely to increase pedestrian-vehicle conflict along the pavement outside the
    appeal site.
19. Accordingly, the proposal would not harm highway or pedestrian safety, or parking.
    As such, the proposal would be in accordance with Policy 6 and 24 of the Local
    Plan, and Policy T6 of the London Plan. Collectively, they seek to ensure that an
    adequate level of parking in line with levels of existing and future public transport
    connectivity.
Conditions
20. I have had regard to the conditions suggested by the Council. In addition to the
    standard time limit condition, I have also imposed a condition specifying the
    approved plans, in the interests of certainty. Conditions specifying the ongoing use
    of the site, as well as the number of occupants, are necessary to ensure that the
    proposal does not harm the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be allowed.

R Dickson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
