Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by Laura Cuthbert BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006629
Land Opposite and to the East of the Full Quart, Off Bristol Road (A370), Hewish,
Puxton BS24 6RT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Brazil and Mr Richards against the decision of North Somerset
    Council.
•   The application Ref is 23/P/2593/FUL.
•   The development proposed is Change of use to Gypsy and Travellers site with associated
    development.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr and Mrs Brazil and Mr Richards against
   North Somerset Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. The address in the banner heading is taken from the appeal form and decision
   notice, as it more accurately describes the location of the appeal site.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. The revised Framework now contains the Government's national
   policies relating to Traveller site provision, replacing the previous Planning Policy
   for Traveller Sites (PPTS). It also incorporates the flood risk vulnerability
   classifications and flood zone compatibility tables previously contained within the
   Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). I sought comments from the main parties on
   the implications of the revised Framework for the determination of this appeal and
   have taken those comments into account. Accordingly, I have determined the
   appeal having regard to the policies of the revised Framework.
5. The Council is preparing a new local plan to take the place of the Core Strategy
   and Sites and Policies Plan for the period 2026 to 2041. The Council advise that it
   will shortly submit its Local Plan to the Planning Inspectorate for examination.
   Whilst the relevant draft policies are a material consideration, as the plan has not
   yet been examined and its policies have not yet been found sound, I attach only
   limited weight to the emerging policies and allocations at this stage. I have
   determined the appeal on this basis.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006629


Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the proposal would comply with local and national
   planning policy which seeks to steer new development away from areas at the
   highest risk of flooding.
Reasons
Flooding
7. The appeal site, comprising approximately 0.3 hectares of land, lies wholly within
   Flood Zone 3a, which is defined as having a high probability of flooding. The
   proposal seeks planning permission for a Gypsy and Traveller site providing 9
   pitches for permanent residential occupation. Such development falls within the
   category of Highly Vulnerable development as identified in Table 2 of Annex F to
   the Framework. The flood risk vulnerability and flood zone compatibility provisions
   set out in Table 3 of Annex F indicate that Highly Vulnerable development should
   not be located within Flood Zone 3a.
8. Policy F6 of the Framework states that, within areas falling within Flood Zones 2,
   3a and 3b, development proposals should be refused where the proposed use is
   incompatible with the risk from river or sea flooding, having regard to the
   compatibility matrix contained within Table 3 of Annex F. As the appeal site lies
   wholly within Flood Zone 3a and the proposal comprises Highly Vulnerable
   development, the proposal gives rise to a clear conflict with national planning policy
   relating to flood risk.
9. Policy F7 of the Framework seeks to ensure that development is safe from flooding
   throughout its lifetime and does not increase flood risk elsewhere. In areas at risk of
   flooding, development should only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that
   it would remain safe for its lifetime, taking account of the vulnerability of its users,
   that residual risks can be managed safely, that safe access and escape
   arrangements are available where appropriate, that the development is flood
   resistant and resilient, and that flood risk would not be increased elsewhere.
10. The appellant has submitted a Flood Risk Assessment which sets out a package of
    mitigation measures including land raising, finished floor levels above predicted
    flood levels, flood-resilient construction of the mobile homes and dayrooms, and a
    Flood Warning and Evacuation Plan. These measures are intended to reduce the
    consequences of flooding and assist in the management of residual flood risk.
11. I have had regard to these mitigation measures and accept that they may assist in
    satisfying certain requirements of Policy F7. However, whilst they may reduce the
    consequences of flooding and improve the management of residual risk, they do
    not alter the fact that the proposal would involve Highly Vulnerable development
    within Flood Zone 3a. Consequently, they do not overcome the significant conflict
    with Policy F6 and the flood zone compatibility provisions contained within Annex F.
12. Moreover, whilst the site currently benefits from existing tidal flood defences, the
    appellant's own Flood Risk Assessment acknowledges that the standard of
    protection afforded by those defences is expected to reduce over the lifetime of the
    development as a consequence of climate change. The assessment further
    accepts that future maintenance, improvement or realignment of those defences
    cannot be guaranteed, as such measures are dependent upon future funding


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006629


     decisions. Consequently, I am not satisfied that the long-term safety of future
     occupiers can be assured solely through reliance upon existing flood defence
     infrastructure and emergency management measures.
13. Significantly, the Flood Risk Assessment identifies the Flood Warning and
    Evacuation Plan as the principal means of managing flood risk to the site. The
    safety of future occupiers would therefore remain dependent upon the continued
    operation of flood forecasting and warning systems, the receipt of warnings by
    residents, and their timely and effective response over the lifetime of the
    development. Whilst such measures may reduce risk, they represent the
    management of flood risk rather than its avoidance. In my view, they do not remove
    the site's vulnerability arising from the siting of permanent residential caravans
    within Flood Zone 3a.
14. The appellant contends that the proposal satisfies both the Sequential Test and the
    Exception Test. In relation to the Sequential Test, I acknowledge the evidence
    concerning the shortage of Gypsy and Traveller accommodation within the North
    Somerset area and the apparent absence of reasonably available alternative sites
    at a lower risk of flooding. However, irrespective of whether the Sequential Test is
    satisfied, the proposal would remain Highly Vulnerable development located within
    Flood Zone 3a. The Framework does not indicate that satisfaction of the Sequential
    Test would, in itself, render such development compatible with that flood zone.
15. In relation to the Exception Test, the appellant again relies upon the identified
    unmet need for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation together with the proposed
    flood mitigation measures. Whilst these matters are material considerations and
    attract weight in favour of the proposal, they do not negate the substantial conflict
    with national policy arising from the siting of Highly Vulnerable development within
    Flood Zone 3a. Consequently, the proposal remains in conflict with the
    Framework's flood risk policies.
16. Accordingly, even if the Sequential Test and Exception Test were satisfied, the
    proposal would nevertheless involve Highly Vulnerable development within Flood
    Zone 3a. For that reason, I find that the proposal gives rise to a significant conflict
    with the Framework's flood risk policies and the vulnerability compatibility
    provisions contained within Annex F.
17. I have also considered the relevance of Policy CS3 of the North Somerset Core
    Strategy (2017) (Core Strategy). The policy seeks to direct development away from
    areas at risk of flooding and states that development within Flood Zones 2 and 3
    will only be permitted where it is demonstrated that it complies with the Sequential
    Test and, where applicable, the Exception Test. Whilst Policy CS3 addresses the
    application of the Sequential and Exception Tests, it does not displace the
    Framework's requirement that the vulnerability classification of a development must
    be compatible with the flood zone within which it is proposed. Policy CS3 must be
    read alongside national policy concerning flood risk vulnerability and flood zone
    compatibility.
18. In this case, the proposal comprises Highly Vulnerable development located wholly
    within Flood Zone 3a. As set out above, the Framework identifies such
    development as incompatible with that flood zone. Accordingly, notwithstanding the
    appellant's case in relation to the Sequential and Exception Tests, I find that the
    proposal conflicts with the objectives of Policy CS3 when read as a whole and in


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006629


     the context of national flood risk policy. I attach substantial weight to this conflict in
     the circumstances of the appeal before me.
19. Therefore, in conclusion, for the reasons set out above, the proposal would not
    comply with local and national planning policy which seeks to steer new
    development away from areas at the highest risk of flooding. It would conflict with
    Policy CS3 of the Core Strategy and with national planning policy contained within
    the Framework. Taken together, these seek to direct development away from areas
    at the highest risk of flooding.
Other Matters
20. The appeal site lies within Zone C of the North Somerset and Mendip Bats Special
    Area of Conservation (SAC), which is designated for its greater and lesser
    horseshoe bat populations. However, given my findings on the main issue and as I
    am dismissing the appeal on other grounds, there is no need for me to reach a
    finding on the effect of the proposal on the SAC, nor to undertake an Appropriate
    Assessment under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as
    amended).
21. The appeal site also lies within the wider setting of the Grade II listed Chestnut
    Farmhouse. The appeal site forms part of the surrounding rural landscape which
    contributes to the wider setting of the farmhouse and assists in understanding its
    historic function as a farmstead. However, the presence of recently constructed
    agricultural buildings, together with intervening vegetation, substantially limits
    intervisibility between the appeal site and the listed building. Consequently, whilst
    the proposal would result in some change to part of its wider rural setting, I find that
    it would have a negligible effect on the significance of the heritage asset. As such,
    the proposal would preserve the setting of the listed building.
22. The Council accepted that the proposal would alter the appearance of the currently
    undeveloped field and reduce the rural character experienced from the adjacent
    public footpath which runs along the eastern boundary. However, having regard to
    existing nearby commercial development, the retention of boundary vegetation, and
    proposed landscaping, the overall impact on the character and appearance of the
    area was assessed as causing moderate harm that could be further mitigated
    through additional planting secured by condition. I have no substantive evidence
    before me to disagree with this conclusion.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
23. Policy S5 of the Framework identifies certain forms of development that may be
    appropriate outside settlement boundaries. Criterion g) includes development which
    would address an evidenced unmet need for Gypsy, Traveller or Travelling
    Showpeople accommodation, provided that it satisfies the requirements of Policy
    HO12. Policy S5 further requires decision-makers to assess whether the benefits of
    such development, which meets the criteria, would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    of the Framework.
24. I have had regard to the Council's inability to demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable Gypsy and Traveller pitches and the resulting need for additional
    authorised accommodation within the district. The appellant sets out that the five-
    year supply requirement, taking account of future growth, amounts to 131 additional

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006629


     pitches. I also acknowledge that the sites allocated for Gypsy and Traveller
     accommodation in the emerging plan are located within Flood Zone 3a, which lends
     support to the appellant's contention that there is a limited supply of suitable and
     available land outside areas of flood risk. These considerations weigh significantly
     in favour of the proposal.
25. The proposal would provide nine Gypsy and Traveller pitches and would therefore
    contribute towards meeting that identified need. I acknowledge that the site is
    reasonably related to local services and facilities and that the proposal would not
    result in unacceptable harm to highway safety, surface and foul water drainage
    matters or the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
26. I have carefully considered the appellant's submissions regarding the lack of
    suitable, available and affordable alternative sites. I also acknowledge that the
    proposal would make use of an existing access arrangement and would not
    dominate the local community. Whilst the revised Framework no longer places
    specific emphasis on the effect of sites on the settled community, I have
    nevertheless had regard to these matters.
27. However, I have found that the appeal site lies wholly within Flood Zone 3a and
    that the development would comprise Highly Vulnerable development within an
    area at high risk of flooding. The proposal is therefore incompatible with the flood
    risk vulnerability and flood zone compatibility provisions contained within Annex F
    of the Framework and conflicts with Policy F6. Whilst the appellant has proposed a
    package of mitigation measures, including raised floor levels, flood warning and
    evacuation procedures, flood-resilient construction and access improvements,
    those measures do not remove the significant conflict arising from the location of
    Highly Vulnerable development within Flood Zone 3a.
28. I have considered the appellant's submissions regarding the revised Framework
    published in August 2026, including the contention that flooding is not a
    determinative issue and that planning permission may nevertheless be granted
    following the exercise of planning judgement under section 38(6) of the Act. I also
    note the appellant's acceptance that the proposal cannot comply with Policy F6.
    Whilst that conflict does not automatically preclude the grant of planning
    permission, Policy S5.2 indicates that adverse effects are likely to substantially
    outweigh the benefits where a proposal fails to comply with a national decision-
    making policy that states development should be refused in specified
    circumstances. Given the nature of the conflict with Policy F6, which states that
    development proposals should be refused where incompatible with the risk from
    river or sea flooding, and the Framework's express identification of Highly
    Vulnerable development as incompatible with Flood Zone 3a, I attach substantial
    weight to that conflict.
29. Whilst the courts, in particular those cases which the appellant has referred me to,
    have recognised that the absence of suitable alternative sites may attract very
    substantial weight, they have not prescribed the outcome of the planning balance in
    future cases. Rather, the assessment of whether the benefits of a proposal
    outweigh its harms remains a matter of planning judgment in the circumstances of
    the individual case.
30. The appellant has also drawn my attention to a number of appeal decisions and
    recent planning permissions in which permission was granted for Gypsy and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006629


        Traveller sites within areas at risk of flooding, in some cases notwithstanding an
        objection from the Environment Agency. However, I only have copies of the appeal
        decisions before me and not the full body of evidence that was available to those
        decision-makers. Notably, a number of these related to temporary permissions
        rather than permanent permissions1 and pre-dated the adoption of the revised
        Framework.
31. The Secretary of State in the Staples Vegetables Ltd2 decision accepted that the
    proposal comprised Highly Vulnerable development within Flood Zone 3a. He also
    expressly recognised the resulting conflict with national flood risk policy and
    attached considerable weight to flood risk concerns. Permission was granted only
    because of the exceptional, site-specific circumstances of that case, including the
    absence of a suitable alternative site, the protection afforded by existing flood
    defences, and the particular benefits of the development. The permission was also
    limited to a temporary five-year period.
32. Consequently, the Staples Vegetables decision does not establish a general
    principle that flood risk is merely one ordinary material consideration in the planning
    balance. Rather, it demonstrates that any departure from national flood risk policy
    requires compelling justification grounded in the particular facts of the case. The
    weight to be afforded to flood risk in the present appeal must therefore be assessed
    having regard to the characteristics of the appeal site and the relevant development
    plan and national policy framework.
33. Whilst I have had regard to those decisions, they do not demonstrate that Highly
    Vulnerable development within Flood Zone 3a will necessarily be acceptable. In
    particular, they were reached in materially different factual and policy contexts.
    Accordingly, they do not alter my conclusion that the proposed development
    conflicts with the Framework's flood risk policies applicable to this appeal.
34. I have also considered whether a temporary grant of planning permission for a
    period of 5 years would be appropriate. However, a temporary permission would
    not alter the site's flood risk characteristics. Nor is there persuasive evidence
    before me that the identified flood risk harm, or the policy conflict arising from the
    location of Highly Vulnerable development within Flood Zone 3a, would materially
    diminish over time. Consequently, I find that a temporary permission would not
    overcome my concerns regarding the suitability of the site for the proposed use.
35. I have had due regard to the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Public Sector
    Equality Duty. The future occupants of the site would have protected characteristics
    for the purposes of the Equality Act 2010. Whilst dismissal of the appeal may have
    consequences for their ability to maintain their way of life, I am satisfied that
    protecting future occupiers from unacceptable flood risk is a legitimate and
    compelling planning objective. Any interference with those interests would therefore
    be necessary and proportionate.
36. Taking all matters into account, I attach significant weight to the unmet need for
    Gypsy and Traveller accommodation, the lack of suitable alternative sites, the
    mitigation measures advanced by the appellant, and the absence of a five-year
    supply of deliverable pitches. Nevertheless, those benefits would be achieved
    through the siting of a highly vulnerable form of development within an area

1
    Including 22/P/1124/FUL and 23/P/1423/FUL
2
    APP/Z2505/V/09/2119176


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        6
Appeal Decision 6006629


     identified by national policy as being at high risk of flooding. The proposed
     mitigation measures would serve principally to manage, rather than remove, the
     risk and therefore together, the benefits would be substantially outweighed by the
     adverse effects. Furthermore, the Framework specifically states the proposed
     development should be refused.
37. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan
    when read as a whole. There are no material considerations, including the
    Framework, which would outweigh that conflict. For the reasons given above, the
    appeal is dismissed.

Laura Cuthbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
