Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 July 2026
by Ann Veevers BA(Hons) PGDip(BCon) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006423
79 Clerkenwell Road, Camden, London EC1R 5AR
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a failure to give notice within the
     prescribed period of a decision on an application for express consent to display an advertisement.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Anton Friedlander of Tsp 79 Cr Limited against the Council of the London
     Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2025/5617/A.
•    The advertisement proposed is non-illuminated hand-painted mural applied flat to the existing flank
     wall, with no projection beyond the wall surface. Part of a rotating mural programme. Optional
     painted sponsor credit (max. 20% of composition). No lighting, no digital display, no movement.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of non-
       illuminated hand painted mural applied flat to the existing flank wall, with no
       projection beyond the wall surface. Part of a rotating mural programme. Optional
       painted sponsor credit (max. 20% of composition). No lighting, no digital display,
       no movement at 79 Clerkenwell Road, Camden, London EC1R 5AR in accordance
       with the terms of the application, Ref 2025/5617/A. The consent is for three years
       from the date of this decision and is subject to the five standard conditions set out
       in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations and the following additional condition:
       1)    The advertisement permitted by this consent and any materials erected,
             installed or used principally for the purpose of displaying the advertisement
             shall be removed from site no later than 3 years from the date of this decision.
Preliminary Matters
2.     This appeal was submitted following the Council’s failure to give notice of its
       decision on the application within the prescribed period. The Council provided a
       decision notice and an officer report, after the appeal was made, setting out the
       reason why it would have refused the application had it retained jurisdiction to do
       so. The appellant and third parties have had the opportunity to comment on this
       information, and I have had regard to it in framing the main issue.
3.     The time period for which consent is sought for the advertisement specified on the
       application form is from 2 February 2026 to 2 February 2026, which is clearly
       incorrect. The information submitted with the application refers to a 36-month
       temporary consent, and the Council dealt with the application on that basis. On
       seeking the views of the main parties, both confirmed that advertisement consent
       is sought for a temporary period of 36 months from the date of the decision. I have
       dealt with the appeal on this basis.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006423


4.       The parties have drawn my attention to the policies of the Camden Local Plan,
         2017 (CLP) that they consider relevant to this appeal, and I have taken them into
         account as material considerations. However, powers under the Regulations to
         control advertisements may be exercised only in the interests of amenity and
         public safety, taking into account the provisions of the development plan, so far as
         they are material, and any other relevant factors. In my determination of this
         appeal the Council’s policies have not therefore, by themselves, been decisive.
5.       The emerging Draft New Camden Local Plan, January 2024 ( the draft CLP) has
         been referred to in the Council’s appeal submissions. I have not been advised as
         to the status of the draft CLP and whether or not it has been formally adopted.
         Consequently, it carries limited weight insofar as it is a relevant consideration on
         the matter of amenity.
6.       Neither the Council nor any interested party allege any harm in relation to public
         safety. Having regard to the presented evidence and my observations on site, I
         have no reason to reach a different view and confirm that the proposal would
         cause no harm to public safety.
7.       The appeal site is located in a conservation area; therefore Section 72 (1) of the
         Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) is relevant.
         It sets out that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or
         enhancing the character or appearance of that area. This statutory duty applies in
         advertisement appeals in so far as it relates to the consideration of amenity.
         Evidence also indicates a listed building is located in proximity to the appeal site.
         The setting of listed buildings is in this case a relevant material consideration in
         terms the consideration of amenity, but the statutory duty related thereto1 is not
         engaged.
Main Issue
8.       The main issue is the effect of the proposal on amenity, including whether it would
         preserve the character and appearance of Hatton Garden Conservation Area (the
         CA) and the setting of the Grade II* listed Roman Catholic Italian Church of St
         Peter and Presbytery (the Church).
Reasons
9.       The appeal site, 79 Clerkenwell Road (No 79) is a six-storey building located on
         the south side of Clerkenwell Road, a trafficked street lined with buildings of a
         similar height in the eastern part of the CA. No 79 forms part of an attached block
         of buildings that together sit on the corner of Clerkenwell Road, Hatton Garden
         and Hatton Wall. The side elevation of No 79 faces east and is adjacent to a parcel
         of land which, at the time of my site visit, was used in part for the parking of
         motorbikes and vehicles. Beyond this to the east is the side elevation 75
         Clerkenwell Road (No 75), which is also part of a large corner building that fronts
         Saffron Hill and Hatton Wall.
10. The surrounding area is a busy commercial area that also includes residential
    uses above ground floor. Buildings in the area are varied in their age and
    appearance with a notable proportion of Victorian and early 20th century


1
    Section 66 (1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
Appeal Decision 6006423


         warehouses and workshops interspersed with modern and less architecturally
         detailed buildings such as No 79.
11. In part and insofar as is relevant to this appeal, I find the special interest and
    significance of the CA largely derives from the varied architectural and historic
    interest of the area’s buildings and street layout in demonstrating the commercial
    development of the city, particularly in relation to the jewellery trade. Although the
    area has a commercial character, advertisements along Clerkenwell Road are
    generally confined to ground floor frontages. This allows the buildings and their
    architectural features to remain the dominant elements in the street scene.
12. The Conservation Area Appraisal2 (CAA) identifies the view looking west along
    Clerkenwell Road across its junction with Farringdon Road as a ‘Key View’ in
    revealing the topography of the area and the positive attributes of the Lever
    Building and its prominent clock. The buildings to each of side of No 79 (No 75 and
    Kovacs House, Hatton Gardens) are both identified in the CAA as buildings that
    make a positive contribution to the character of the CA and the ‘gap’ between No
    79 and No 75 is identified as a development opportunity site. The Council suggest
    No 79 makes a neutral contribution to the significance of the CA and given its
    unremarkable design, I agree.
13. Located to the north of No 79 on the other side of Clerkenwell Road is the Church.
    Constructed 1862/3 it is completely surrounded by built form such that only the
    narrow entrance loggia to Clerkenwell Road is clearly visible from the street,
    although the large presbytery, included in the list entry, fronts Back Hill. This belies
    the basilica-style scale and importance of the Church as evidenced from the
    information before me. A hint at what lies behind is provided in the ornate loggia
    and portico with two arches and niches that contain two brightly decorated
    mosaics, as well as a tall bell tower. The interior is also known for its wealth of
    statues, paintings and furnishings. It is a historically and architecturally distinctive
    building to which its design, scale and surviving fabric all contribute to its high
    grade significance. Special interest also stems from its ongoing ecclesiastical use
    and symbolism of faith which link to the local community.
14. The setting of the Church comprises busy vehicular routes and tall buildings,
    including No 79, within a dense urban grain. Nonetheless, the Church, and what it
    represents, can still be experienced within this dynamic setting. In relation to
    No 79, the evidence does not indicate that there are any historical or functional
    links between it and the Church. Although there is intervisibility between the two,
    No 79, as part of the Church’s setting, makes a neutral contribution to the asset’s
    special interest and significance.
15. The proposal would involve a rotating programme of hand painted murals on the
    whole of the side elevation of No 79 over a 36 month time period. The application
    form and submitted plans set out the size of two types of sponsored, commercial
    advertisements that would also be hand painted on the wall denoting the partner
    associated with the artwork on the mural. The submitted information suggests that
    from January to June each year, the mural would comprise of artwork to support
    Clerkenwell Design Week and the London-wide National Gallery Programme. For
    the remainder of the year, the mural would host ‘culturally driven artworks’ funded
    through sponsored advertising which the appellant contends would be limited to

2
    Hatton Garden Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Strategy, August 2017


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6006423


       30% of the year. Each mural would be painted by hand using microporous
       masonry paints and include a limited area for sponsor credit. The murals would be
       non-digital and non-illuminated and the content would differ, changing
       approximately 4 to 6 times per year.
16. The Camden Planning Guidance: Advertisements, March 2018 (CPGA) provides
    advice on the design and siting of advertisements. It states that advertisements
    should contribute positively to the character and appearance of an area and,
    amongst other things, respect the form, fabric, design, scale and setting of the host
    building as well as serve as an integral part of the immediate surroundings. The
    CPGA advises that advertisements will only be acceptable at fascia level since
    above fascia level they can appear obtrusive. However, it also states that
    interesting and unique styles of advertisements and signs will be considered
    acceptable where they are compatible with the host building and surrounding
    environment.
17. Due to the gap between No 79 and No 75, and the topography of the area, the
    side elevation of No 79 is highly visible along Clerkenwell Road when approaching
    from the east. The wall above ground floor level is also visible from street level on
    Hatton Wall. At present, it is painted white, and I saw at my site visit that the lower
    part is covered in graffiti and small paper posters. As such, it contributes little to
    the visual quality of the building and the wider cityscape.
18. The proposal would introduce significant-sized and eye-catching painted murals to
    a street devoid of similar advertisements. It would be clearly noticeable in public
    views along Clerkenwell Road looking west, at the junction of Clerkenwell Road
    and Herbal Hill, and from Hatton Wall. Longer views would be relatively limited
    despite the siting of No 79 on the incline of a hill due to the alignment of other
    buildings on the south side of the street.
19. The Regulations do not provide for, along with other matters, the function or
    content of a proposed advertisement to be taken into account when considering
    effects on amenity. However, I note support for a partnership arrangement relating
    to the content and delivery of the proposed murals in association with the National
    Gallery and the Hatton Garden Business Improvement District through community
    engagement in public art. I am also mindful that, even if a sponsored
    advertisement constitutes a limited proportion of the overall painted mural, in
    reality, the whole mural may also constitute an advertisement depending on its
    content. As such, I acknowledge that over the extent of a year, some of the
    painted murals would include commercial advertising during the months when
    murals were not displayed in partnership with Clerkenwell Design Week or the
    National Gallery.
20. Nevertheless, the painted murals would have a more muted visual quality than
    illuminated digital advertisements, which are often visually sharp and overly
    prominent. In the context of this specific site, I find that the proposal would not
    obscure or damage any architectural feature of No 79. Moreover, it would provide
    interest to an expanse of wall bereft of any character or even any traditional
    brickwork and which suffers from ad-hoc graffiti and fly-posters at the lower level.
    The proposal would not be illuminated other than by existing streetlights and,
    importantly, it is proposed to be in-situ for a temporary period of 36 months only;
    and would be easily reversible by painting over.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006423


21. Whilst there may be other ways to remove the existing graffiti and an active use of
    the land fronting the side elevation of No 79 could enhance the appearance of the
    site and the street scene, no details of any such use have been provided to me.
    Consequently, in the context of this undeveloped ‘gap’ site within a busy city area,
    I consider the proposed painted mural would add visual interest to the street
    scene.
22. The proposal would not affect the listed Church’s evolution and fabric nor its
    spiritual and communal value, and thus the contribution these elements make to
    the asset’s significance. It would result in change to the built backdrop in views
    looking westwards, which forms part of the asset’s setting. However, given the
    orientation of the proposed advertisement, it would not alter the authenticity of how
    the Church is experienced or how its intrinsic heritage values are appreciated. On
    this basis, the proposal would preserve the listed building’s setting and would not
    harm its significance. I note the same conclusion is reached by the Council in this
    regard.
23. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would not detract from
    the appearance of the area nor undermine or harm the identified special interest of
    the CA. Therefore, it would have an acceptable effect on the visual amenity of the
    surrounding area including through preserving the character or appearance of the
    CA as a whole insofar as it relates to amenity.
24. Accordingly, to the extent that they are material considerations, the proposal would
    not conflict with Policies D1, D2 and D4 of the CLP which require, amongst other
    things, that developments respect local context and character and that
    advertisements respect their setting and host building.
Other Matters
25. My attention has been drawn by the Council to other hand painted murals in
    Camden that have been dismissed at appeal. The examples at 48 Chalk Farm
    Road3 and 49 Chalk Farm Road4 sit on opposite sides of the road. They both
    related to murals in a location where the Inspector in each case considered the
    characteristics and appearance of the area gradually moves away from the
    commercial appearance of Chalk Farm Road. The elevation upon which each of
    the proposed murals would be displayed was also not blank and featureless, which
    is the case in the appeal before me.
26. In the case at 226 Camden High Street5, while the mural proposed would be
    located on the building’s side elevation, this elevation also fronts Hawley Crescent
    and incorporates a shop front at ground floor level. The proposal at 156 Portobello
    Road6 is not in the same London Borough and the Inspector in that case noted the
    residential character of the area where painted front elevations were generally a
    single colour.
27. Whilst I recognise that consistency in the planning process is important, each case
    must be determined on its own merits and on the basis of the evidence. In all of
    the above cases, the circumstances relating to site context were materially
    different to the case before me. These examples are not therefore directly

3
  Appeal Ref: APP/X5210/Z/24/3354706
4
  Appeal Ref: APP/X5210/Z/25/3363046
5
  Appeal Ref: APP/X5210/H/22/3305667
6
  Appeal Ref: APPK5600/X/22/3293984


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006423


         comparable due their locational and contextual differences. As such, I am
         satisfied that my decision on this proposal, on this particular site with its distinct
         characteristics, has been dealt with on its own merits and has been found to be
         acceptable for the reasons given above and would not fetter the Council’s ability to
         exercise their judgement on other proposals.
28. I note a previous large advertisement at the appeal site was removed as a result of
    potential enforcement action by the Council. I do not have full details of this
    advertisement, including whether it was a hand painted or a digital display. As
    such, I cannot be certain that the baseline for assessing that case is the same as
    the one now before me.
Conditions
29. The Council have not suggested any conditions beyond the five standard
    conditions set out in the Regulations, and the appellant has not provided comment
    on the standard conditions.
30. By virtue of the provisions of Class 14 of Part 1 of Schedule 3 of the Regulations,
    an advertisement may continue to be displayed after the end of the period for
    which express consent was granted, unless to do so would contravene a condition
    subject to which express consent was granted7. Whilst I have concluded that the
    display of the proposed advertisement, in the form of hand-painted murals, would
    not cause harm to the amenity of the area, I am mindful of the potential changing
    nature of the mural and the land fronting the appeal site. I am also aware of the
    site’s location within the conservation area. Furthermore, the nature of the
    proposed display is reversible by being painted over. As such, I consider it prudent
    to impose an additional condition requiring the removal of the advertisement
    display at the end of the consented period, in order to allow the effect of the
    changing hand-painted murals on amenity over the period of the consent to be
    reviewed.
Conclusion
31. For the reasons given above, and having considered all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal is allowed.



Ann Veevers
INSPECTOR




7
    Class 14, paragraph 14(a)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    6
