Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by L Fleming BSc (Hons) MRTPI IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026
 Appeal A Ref: 6006806
 30 Main Street, Lyddington, Oakham LE15 9LT
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
      Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
      which a previous planning permission was granted.
 •    The appeal is made by Robert Cleminson against the decision of Rutland County Council.
 •    The application Ref is 2025/0779/FUL.
 •    The application sought planning permission for retrospective planning permission for the following:
      Vent to the downstairs bathroom from the shower and downstairs toilet. Boiler flue. Vent from
      upstairs toilet. Essential repair to chimney stack. Essential redirection of the front facing gutters. New
      services to the front of the building: Water tap, electric socket, utility box and fibre cable.
      Replacement exterior door light from non-working previous. Replacement of fascias to front with
      black from white to match guttering. Rear windows replacement to match with the front windows.
      Lintels to windows, old cracked paint removed and to be repainted black. Wooden Bin storage unit.
      Trellis to be placed behind a new bin store if approved without complying with a condition attached to
      planning permission Ref 2024/0836/FUL, dated 11 March 2025.
 •    The condition in dispute is No 6 which states: Notwithstanding the details submitted, within two
      months of the date of this permission, details of the management of the surface water runoff from the
      rainwater goods shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for approval in writing. The
      approved development shall then be implemented within two months of the date of the approval of
      these details.
 •    The reason given for the condition is: To ensure the runoff is managed effectively, in accordance with
      Policy SP15 of the Site Allocations and Policies DPD.

 Appeal B Ref: 6006808
 30 Main Street, Lyddington, Oakham LE15 9LT
 •    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
      1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent under section 19 of the Planning
      (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended) for works to a listed building
      without complying with conditions subject to which a previous listed building consent was granted.
 •    The appeal is made by Robert Cleminson against the decision of Rutland County Council.
 •    The application Ref is 2025/0778/LBA
 •    The application sought planning permission for retrospective planning permission for the following:
      Vent to the downstairs bathroom from the shower and downstairs toilet. Boiler flue. Vent from upstairs
      toilet. Essential repair to chimney stack. Essential redirection of the front facing gutters. New services
      to the front of the building: Water tap, electric socket, utility box and fibre cable. Replacement exterior
      door light from non-working previous. Replacement of fascias to front with black from white to match
      guttering. Rear windows replacement to match with the front windows. Lintels to windows, old
      cracked paint removed and to be repainted black. Wooden Bin storage unit. Trellis to be placed
      behind a new bin store if approved without complying with a condition attached to listed building
      consent Ref 2024/1038/LBA, dated 11 March 2025.
 •    The condition in dispute is No 5 which states: Notwithstanding the details submitted, within two
      months of the date of this permission, details of the management of the surface water runoff from the
      rainwater goods shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for approval in writing. The
      approved development shall then be implemented within two months of the date of the approval of
      these details.
 •    The reason given for the condition is: To ensure the runoff is managed effectively, in accordance with
      Policy SP15 of the Site Allocations and Policies DPD.


 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006806 & 6006808


Decisions
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for retrospective
       planning permission for the following: Vent to the downstairs bathroom from the
       shower and downstairs toilet. Boiler flue. Vent from upstairs toilet. Essential repair
       to chimney stack. Essential redirection of the front facing gutters. New services to
       the front of the building: Water tap, electric socket, utility box and fibre cable.
       Replacement exterior door light from non-working previous. Replacement of
       fascias to front with black from white to match guttering. Rear windows
       replacement to match with the front windows. Lintels to windows, old cracked paint
       removed and to be repainted black. Wooden Bin storage unit. Trellis to be placed
       behind a new bin store if approved at 30 Main Street, Lyddington, Oakham LE15
       9LT in accordance with the application Ref 2025/0779/FUL, without compliance
       with condition number 6 previously imposed on planning permission Ref
       2024/0836/FUL, dated 11 March 2025 and subject to the conditions set out in the
       attached schedule.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is allowed and listed building consent is granted for retrospective listed
       building consent for the following: Vent to the downstairs bathroom from the
       shower and downstairs toilet. Boiler flue. Vent from upstairs toilet. Essential repair
       to chimney stack. Essential redirection of the front facing gutters. New services to
       the front of the building: Water tap, electric socket, utility box and fibre cable.
       Replacement exterior door light from non-working previous. Replacement of
       fascias to front with black from white to match guttering. Rear windows
       replacement to match with the front windows. Lintels to windows, old cracked paint
       removed and to be repainted black. Wooden Bin storage unit. Trellis to be placed
       behind a new bin store if approved at 30 Main Street, Lyddington, Oakham LE15
       9LT in accordance with the application Ref 2025/0778/LBA, without compliance
       with condition number 5 previously imposed on listed building consent Ref
       2024/1038/LBA, dated 11 March 2025 and subject to the conditions set out in the
       attached schedule.
Background and Main Issue
3. The two appeals relate to the same scheme at the same property under different
   but complementary legislation. I have therefore determined them together in my
   reasoning below, except where otherwise indicated.
4. Since the Council made its decisions on the proposals, the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026 (the Framework) has been published. It is now material to my
   decisions and supersedes the version of the National Planning Policy Framework
   that was available when the Council made its decisions. However, insofar as they
   are relevant to these appeals, the policies have not materially changed. I have not
   therefore needed to seek the parties’ views on this change. I am satisfied that no
   party has been prejudiced by my approach.
5. The appeals follow the Council’s decisions to refuse the applications made under
   section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and section 19 of the
   Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to remove condition
   No 6 attached to planning permission Ref 2024/0836/FUL and condition No 5

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006806 & 6006808


     attached to listed building consent Ref 2024/1038/LBA. Both conditions are the
     same and require details of the management of surface water runoff from the
     rainwater goods to be submitted and approved.
6. The Council’s decision notices for both appeals indicate that it refused to remove
   the conditions because the information then provided was insufficient to
   demonstrate that the surface water management arrangements would be
   acceptable. The particular uncertainty was whether, after the implementation of the
   approved scheme, surface water from the rainwater goods would drain to an
   existing lawful connection.
7. During the appeals, further information has been provided confirming drainage to
   an existing lawful connection. The Council finds this information acceptable and
   has confirmed that it no longer wishes to defend either appeal. Nevertheless, I
   must determine the appeals on their merits. It remains necessary for me to be
   satisfied that the details now before me are sufficient and acceptable, having
   regard to the relevant conditions and the purposes they serve.
8. The main issue is therefore whether the submitted surface water management
   details are sufficient and acceptable, such that the relevant conditions are
   unnecessary, having regard to the effect of the development and works on local
   flood risk and on the special architectural or historic interest of the appeal property,
   the grade II listed 30 Main Street (No 30), and listed buildings nearby, the grade II
   listed 28 Main Street (No 28) and the grade II listed 32 Main Street (No 32) and the
   Lyddington Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons
9. No 30, No 28, and No 32 are all grade II listed buildings in use as dwellings. They
   are constructed of coursed ironstone rubble and have a variety of traditional
   architectural features. Insofar as is relevant to these appeals, their its special
   interest and significance derives from their age, surviving traditional form, local
   materials and contribution to their group value.
10. The CA covers the historic village core of Lyddington, with Main Street and the
    surrounding lanes containing a varied group of traditional buildings set within an
    established settlement pattern, interspersed with open spaces which contribute to
    its character and appearance. Use of local stone and traditional architectural
    details give the area a distinctive appearance. Insofar as is relevant to these
    appeals, the significance of the CA derives from the historic layout, the prevailing
    use of local materials, the architectural detailing of its traditional buildings and their
    collective contribution to the village street scene.
11. The purpose of the disputed conditions is to ensure that surface water runoff from
    the rainwater goods is managed effectively, to avoid uncontrolled water discharge
    close to historic fabric, which can damage masonry and lead to damp penetration,
    among other things.
12. I have noted the photographs showing water overflowing from gutters and running
    down the walls of No 30. The appellant’s evidence also shows that previously part
    of the roof drainage discharged into a bucket, which overflowed during heavy
    rainfall and caused water to collect near the kitchen door. It is unclear to me where
    this water ultimately drained to at that time.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006806 & 6006808


13. When the Council made its decisions, the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) could
    not confirm, on the information then before it, whether surface water discharged to
    a public sewer. The LLFA also could not tell whether the arrangement shown
    represented an existing connection, or a new or altered connection or outfall.
14. However, the guttering and bucket arrangement is no longer in place and surface
    water from the roof now discharges directly into underground drains. The appellant
    states that water no longer collects outside the kitchen door or overflows from the
    drain. My site inspection did not lead me to question this arrangement. In particular,
    there was no obvious evidence of water collection outside the drain. I observed
    water being poured into the drains at a high volume and it drained freely away
    without any overflow. Overall, the arrangements in place appeared to me to be
    relatively normal and as would be expected.
15. The appeal evidence, including the appellant’s explanation of the works
    undertaken, the drainage statement, annotated plans and water search information,
    resolves the uncertainty which led to the refusal of the applications. Taken together,
    these show that all surface water runoff from the rainwater goods drains to an
    existing lawful connection. The LLFA no longer objects on local flood risk grounds,
    and the Council no longer maintains its objection.
16. I have not been provided with substantive evidence that the modest appeal scheme
    would increase local flood risk, cause uncontrolled discharge onto neighbouring
    land, harm the special architectural or historic interest of No 30, No 28 or No 32, or
    fail to preserve the character or appearance of the Lyddington Conservation Area.
17. Overall, I am satisfied that the submitted details are sufficient and acceptable. It
    follows that condition No 6 attached to the planning permission and condition No 5
    attached to the listed building consent are no longer necessary in their previous
    form. However, for certainty, new conditions should be imposed on each decision
    to make clear that the existing drainage arrangements, as detailed in the appeal
    documents, must be retained thereafter.
18. Thus, subject to conditions, the scheme would accord with Policy CS22 of the
    Rutland Core Strategy Development Plan Document (2011), Policy SP15 and
    Policy SP20 of the Rutland Site Allocations and Policies Development Plan
    Document (2014), which together seek to ensure that development manages
    surface water effectively, preserves and enhances the historic environment and is
    appropriately designed. For the same reasons, there would be no conflict with the
    heritage preservation aims of the Framework.
Other Matters
19. In reaching these conclusions, I have noted the neighbouring occupiers’ concerns
    about the capacity and condition of the underground drainage system. However,
    Appeal A is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
    against the Council’s refusal of an application under section 73 of that Act. Appeal
    B is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
    Areas) Act 1990 against the Council’s refusal of an application under section 19 of
    that Act. My task is therefore to consider whether the disputed conditions remain
    necessary and whether the submitted surface water management details are
    acceptable in planning, listed building and local flood risk terms. Questions about
    the ownership, maintenance or capacity of an existing underground drain, or any
    private rights associated with it, are primarily civil matters between the relevant

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006806 & 6006808


     parties, or matters for any responsible drainage body or statutory undertaker where
     applicable.
Conditions
20. The conditions imposed on both decisions are essentially those suggested by the
    Council and largely replicate those imposed on the original planning permission
    and listed building consent. However, for the avoidance of doubt and to provide
    certainty, I have replaced the conditions sought to be removed with a new condition
    on each decision which confirms that the existing surface water drainage
    arrangements, as explained in the appeal documents, should be retained in
    perpetuity.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development/works would accord with
    the development plan and, having had regard to all other matters raised, the
    appeals should be allowed.

L Fleming
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006806 & 6006808


                                   Schedule of Conditions for Appeal A


    1. The development shall be begun by 10 March 2028.

    2. The development hereby permitted shall not be carried out except in complete
       accordance with the details shown on the submitted plans:
       Location Plan
       Proposed Floor Plans, Elevations and Sections Rear Window Plan
       Photos:
       Electric Socket
       External Light and Window
       External Light Fitting
       External View Window
       Fibre Cable
       House Elevation (excluding tumble dryer vent)
       Outside Tap
       Trellis and Gas Flue
       Trellis and Side Drainpipe
       Utility Box.

    3. This permission does not convey approval for the proposed tumble dryer vent.

    4. The development shall be made good using matching materials and building
       techniques.

    5. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1 of the Town and
       Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order (England) 2015 (or
       any Order revoking and re-enacting that Order with or without modification), the
       bathroom window shall be glazed in obscure glass to a level equivalent to
       Pilkington Level 4 or above before the development hereby permitted is first
       occupied and shall thereafter be permanently retained in this approved form.

    6. The management of the surface water drainage from the rainwater goods as
       specified in the appeal documents (Council Reference 2026/0006/APPEAL)
       shall be retained in perpetuity. These include the Appeal Letter dated 21 March
       2026 and Email Correspondence 1 and Email Correspondence 2 between the
       Council, the Appellant and the Lead Local Flood Authority and Application
       Statement -1321436.


                               End of Conditions Schedule for Appeal A




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       6
Appeal Decision 6006806 & 6006808


                                   Schedule of Conditions for Appeal B


    1. The works shall be begun by 10 March 2028.

    2. The works hereby approved shall not be carried out except in complete
       accordance with the details shown on the submitted plans:
       Location Plan
       Proposed Floor Plans, Elevations and Sections Rear Window Plan
       Photos:
       Electric Socket
       External Light and Window
       External Light Fitting
       External View Window
       Fibre Cable
       House Elevation (excluding tumble dryer vent)
       Outside Tap
       Trellis and Gas Flue
       Trellis and Side Drainpipe
       Utility Box.

    3. This consent does not convey approval for the proposed tumble dryer vent.

    4. The works shall be made good using matching materials and building
       techniques.

    5. The management of the surface water drainage from the rainwater goods as
       specified in the appeal documents (Council Reference 2026/0007/APPEAL)
       shall be retained in perpetuity. These include the Appeal Letter dated 21 March
       2026 and Email Correspondence 1 and Email Correspondence 2 between the
       Council, the Appellant and the Lead Local Flood Authority and Application
       Statement -1321436.

                               End of Conditions Schedule for Appeal B




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       7
