Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 July 2026
by N Unwin BSc (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6006824
Centre Of Pond 180m From 3 Morton Cottages, New House Lane 61m From New
House Lane, New House Lane, Lancashire, Winmarleigh PR3 0JT
•       The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of
        the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
        amended).
•       The appeal is made by Ms Kim Masterton-Taylor against the decision of Wyre Council.
•       The application Ref is 25/00882/AGR.
•       The development proposed is described as: Barn for hay and machinery storage and a 7metre by
        15 metre polytunnel.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Ms Kim Masterton-Taylor against Wyre
   Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
   appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
   consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework.
4. Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the Town and Country Planning
   (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (GPDO) sets
   out that on agricultural land comprised in an agricultural unit of 5 hectares or more,
   the erection of a building reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture within
   that unit is permitted development, subject to limitations and conditions.
5. The appellants submission refers to a proposed agricultural barn and a polytunnel.
   These are both included within the description of development within the application
   form and within the submitted plans. The Council’s delegated report states that
   there was a polytunnel on site at the time of the officers site visit, going on to say
   that it is an existing feature and therefore cannot be considered under Article 3(1)
   and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the GPDO).
6. The Council amended the description of development, removing reference to the
   polytunnel without prior consultation or agreement from the appellant. Based on the
   submissions before me, the polytunnel formed part of the application and I have
   determined the appeal on this basis.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006824


7. In this case, the Council contend that the development of the polytunnel has already
   commenced and that the proposal is not reasonably necessary for the purposes of
   agriculture within the unit.
Main Issues
8. The main issue is whether or not the proposal would be permitted development
   under Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the GPDO, with particular regard to:
           •    Whether the proposed development has already begun; and
           •    Whether the proposed development would be on agricultural land, and
                reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture within the unit.
Reasons
Whether the development has commenced
9. Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A, A.2(i) of the GPDO states that the developer must,
   before beginning the development, apply to the local planning authority for a
   determination as to whether the prior approval of the authority will be required. (iii)
   says that development must not begin before receipt of confirmation prior approval
   is not required; or confirmation prior approval is required and given; or the expiry of
   28 days following the submission of the application without the local planning
   authority making any determination.
10.During my site visit I observed a partially constructed polytunnel consisting of a
   metal frame in the approximate location of the proposed polytunnel. The appellant
   confirms that the structure observed during the site visit was a partially erected
   polytunnel frame which had been assembled prior to the submission of the
   application.
11.Whilst the polytunnel frame appeared to be mounted on skids and is not fixed to the
   land, the appellant’s submissions indicate that it would form part of the proposed
   polytunnel. Physical attachment is not the only factor in determining if something is
   a building, with size and permanence also to be considered.
12.Despite the ability of the existing frame to be repositioned, it forms a sizable
   structure, and the appellant is clear that, whilst not complete, the polytunnel has
   been partially erected. Given the appellant is applying under Schedule 2, Part 6,
   Class A of the GPDO for the works for the erection, extension or alteration of a
   building, the proposed polytunnel is clearly a building. As such, the polytunnel has
   been partially erected and therefore the development has begun.
13.The appellant contends that the existing frame is required to be dismantled and
   reassembled using the supplied ground anchors in order to create the permanently
   secured polytunnel proposed. Nevertheless, there is little before me as to why this
   would be the case and that the existing frame could not be attached to the ground in
   its current state.
14.Accordingly, whilst no other elements of the proposal may have commenced, the
   commencement of the proposed polytunnel means that the development has begun.
   As such, it does not fall within the scope of Schedule 2, Class A, Part 6 of the
   GPDO and does not constitute permitted development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006824


Whether the development would be on agricultural land and is reasonably necessary
15.According to the submitted evidence the appeal site has an area of 5.2 hectares and
   was acquired by the appellant in 2025. To be permitted under Class A, the proposed
   agricultural building must be sited ‘on agricultural land comprised in an agricultural
   unit’ and be ‘reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture within that unit’.
16.The appellant states that since purchasing the land, it has been actively developed
   as an agricultural holding and that during the most recent season, the land produced
   89 large round bales of haylage.
17.The meaning of ‘agricultural land’ for the purposes of Part 6 is given under
   paragraph D.1 as land which, before development permitted by this part is carried
   out, is land in use for agriculture and which is so used for the purposes of a trade or
   business. It goes on to define an agricultural unit as agricultural land which is
   occupied as a unit for the purposes of agriculture.
18.The Council contend that the evidence submitted with the original application lacked
   information such as accounts, invoices, and sales records that would demonstrate
   that an agricultural business is operating from the appeal site. However, the
   appellant has provided accounts information with the appeal which includes a
   tractor, quad, and fencepost knocker as assets.
19.A ‘trade or business’ is an occupation by which a person earns a living, however no
   one factor is decisive as to whether the activities constitute a trade or business. The
   appellant’s additional evidence submitted with the appeal demonstrates ownership
   of the appeal site in addition to agricultural equipment included within the assets of
   the accounts information. Whilst the information does not indicate a profit, the
   appeal site was purchased in 2025 and a profit may not be made in the early stages
   of a business. If a farming enterprise is being established, and it does not appear
   that this is being done as a hobby, then it may be a trade or business even if there is
   little or no profit. As such, on the evidence before me the appeal site forms
   agricultural land which is so used for the purposes of a trade or business.
20.The Council contend that the proposal is not reasonably necessary for the purposes
   of agriculture within that unit. I observed a number of pieces of agricultural
   equipment during my site visit including a tractor, dumper, and trailer, all of which
   were externally stored. During my site visit I additionally observed a number of
   structures including a caravan and field shelters. These did not appear large enough
   to accommodate the equipment such as the tractor at the appeal site.
21.The proposed agricultural building would primarily be used to store hay and
   agricultural equipment, and includes an office and welfare room comprising a minor
   part of the floor space. An updated floor plan of the proposed agricultural building
   additionally includes space to store a tractor. The appellant states that the
   agricultural building would replace the existing structures on the site, with the
   proposed site plan showing these removed from the appeal site. The polytunnel is to
   be used for the growing of fruit and vegetables.
22.For a building to be ‘reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture within that
   unit’, the structure itself and uses carried on within it must be reasonably necessary
   for the use of the land as an agricultural unit. The size of the building is therefore not
   a determinative factor. Whether a smaller or simpler building would suffice would be
   a question of ‘absolutely’ rather than ‘reasonably’ necessary. Based on the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006824


    information before me, the proposal is reasonably necessary for the purposes of
    agriculture within the unit.
23.For the above reasons, the proposal would be on agricultural land comprised in an
   agricultural unit and be reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture within
   that unit.
Conclusion
24.Whilst I have found the proposal to be on agricultural land, and reasonably
   necessary for the purposes of agriculture within the unit, the proposed development
   has begun. As such, it does not fall within the scope of Schedule 2, Class A, Part 6
   of the GPDO and does not constitute permitted development. For these reasons,
   the appeal should be dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
