Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by Robert Naylor BSc (Hons) MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6006631
Land at Five Oaks, Lewes Road, Laughton, East Sussex BN8 6BJ
•   The appeal is made under section 174 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the 1990 Act) as
    amended.
• The appeal is made by Mr. Stephen Mouland against an enforcement notice issued by Wealden
    District Council.
• The notice was issued on 17 February 2026.
• The breach of planning control as alleged in the notice is without planning permission, the
    construction of raised timber decking, a swimming pool, balustrade and fencing ('the Development')
    in the approximate position shown coloured green on the attached plan.
• The requirements of the notice are:
    (i) Demolish, dismantle and remove the raised timber decking, swimming pool, balustrade and
    fencing from the Land.
    (ii) Break up and remove the compacted aggregate surfacing from the Land.
    (iii) Cover with top soil and seed with grass seen the area from where the Development has been
    removed, to marry in with the contours of the adjacent undisturbed land.
    (iv) Remove from the Land all materials, rubble, rubbish, debris, machinery, tools and equipment
    arising from compliance with the above requirements.
• The period for compliance with the requirements is Four months after this notice takes effect.
• The appeal is proceeding on the grounds set out in section 174(2) (f) and (g) of the 1990 Act (as
    amended).
Summary of decision: The appeal is dismissed and the enforcement notice is upheld with a variation in
the terms set out below in the Formal Decision.

Formal Decision
1.     It is directed that the enforcement notice is varied by:
           •    the deletion of four months and the substitution of eight months as the time
                for compliance as set out in Section 5 of the enforcement notice.
2.     Subject to the variation, the appeal is dismissed, and the enforcement notice is
       upheld.
Preliminary Matters
3.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published by
       the Government on 17 August 2026. Those parts of the Framework most relevant
       to this appeal have not been significantly amended. As a result, I consider that
       there is no requirement for me to seek further submissions and I am satisfied that
       no party’s interests have been prejudiced by my taking this approach. I will refer to
       the new Framework policies where necessary in this appeal.
4.     The appellant questions the validity of the notice, alleging that the notice is not
       clear in respect to what part of the development the requirements of the notice are
       directed. The appellant also alleges that it is not within the Inspectorates powers
       under section 176(1)(a) of the 1990 Act (as amended) to correct the notice, as this
       would cause injustice to the appellant.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006631


5.       From the information before me, the site is fully addressed in Section 2 of the
         enforcement notice, and the alleged breach of planning control is copiously
         described at Section 3. Furthermore, the appellants land is clearly depicted by the
         red line boundary in the submitted plan. The plan also clearly indicates a shaded
         green area which depicts the area to which the development stated in the
         Council’s notice relates, namely the construction of raised timber decking, a
         swimming pool, balustrade and fencing as defined at Section 3.
6.       The appeal as submitted undoubtedly relates to the land at the rear of Five Oaks,
         Lewes Road, Laughton, East Sussex BN8 6BJ where the decking and swimming
         pool are located. In my view, this is of sufficient detail to accurately reflect the
         scope of the notice served by the Council which is the subject of this appeal. The
         notice is a valid one, and no parties’ interests would be prejudiced by my intention
         to determine the appeal on this basis.
7.       The appellant considers that there should be a ground (a) appeal at the site, in that
         planning permission should be granted for the development. However, where an
         enforcement notice is issued on or after 25 April 2024, no appeal on ground (a)
         may be made if the enforcement notice was issued after the making of a related
         retrospective planning application and within two years of the date on which the
         related application ceased to be under consideration.
8.       In this case, planning permission was refused by the Council for the “removal of
         sand school and equestrian land use for partial conversion to residential curtilage
         and retrospective consent for the retention of partially constructed swimming pool
         and surrounding raised deck area.” The scheme was appealed and dismissed on
         26 November 2025. The application has therefore ceased to be under
         consideration, and consequently as the notice has been issued within two years of
         26 November 2025 the appellants are barred from appealing under ground (a).
9.       Therefore, the appeal is proceeding under grounds (f) and (g) only
10. There is also another appeal at this site made by the same appellant against an
    additional enforcement notice issued by Wealden District Council which is subject
    to a separate decision. The enforcement notice related to an alleged unauthorised
    change of use of the land from use as a sand school and equestrian use to use as
    domestic garden land1.
Appeal under ground (f)
11. An appeal on ground (f) is made on the basis that the requirements of the notice
    exceed what is necessary. Section 173(4) of the 1990 Act (as amended) sets out
    the purposes which an enforcement notice may seek to achieve. They are either
    (a) remedying of the breach of planning control or (b) remedying any injury to
    amenity which has been caused by the breach. Having regard to its requirements,
    it is clear that the purpose of the notice is to remedy the breach of planning control
    in that the notice requires the demolition and the removal of the raised timber
    decking, swimming pool, balustrade and fencing.
12. The appellants have suggested that modifications could be undertaken in terms of
    a robust landscaping scheme to effectively mitigate the impact of the appeal
    development on the character of the countryside. As part of the appeal, they have

1
    PINS Ref: 6006632


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006631


       commissioned a local landscape consultant (Osmosis Garden Design) to provide a
       detailed landscaping scheme2. The scheme provides several changes to the site
       as existing, through the replacement of the equestrian land to become part of the
       open countryside.
13. The landscaping scheme details that the existing sand school would be contoured
    and planted to blend in with the surrounding rolling topography. The area would be
    extensively planted to create habitat for local flora and fauna. Further works
    proposed are swale channels for water runoff from nearby fields to form a wetland,
    along with the introduction of wildflower meadows and additional tree planting. I
    am in no doubt that the proposals would provide a benefit to the Low Weald
    Landscape and would also soften the appearance of the swimming pool and
    decked area within the wider visual environment.
14. However, despite the green screening, views of the development from public
    vantage points along the footpath at the side of the appeal site would still be
    observed. The development is at the same ground level as the existing dwelling
    and would appear as a visual extension to it. Given the localised topography the
    development protrudes above the existing slope. The outline design plan, planting
    details and mood board3 indicate that the planting of vegetation, hedges and
    shrubs could limit some views of the development, although this would be
    diminished in the winter months when there is less foliage.
15. Furthermore, the use of fencing and glazed balustrades provide further built
    structures which eat into the buffer between the more rural setting to the north and
    the cluster of buildings adjoining the appeal site. The increased residential
    development and associated domestic facilities, within the rural setting provide a
    noticeable change in character, which are especially apparent from users of the
    footpath, notwithstanding the proposed Osmosis Garden Design landscaping
    scheme.
16. I appreciate that the alterations proposed would provide alternative steps with less
    cost and disruption to the appellant. However, these alterations would not remedy
    the breach required by the notice, namely the removal of the raised timber
    decking, a swimming pool, balustrade and fencing. Moreover, these alterations
    would retain the unauthorised development, attempting to disguise the increase in
    the quantum of development through mitigation measures. Whilst this may remedy
    any injury to amenity, it would not achieve the purpose of the notice under section
    173(4)(a).
17. Indeed, there may be many other alternative steps and lesser steps that could be
    proposed to alleviate the injury to amenity, which may appear as common sense to
    the appellants, but these do not remedy the breach of planning control.
    Furthermore, these would involve the planning merits of the case, which as ground
    (a) is barred, are matters that I cannot consider under ground (f).
18. Furthermore, the current development has been found by a previous Inspector4 to
    cause harm to the rural character and appearance of the area. Specifically, the
    Inspector found the scheme would “encroach into this countryside setting by
    introducing a harsh form of urbanising development with rigid angular lines that do

2
  Statement of Case Appendix A - Design Statement prepared by Osmosis Garden Design
3
  Statement of Case Appendix B, C and D
4
  PINS Ref: APP/C1435/W/25/3370925


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
Appeal Decision 6006631


       not respect the surrounding natural contours of the land. The swimming pool and
       elevated deck already appears as a strident addition to the area, and the
       completed proposals would no doubt be more harmful due to the increased height
       of the surrounding balustrade. This harm is compounded by the proposed
       enlargement of the garden area beyond. This would feature further domestic
       paraphernalia including potting sheds and greenhouse.” Given that the
       development would be retained despite the amendments proposed, the breach of
       planning control would not be remedied.
19. Consequently, I find that the requirements of the enforcement notice, as stipulated,
    would be appropriate to remedy the breach of planning control, and as such the
    requirements of the enforcement notice are not excessive. Given that the lesser
    steps identified would not achieve the aims of the notice, the appeal on ground (f)
    therefore fails.
Appeal under ground (g)
20. For an appeal on ground (g) to succeed, it is to be demonstrated that the period
    specified in the notice for compliance in accordance with section 173(9) of the
    1990 Act (as amended) falls short of what should reasonably be allowed.
21. The appellant highlights that the four month period is too short to undertake the
    necessary works as stated in the enforcement notice. The appellant indicates that
    the works are extensive requiring the use of HGVs to bring in the necessary
    equipment to remove the structures and aggregate from the land, and to bring on
    to site the necessary topsoil for the remedial works. The appellant indicates that
    the works would be weather dependent, with the impending autumn and winter
    months likely to make the works more difficult. The appellant has therefore
    requested twelve months to complete the works.
22. The Council acknowledges that works maybe impacted by any inclement weather
    conditions during the winter months and has indicated that they are willing to
    negotiate with the appellant in respect to the proposed compliance period.
23. I would concur with the parties that any remedial works would be weather
    dependant given the levels of remedial works involved including the provision of
    ground works, reprofiling and contouring the topsoil back to original levels.
    Furthermore, I accept that a longer period might be required to ensure that the
    vegetation and grass seed is given sufficient time to bed in and become
    established. Accordingly, I find a more reasonable period for compliance would be
    eight months. The increase in the compliance period would also strike an
    appropriate balance between the remedial rather than punitive requirements of the
    enforcement notice whilst also maintaining public confidence in the planning
    system. I will therefore vary the enforcement notice accordingly.
24. To that extent, the appeal succeeds on ground (g).
Overall Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should not succeed. I
    shall uphold the enforcement notice with a variation.

Robert Naylor
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
