Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 July 2026
by N Unwin BSc (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006809
Fishpool Farm, Fishpool Road, Delamere, Northwich, Cheshire CW8 2HP
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
       Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)..
•      The appeal is made by Mr William Connors against the decision of Cheshire West and Chester
       Council.
•      The application reference is 25/03925/PDQ.
•      The development proposed is for the conversion of barn into one dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       I have taken the description of development from the decision notice as it more
         accurately represents the proposal.
3.       During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
         (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
         appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
         consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework.
Background and Main Issues
4.       Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q, of the Town and Country
         Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
         (the GPDO), development is permitted for the change of use of a building and any
         land within its curtilage, from use as an agricultural building to a use falling within
         Class C3 (dwellinghouses) together with building operations reasonably necessary
         to convert that building for such a use, subject to limitations and conditions.
5.       Article 3(4) of the GPDO states that nothing in the Order permits development
         contrary to any condition imposed by any planning permission granted or deemed
         to be granted. Planning permission 24/01021/S731 for the appeal building includes
         Condition 3, which requires it to be used solely for agricultural purposes incidental
         to the use of land associated with Fishpool Farm. The Council consider that the
         proposal would be contrary to this condition.
6.       Should I find that Article 3(4) does not limit the operation of the GPDO in this case,
         Paragraph Q.1. sets out limitations to the permitted development right under Class
         Q. If the proposal is found to accord with Paragraph Q.1., it is then necessary to go

1
    Granted under Appeal Ref: APP/A0665/W/24/3354534

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006809


       on to consider Paragraph Q.2.(1) which lists conditions under which the developer
       must apply to the local planning authority for a determination as to whether prior
       approval will be required as to the impacts of the development.
7.     The GPDO provides that the local planning authority (LPA) may refuse the
       application where it considers that the proposed development does not comply
       with, or that the developer has provided insufficient information to enable the LPA
       to establish whether the proposed development complies with the conditions,
       limitations or restrictions set out in paragraphs Q.1 and Q.2.
8.     Against this background, I consider the first main issue in this appeal to be,
       whether the proposal would be permitted development under Article 3(1) and
       Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO, having regard to the provisions of
       Article 3(4) and the requirements of Paragraphs Q.1, and if so, whether prior
       approval should be granted in respect of the matters at Paragraph Q.2(1).
Reasons
9.     Condition 3 of planning permission 24/01021/S73 states:
       The agricultural building hereby permitted shall be used solely for agricultural
       purposes incidental to the use of land associated with Fishpool Farm, Fishpool
       Road, Delamere, Cheshire, CW8 2HP and not for the use of any other trade or
       business.
10. The reason originally given for the condition under Council Ref 09/01255/FUL is
    enable the Local Planning Authority to exercise proper control over the
    development in the interests of amenity and protecting the open countryside. The
    Council contend that, as the proposal would not be for agricultural purposes
    incidental to the use of land associated with Fishpool Farm, it would be contrary to
    Condition 3. The appellant argues, with reference to case law2, that the condition
    as worded does restrict the operation of all permitted development rights under the
    GPDO, but states that the restriction is only in respect of a proposed change to
    ‘any other trade or business’, and not in respect of the proposed change to
    residential use under Class Q.
11. Article 3(4) does not differentiate between the nature or type of condition imposed.
    Nonetheless, the question is whether the condition specifically prohibits
    development permitted through the GPDO. The case law referred to in evidence
    held that where a condition makes no express exclusion of the effect of the GPDO,
    the question is whether it is to be implied from the words themselves, in the
    context in which they are used, to so exclude it. The Dunnett judgement states that
    ‘to exclude the application of the GPDO, the words used in the relevant condition,
    taken in their full context, must clearly evince an intention on the part of the local
    planning authority to make such an exclusion.’
12. The wording of Condition 3 explicitly requires the use of the barn to be for
    agricultural purposes, incidental to land associated with Fishpool Farm and not for
    the use of any other trade or business. An incidental use is one which is
    functionally related to the primary use. Condition 3 makes no express exclusion of

2
 Dunoon Developments v Secretary of State for the Environment and Poole Borough Council (1993) 65 P&CR 10
Dunnett Investments Ltd v Secretary of State [2017] EWCA Civ 192
Lazari Properties 2 Ltd v Secretary of State for Levelling Up Housing and Communities [2023] EWHC 2026 (Admin) [37]
Trump International Golf Club Scotland Ltd and another v Scottish Ministers [2015] UKSC 74 [34]


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6006809


         the effect of the GPDO, which included Class Q at the time of approval
         24/01021/S73. The use of words ‘and not for the use of any other trade or
         business’, when read in context with the reason for the condition - to control
         development in the interests of amenity and protecting the open countryside -
         suggests that the condition is concerned with avoiding potential effects of a trade
         or business use, rather than a general concern over any non-agricultural use. Had
         the intention of the condition been to exclude all other uses permitted under the
         GPDO, it would have instead prohibited any other use and not specified ‘any other
         trade or business.’ Given the specifics of Condition 3, from plain reading, it does
         not imply a broad exclusion of the effect of the GPDO which would include Class
         Q. Instead, the condition prohibits specific permitted development rights that relate
         to the use of the building for a trade or business.
13. For these reasons, I find that Condition 3 of planning permission 24/01021/S73
    does not specifically restrict the permitted development right under Schedule 2,
    Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO. Therefore, it is possible to go on to consider whether
    the proposal meets with the relevant conditions and limitations of Class Q.
14. The Council’s delegated report identifies concerns with a number of the limitations
    to the permitted development right at Paragraph Q.1. Criterion Q.1 (j) permits
    building operations reasonably necessary to convert the building, comprising the
    installation or replacement of windows, doors, roofs, or exterior walls, or water,
    drainage, electricity, gas or other services, and partial demolition to the extent
    reasonably necessary to carry out these building operations.
15. However, as set out within the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG), It is not the
    intention of the permitted development right to allow rebuilding works which would
    go beyond what is reasonably necessary for the conversion of the building to
    residential use.
16. There is no definition to the term ‘reasonably necessary’ within either the GPDO or
    PPG, and this is a matter of planning judgement based on the fact and degree of
    each case. The Hibbitt3 judgement, referred to within the PPG, gives guidance on
    this, considering whether works required to bring about a change of use amounted
    to a re-build or ‘fresh’ build as opposed to conversion.
17. The appellant states that the proposal would make the best use of existing
    external walls and not extend beyond them, with a modest section of the building
    demolished. Nonetheless, whilst the application is accompanied by a proposed
    floor plan, there is an absence of elevations and sections. The proposed ground
    floor plan shows walls being variously retained, removed, and newly added.
    However, the majority of the external walls have not been identified in any of these
    categories and therefore I cannot be sure they will be retained. In this instance,
    complete replacement of the walls and roof would go beyond partial demolition
    and what is reasonably necessary for conversion. Therefore, on the information
    before me, I cannot be sure that the proposed works would be of an extent
    considered reasonably necessary, and would not amounted to a re-build.
18. Criterion Q.1 (h) and (i) permit extensions to the original building provided they
    comply with specific limitations. Whilst the application form states that no
    extension is proposed, in the absence of elevations, I cannot be sure this is the
    case. Therefore, on the information before me I am unable to conclude that the
3
    Hibbitt and another v SSCLG (1) and Rushcliffe Borough Council (2) [2016] EWHC 2853 Admin


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6006809


       proposal would not result in an extension beyond what is permitted by Criteria Q.1
       (h) and (i).
19. Criteria Q.1 (o) requires the proposal to be capable of complying with the technical
    housing standards – nationally described space standard (2015) (NDSS). The
    proposal would create a three-bedroom single storey dwelling which would require
    a gross internal floor area of between 74-95 square metres. Based on the
    proposed ground floor plans and my observations on site, the proposal would be
    capable of complying with the NDSS and Criterion Q.1.(o).
20. Overall, I find that Condition 3 of planning permission 24/01021/S73 does not
    prohibit the conversion of the appeal building to a dwelling under Schedule 2, Part
    3, Class Q of the GPDO. However, the absence of proposed elevations and
    sections means that I cannot be sure that the proposed works would be
    reasonably necessary, and not amounted to a re-build, or that the proposal would
    not result in an extension beyond what is permitted by Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q
    Criteria Q.1 (h) and (i). Accordingly, I find that the proposal would not constitute
    permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO in this
    regard. Consequently, it is not necessary for me to consider the proposal’s
    compliance with the conditions set out within Criteria Q.2(1), as this would not alter
    the outcome of the appeal.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
