Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 8 June May 2026
Site visit made on 8 June 2026
by Sarah Manchester BSc MSc PhD MIEnvSc
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 19th August 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6006023
Grove House, Town Lane, Mobberley, Knutsford WA16 7HR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Hughes against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/0500/HOUS.
•   The development proposed is conversion of outbuilding into ancillary habitable accommodation and
    construction of glazed link extension to house.
Appeal B Ref: 6006027
Grove House, Town Lane, Mobberley, Knutsford WA16 7HR
•   The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
    1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Hughes against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/0504/LBC.
•   The works proposed are Listed Building Consent for conversion of outbuilding into ancillary habitable
    accommodation and construction of glazed link extension to house.

Decision
1. Appeal A is dismissed and Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. Taking into account the nature of the changes, and the main issues in
   these appeals, I am satisfied that the interests of neither party would be prejudiced
   by my taking it into account in my decision.
3. As the proposal is in a conservation area and relates to a listed building I have had
   special regard to sections 16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings
   and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
4. The appeal site is in Mobberley Conservation Area (the CA), which includes historic
   rural development and land to either side of Town Lane and Hall Lane. Grove
   House, including the outbuilding subject of these appeals, makes a positive
   contribution to the historic character and appearance and thereby the significance
   of the CA. However, the proposed alterations would not be prominent in public
   views and therefore the proposal would not be capable of harming the CA as a
   whole. Consequently, it would preserve the significance of the CA.
5. The appeal site is in the Green Belt, where development is inappropriate unless it
   meets exceptions set out in the Framework. The Council is satisfied that the
   proposed alterations to the outbuilding would not result in disproportionate increase


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027


     in size compared to the original building and, for this reason, the proposal would
     not be inappropriate development in the Green Belt. I see no reason to disagree.
Main Issues
6. Therefore, the main issues are:
       i)       In appeal A and appeal B, whether the proposal would preserve a Grade II
                listed building, “Grove House“ (ref 1139525) (the LB), and any of the
                features of special architectural or historic interest that it possesses; and
       ii)      In appeal A, whether or not a European protected species licence would be
                likely to be granted.
Reasons
Whether the heritage asset would be preserved
7. Grove House was listed in 1959 and it is former farmhouse that dates from the late
   18th century. It is finished in brick with a slate roof, with timber-framing to the rear
   service wing indicative of its early origins. The principal elevation has 3 bays, with
   central doorway featuring Doric columns with entablature pieces and an open
   pediment to either side of which are 19th century angled bays with stone cills,
   chamfered lintels and sash windows.
8. The outbuilding subject of the appeal is the former coach house to Grove
   House. It is a large detached building likely dating from the early 19 th century,
   with north and south gabled brick ranges and a slate valley roof. Set back to the
   rear of the yard and north east of the farmhouse, it is now the only surviving
   outbuilding of the historic farmstead group that included a long linear wing,
   possibly stables, that projected south of the coach house and a large barn near
   the Town Lane entrance. The high status of the LB as a 19th century yeoman’s
   or gentleman-farmer residence is further evidenced by its documented historic
   land holding, stabling for 6 horses, 4 resident servants and coachman.
9. The outbuilding elevation facing the front yard has Flemish bond brickwork to
   complement the house and a somewhat domestic appearance with dentil
   moulding to eaves and sash windows either side of a panelled door with a
   gothic tracery fanlight. At first floor above each window there is a blind oculus
   with keystones. The main door leads into the left-hand bay, which is full height
   following the removal of the loft floor. The right-hand bay of this south range
   contains two coach houses, one of which retains exposed historic beams, and
   each is served by a wide doorway in the flank elevation facing the LB.
10. The rear range has a flank wall door leading into the right-hand bay. This has
    various casement windows at ground and first floor which is accessed via a
    modern staircase. The rear left-hand bay is full height with a large lunette
    window and rooflights. The two rear bays are separated by an internal wall with
    historic brick chimney stack. Notwithstanding its decorative 19 th century stone
    surround and hearth, the fireplace in the ground floor right-hand bay suggests
    historic servant accommodation. The rear elevation of the north range exhibits
    several phases of brickwork, including blocked openings indicative of a historic
    stable use. Other alterations, including replacement floors and joinery and walls
    re-finished, appear to date from the later 20 th century.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027


11. Externally, the front yard is cobbled and the cobbles continue between the
    dwelling and the outbuilding. The outbuilding and side yard have been
    incorporated into the rear garden by a 21st century brick wall that links the LB to
    the outbuilding. The modern wall erodes the visual separation and historic
    functional arrangement of the outbuilding and LB, with the door in the wall
    allowing only limited views of this rear area and the stepped block adjoining the
    rear range, which may have been a tall mounting block although it appears to
    serve a blocked doorway part way up the flank wall.
12. Irrespective of the internal and external alterations, the outbuilding remains
    legible as a former coach house and servants’ residence associated with Grove
    House. There is no dispute that the outbuilding is locally distinctive with
    architectural features indicative of design consideration. Notwithstanding its
    curtilage listing, it could be considered a non-designated heritage asset in its
    own right. Given the above, I find that the special interest of the LB, insofar as it
    relates to these appeals, to be associated with the design and form of the
    coach house outbuilding, its historic fabric, layout and ancillary functional
    relationship which illustrate the historic status of the former farmhouse.
     Internal alterations
13. There would be further internal alterations to the outbuilding to facilitate its
    conversion to habitable accommodation. A new floor would be inserted into the
    south range, apparently replicating the historic internal arrangement. While the
    mezzanine in the rear north range would be inauthentic, the Council considers it
    acceptable in the absence of evidence in relation to the building prior to the 20th
    century alterations.
14. The coach door openings in the flank wall would be retained, but the historic
    internal walls in this bay would be removed and it would be subdivided to form a
    gym, wc and corridor. The rear range would become an open plan space with a
    double-sided stove feature following the removal of the ground floor walls to either
    side of the chimney breast, the rear chimney wall and the 19th century fireplace.
15. There is little substantive evidence in relation to the unauthorised 20 th century
    alterations. While the fireplace may be a late insert, equally it could have been
    installed in the 19 th century during alterations to the LB at that time. Moreover,
    in the absence of intrusive investigations, the extent of historic fabric remaining
    beneath contemporary finishes is unknown. Therefore, there would be a loss of
    historic fabric, but the full extent of loss is unknown.
16. Although the retention of the two coach door openings is clearly desirable, they
    would both open into a contemporary corridor and the internal evidence of the
    former coach houses would be lost. The ground floor opening up of the rear range
    would result in a modern open plan layout with mezzanine floor, industrial
    aesthetic and contemporary fireplace feature. While the chimney breast and the
    ceiling in the rear right-hand bay would be retained, the historic layout and
    evidence of former function would be eroded. The provision of principal living
    accommodation in the coach house would also alter how the LB was used and
    experienced, elevating the status of the ancillary outbuilding relative to the dwelling
    and undermining the historically separate functions and use.
17. The Framework is clear that where there is evidence of deliberate neglect of, or
    damage to, a heritage asset, the deteriorated state of the heritage asset should not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027


     be taken into account in any decision. However, as the condition of the outbuilding
     prior to the unauthorised works is unknown, the Council considers that its existing
     condition should be considered the baseline for the assessment of impacts. While I
     see no reason to disagree, the earlier unauthorised alterations and loss of
     historic features do not justify further loss of historic fabric and plan form.
     Arched openings
18. The rear elevation of the outbuilding was substantially rebuilt in the 19 th century
    and the parties agree it is the least sensitive to change. Even so, it retains
    historic interest in the form of its generally small and high level blocked
    openings indicative of former stables. There is little evidence that there were
    historically any large cart door style openings in this elevation. The creation of
    two large arched openings in the rear elevation would result in the loss of
    historic fabric and evidence of former use, and it would be a significant visual
    change to the external envelope of the outbuilding.
19. By virtue of design, siting and scale, the matching arched openings would not
    be read as historic coach house doors but neither would their faux arched style
    with crittall glazing be entirely successful as honest contemporary openings.
    The paired large openings would be incongruous and they would dominate and
    detract from the rear of the outbuilding and LB.
20. The appellants’ preference for extensive glazing to the rear elevation is
    understandable given the proposed internal open plan space with mezzanine.
    Moreover, the Council accepts that the rear elevation could in principle
    accommodate some form of new large opening, although its preference would
    be the re-use of existing blocked openings. However, while the hearing was told
    that a large rectilinear window of a similar overall scale to the proposal would be
    more problematic and result in a greater loss of historic masonry, nevertheless it
    has not been demonstrated that there are no alternative forms of opening such as
    could achieve similar benefits but with less harm.
     Link walkway
21. The proposed link walkway would be an L-shaped structure extending from the
    southernmost coach house door to a new doorway where the modern extension
    meets the LB farmhouse. Its walls would be glazed, but it would have a solid low
    profile roof, internal floor and lighting. The part closest to the coach house would
    attach to both the flank wall and the garden wall, the latter being raised to the
    height of the walkway. The narrower section approaching the dwelling would be set
    away from the garden wall.
22. By virtue of its siting, the walkway would effectively be visually enclosed by walls to
    3 sides. Together with its design, including downlighters and roof materials, this
    would result in the appearance of an extension with glazed walls rather than, as
    intended, a lightweight glazed walkway. In combination with the glazed extension to
    the LB and the proposed arched openings, it would contribute to a disproportionate
    extent of glazing and light spill to the rear of the LB. As illustrated, the link would
    erode the visual and functional separation between the LB and its coach house.
23. The link would have a new floor, with the historic cobbles removed and used to
    repair and extend the cobbled yard to the rear. The replacement of the cobbles in
    the link with a new internal floor would interrupt and detract from the historic yard

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027


     between the buildings and it would contribute to the erosion of the legibility of
     historic function and use.
24. At the hearing, the parties discussed whether amendments to the scheme might
    overcome the Council’s concerns in respect of the link. In this regard, a glazed
    rather than solid roof would render the structure more lightweight and visually
    permeable, thereby reducing its visual impact. The omission of downlighters, or
    indeed any internal artificial lighting, would also reduce its adverse impact. The
    retention of cobbles, albeit re-layed and levelled, would mean that the link floor
    continued to contribute to the appearance of a continuously cobbled historic yard.
25. The parties were provided with the opportunity to discuss and agree additional or
    amended conditions that could be imposed on a planning permission and listed
    building consent to secure an acceptable form of glazed link, in the event the
    appeals were allowed. The Council emphasizes the need for accurate drawings
    and full details of works in order to determine applications affecting listed buildings.
    Nevertheless, it agrees a pre-commencement condition for the approval of details
    of an amended glazed link, together with conditions specifying the floor and
    restricting internal lighting.
26. I acknowledge that the Council considers that the proposed amendments to the link
    would reduce but not entirely negate the harm which, in conjunction with the loss of
    the internal coach houses, would erode the readability of spaces and buildings.
    However, I am satisfied that a wholly glazed link corridor with retained cobble floor
    would be a lightweight feature and it would be sympathetic to the historic character
    and appearance of the LB. The proposed amended link would not further erode the
    historic separation and legibility of the dwelling and its former coach house.
     Garden wall
27. As noted above, a part of the garden wall would be raised close to the coach house
    in order to accommodate the link attachment. The wall is a recent insertion that
    apparently replaces a historic wall that was further to the rear. It is already a tall
    and substantial feature that links the dwelling and outbuilding and alters the
    arrangement of external spaces. While it was permitted, the wall erodes the historic
    separation and understanding of the functional relationship between the buildings.
28. The proposed wall upstand would reflect features of walls elsewhere within the
    curtilage of the LB, but it would not be an authentic feature. Although relatively
    small in the scheme of things, given its design and siting and in combination with
    the scale and impact of the modern wall, the decorative upstand would contribute
    cumulatively to the erosion of visual separation and historic legibility.
     Overall findings
29. Drawing all this together, I find that the originally proposed link walkway would be
    detrimental to the historic interest of the LB. However, the proposed amended
    wholly glazed walkway would not erode the visual separation or legibility of the LB
    and, in isolation, it would be a broadly neutral feature in the setting and curtilage of
    the LB. The wall upstand would be a relatively minor change, but in combination
    with the modern garden wall it would contribute to the erosion of historic legibility.
30. The internal conversion works would result in the loss of historic fabric and the
    historic plan form of the outbuilding would be eroded. The large arched openings to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027


     the rear would be inauthentic and confused, rather than honest contemporary
     features. By virtue of their size and scale, they would overwhelm the rear of the
     outbuilding and the dominance of glazing and artificial light spill would detract from
     the historic character and appearance of the LB. In its entirety, the link with new
     primary access to the outbuilding via a coach house door and the extended modern
     living accommodation, part and parcel of the dwelling, would inevitably alter how
     both the LB buildings were experienced and used.
31. I note the suggestion that the proposal would not harm the LB because the
    changes to the outbuilding would not be readily publicly visible. However, while the
    significance of a conservation area depends upon how it is experienced, listed
    buildings are safeguarded for their inherent architectural and historic interest
    irrespective of whether or not public views of the building or curtilage listed
    structures are afforded. Thus, there is no conflict or inconsistency in finding harm to
    the LB but not to the CA.
32. Given the above, I find that the proposal as a whole would erode and detract from
    the historic interest of the outbuilding and thereby it would fail to preserve the
    special interest of the LB. Consequently, I give this harm considerable importance
    and weight in the planning balance of these appeals.
33. Policy HE6 of the Framework advises that when considering the impact of
    development on the significance of designated heritage assets, substantial weight
    should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE5 advises that significance
    can be harmed or lost through work affecting the asset or from development within
    its setting. Given the scale and nature of the proposal, it would result in a moderate
    degree of harm to the LB which in this instance is of considerable importance and
    weight in the planning balance of these appeals.
34. Where a proposal would lead to harm to the significance of a designated heritage
    asset, Policy HE6 of the Framework advises that this harm should be weighed
    against the public benefits of the proposal including, where appropriate, securing
    the long-term reuse of an underused listed building and enabling energy efficiency.
35. There would be economic benefits during the conversion works including in terms
    of local contractors and suppliers. However, these would be short term and a
    limited public benefit. There is little evidence that modern construction techniques
    and materials would be a public benefit, taking into account the age and historic
    fabric of the LB. The evidence suggests that the converted outbuilding would be
    energy efficient, minimise carbon emissions, protect the environment and reduce
    waste. However, there is little evidence that it would be outstanding design which
    promotes high levels of sustainability or that it would go beyond compliance with
    the requirements of national and local planning policy in these regards.
36. It is suggested that the proposal would secure the optimum viable use of the
    heritage asset by bringing the building to a high standard, functionally linked to the
    house and providing the dwelling with a good standard of living commensurate with
    a modern family home. However, Grove House is already in optimum viable use as
    a residential dwelling. The continued viable use of Grove House and its curtilage
    and associated buildings is not dependent on the proposal as the LB has an
    ongoing residential use that would not cease in its absence. There is little evidence
    that Grove House fails to provide a reasonable standard of living accommodation.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027


37. The outbuilding is used for storage including freezers, children’s toys, garden
    equipment and outdoor paraphernalia. Even so, while it is in active use ancillary to
    Grove House, the proposal would bring this large and underutilised building into a
    more active use as part of the dwelling. The extension and enhancement of Grove
    House in this way would provide a greater incentive for its owners to invest in the
    maintenance and long-term conservation of the outbuilding. However, there is little
    evidence that alternative proposals have been explored and reasonably
    discounted. On the basis that the outbuilding is already in use, and there would
    likely be alternative schemes that would result in similar benefits without the harm
    that I have found, the proposal would not be the optimum viable use of the
    outbuilding and this carries only limited weight in favour of the proposal.
38. The Council considers that the link is not essential, given the distance between the
    LB and outbuilding and the ancillary nature of the proposal. However, while the
    self-contained guest accommodation might be ancillary and the home gym and
    office would be incidental uses, the open plan living space would be an extension
    to the living accommodation in the dwelling and part and parcel of the existing
    family dwellinghouse use. As its successful seamless integration would require a
    physical connection to the LB, the link would be a significant private benefit.
39. I note the suggestion that the link walkway would be a benefit in terms of ensuring
    that the outbuilding remained ancillary to Grove House. However, it is clear from
    the description that the proposal would not be an independent dwelling. The
    outbuilding is in any case very close to the LB and it would not have a separate
    curtilage, garden or parking provision such as would be necessary for it to be
    occupied as a separate dwelling. If it was to be occupied separately in future, then
    a separate grant of planning permission would be required. Therefore, the link
    would be little public benefit.
40. Consequently, the benefits, while considerable to the appellants, would be primarily
    private and they are not sufficient to outweigh the harm that I have identified. Given
    this, I conclude that, on balance, the proposal would fail to preserve the special
    historic interest of the Grade II listed building. This would fail to satisfy the
    requirements of the Act, Policy HE6 of the Framework and conflict with policy SD2,
    SE1, SE7 of Cheshire East Local Plan Strategy 2010-2030 Adopted July 2017 (the
    LP) and policies GEN1 and HER4 of Cheshire East Site Allocations and
    Development Policies Document Adopted December 2022. These seek, among
    other things, to ensure that development avoids harm to heritage assets, creating
    high quality, beautiful and sustainable buildings and making a positive contribution
    to its surroundings. In the absence of a structural report or full details of works, and
    on the basis that the proposal would impact upon floors and ceilings and internal
    and external walls, the proposal would also conflict with the requirements of
    SADPD policy HER1. As a result, the proposal would not be in accordance with the
    development plan.
European protected species - bats
41. The outbuilding roof is in a poor state of repair with numerous gaps along roof
    verges, behind barge boards, beneath ridge tiles and slipped or missing slates.
    These gaps provide potential roosting opportunities for bats. Two dusk emergence
    surveys carried out in August and September 2024 recorded the emergence of a
    single common pipistrelle bat from beneath a raised tile in the centre of the roof.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027


42. At the hearing, it was confirmed that the outbuilding would need to be re-roofed.
    Thus, the proposal would impact upon the day roost of a single bat and could result
    in the killing or injuring of bats. These would be offences under the Conservation of
    Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) unless the works were
    carried out under a European Protected Species Mitigation Licence. I accept that a
    licence would likely be issued for the purposes of re-roofing the outbuilding.
    Nevertheless, in reaching my decision I am required to have regard to the
    legislation and in particular the 3 legal licensing tests.
43. The ecological consultant has set out measures to mitigate the impact on bats. A
    bat box would be installed on a suitable tree within the grounds of Grove House
    prior to works. Any bats encountered during works would be transferred to this box
    by the licensed ecologist. A second bat box would be installed on a suitable tree to
    increase roosting opportunities. External lighting would be designed to avoid
    illuminating the bat boxes, tree lines and boundary features in order to maintain bat
    commuting and foraging corridors. These measures appear appropriate and
    proportionate and their implementation would maintain the favourable conservation
    status of the bat species affected, thereby satisfying the third licensing test.
44. The first licensing test requires that the development be for purposes of preserving
    public health or public safety, or other imperative reasons of overriding public
    interest including those of a social or economic nature. For housing development, a
    grant of planning permission is generally considered to demonstrate that the test
    relating to imperative reasons of overriding public interest has been met.
45. The second licensing test requires that there is no satisfactory alternative. In this
    regard, the roof is in an undeniably poor state of repair. The conservation of the
    building could not be achieved if the roof was not repaired. Even if it was possible
    to repair only parts of the roof, there is little evidence that impacts upon the bat
    roost or other bat roosting features could be avoided given that these are provided
    by defects in the existing roof such as raised tiles. Moreover, even if there were
    theoretical alternatives that could avoid impacts on the bat roost, if the application
    was considered to meet the overriding public interest test then it seems likely that it
    would also meet the second licensing test.
46. The planning process should avoid unnecessarily duplicating the function of
    another regulatory body, which is Natural England for the purposes of European
    protected species licences. Therefore, while I am required to consider the likelihood
    that a licence would not be granted, it is not necessary for me to determine whether
    the legal tests for a licence would be met. For reasons set out above, the proposed
    mitigation would avoid harm to bats and provide alternative roost provision, thereby
    maintaining the population of bats. This could be secured by the imposition of
    planning conditions. If the proposal was otherwise acceptable and permission was
    granted, I have no reason to think that a licence would not be issued.
47. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would not harm bats or their roosts. As
    such, it would not conflict with the biodiversity protection aims of LP policy SE3.
Other Matters
48. The Parish Council do not object to the proposal and there is third party support for
    it. As can be seen from my decision, I have taken into account that the proposal
    would result in a more active use of the coach house. With regard to Town Lane
    Farm on the opposite side of the road, there is little evidence that this is a listed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027


     building or that that scheme or relevant considerations are directly comparable to
     the proposal. The absence of objections and the support are neutral factors.
Conclusion
49. For the reasons given above, I conclude that both Appeal A and Appeal B should
    be dismissed.



Sarah Manchester
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decisions 6006023 and 6006027




APPEARANCES

For the appellant

Mr Nick Smith                          Emery Planning
Mr Joseph O’Brien                      Aran Architects
Mr Mark Halliwell                      United Environmental Services
Mr Toby Hart                           United Environmental Services
Mr Garry Miller                        Heritage Consultancy
Mr Peter Miller                        Heritage Consultancy

Mr and Mrs Hughes                      Appellants

For the Council

Mrs Fiona Reynolds                     Senior Planner
Mrs Katherine Bailey                   Senior Conservation Officer
Mr James Baggaley                      Principal Ecologist
Miss Rhianna Kemp                      Senior Ecologist




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            10
