Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by P Brennan BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006600
Annapurna, Moss Road, Wrockwardine Wood, Telford TF2 7BJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Samantha Sheikh against the decision of Telford and Wrekin Council.
•    The application Ref is TWC/2026/0056.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a single storey rear extension measuring 7.20m in
     length, 4.00m in height and 2.80m to eaves.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    In the interest of clarity and precision, I have amended the description of
      development in the heading above to match that on the Council’s decision notice.
      This has subsequently removed descriptive text relating to height, design, glazing,
      and drainage from the description of development.
Background and Main Issue
3.    Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
      Development) (England) Order 2015 (the Order) permits the enlargement,
      improvement, or other alteration of a dwellinghouse.
4.    Development is permitted under Class A of the GPDO subject to limitations which
      are specified at paragraph A.1 and conditions which are set out at paragraphs A.3
      and, where relevant, A.4. The conditions in paragraph A.3 cover the materials to
      be used, windows in side facing elevations and roof pitch. In paragraph A.4, the
      conditions relate to the requirements of the application submission and notification
      to adjoining occupiers alongside, where necessary, an assessment of amenity.
      The appeal property is not located on article 2(3) land and consequently, the
      limitations identified within paragraph A.2, are not relevant.
5.    The Council’s reasons for refusal identify that the eaves height of the proposed
      rear extension would exceed the eaves height of the existing dwelling and that
      there is a proposed alteration to an existing soil pipe. Consequently, the Council
      considers that the proposal is not permitted development under Schedule 2, Part
      1, Class A of the Order. The Council also contends that insufficient information
      was submitted to enable an assessment of the effect of the proposal on
      neighbouring living conditions under Paragraph A.4 (9) (b).



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006600


6.    Accordingly, the main issue is whether the appeal proposal would be permitted
      development under Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Order and whether
      sufficient information has been provided to assess the effect on neighbouring
      amenity.
Reasons
7.    Paragraph A.1 of Part 1, Class A of the Order provides a list of exclusions as to
      when development would not be permitted by Class A. The Council’s delegated
      officer report determines that the proposal complies with the exclusions specified
      in Paragraph A.1 (a) to (c), (e) to (j) and (l). Based on the information provided, I
      have no reason to take a different view.
8.    The appeal property is a detached bungalow located in a row of bungalows in a
      residential area. The appeal site slopes from south to north and from east to west
      towards Moss Road.
Eaves height
9.    Paragraph A.1(d) of Class A states that development is not permitted by Class A if
      “the height of the eaves of the part of the dwellinghouse enlarged, improved or
      altered would exceed the height of the eaves of the existing dwellinghouse.”
10. The Permitted Development for Householders: Technical Guidance explains that
    for the purpose of measuring ‘height’ from ‘ground level,’ ‘the eaves of a house are
    the point where the lowest point of a roof slope, or a flat roof, meets the outside
    wall. Eaves height is measured from the highest point of the natural ground level at
    the base of the outside wall to the point where that wall would meet the upper
    surface of the roof slope. The Technical Guidance identifies that parapet walls and
    any overhang should be ignored for the purposes of measurement.
11. The existing dwelling is positioned on a sloping site whereby the existing eaves
    height, as annotated on the proposed elevation drawing, varies between 2.8m and
    3.2m. However, the Council has identified that the elevations as submitted on the
    scaled drawings do not accord with the drawing’s annotations and measured at the
    defined scale, would be between 2.24m and 2.54m. Therefore, in accordance with
    the Technical Guidance, the eaves height of the existing dwelling is either 2.8m or
    2.24m.
12. The application form identifies the proposal as measuring 7.2m in depth, 4m in
    height and 2.8m to the eaves. Consequently, the conditions in paragraph A.4 are
    relevant. The proposed development would exceed the requirement of paragraph
    A.1.(f) as the extension would be more than 4 metres in depth but would meet
    paragraph A.1(g) (i) as the proposal is single storey and would not extend beyond
    the rear wall of the original dwellinghouse by more than 8 metres.
13. Paragraph A.4 requires the submission of a written description of the proposed
    development (including dimensions) and a site plan. The paragraph also allows
    the Council to request further information as reasonably necessary to allow a
    determination and elevation drawings. An email with further information including
    plans was provided. Whilst the plans are before me, the further information email
    is not. The Council has advised that the plans do not appear to be correctly drawn
    to scale and based on its assessment and measurements outlined in its statement
    of case, these do not appear to correspond with the drawing annotations nor the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006600


      stated dimensions within the application form. Following my site visit, I am not
      satisfied that the annotations on the submitted drawings are correct and
      subsequently, I am unable to confirm that the existing eaves are of a height of
      2.8m.
14. The annotations on the submitted elevations indicate an extension, with a
    proposed height of between 3.4m and 3.8m and a depth of 7.2m, differs to the
    height stated on the application form and the height and depth measured by the
    Council from the submitted drawings. The original description of development also
    indicates that the proposal would comprise a flat roof extension with a low parapet
    wall. However, neither the proposed drawings, the original description of
    development nor the appellant’s statement of case and final comments, indicate or
    outline the height of the proposed parapet.
15. The proposed side facing window within the extension also appears to sit at or
    above the existing eaves height, indicating that the flat roof would be above this
    and therefore above the height of the existing eaves.
16. Consequently, I am unable to ascertain with any certainty the height of the existing
    eaves of the dwelling; the dimensions of the proposed extension or that the
    proposed eaves of the rear extension would not exceed the height of the existing
    dwelling’s eaves. Accordingly, the plans fail to demonstrate that the proposed
    eaves height of the rear extension would not exceed the eaves height of the
    existing dwelling as required by Paragraph A.1(d) of Part 1, Class A of the Order.
Soil pipe
17. Paragraph A.1(k) of Class A states that development is not permitted by Class A if
    “it would consist of or include (iii) the installation, alteration or replacement of a
    chimney, flue or soil and vent pipe.”
18. The Council identify that the appellant, in their further information email, confirmed
    that the proposed development would require an alteration to an existing soil pipe
    within the dwelling. The appellant considers the alteration to comply with Part 1,
    Class G of the Order that allows for the installation, alteration or replacement of a
    chimney, flue or soil and vent pipe on a dwellinghouse. However, whilst the works
    would be permitted development under Class G, they are specifically excluded
    under Class A and cannot therefore be required to be undertaken as a result of a
    Class A extension.
19. No information is before me regarding this alteration, nor do I have any internal
    layout plans that illustrate where the soil pipe is currently located and what
    alterations would be required. I am therefore unable to ascertain whether the
    proposed extension can proceed without the soil pipe alteration specifically
    excluded under Class A.
20. Consequently, I am unable to establish with any confidence that the proposed
    development would meet the requirement of paragraph A.1(k), even if the
    alterations would be permitted development under Class G. Accordingly, the plans
    fail to demonstrate that the proposal would not include the installation, alteration or
    replacement of a chimney, flue or soil and vent pipe as required by Paragraph
    A.1(k) of Part 1, Class A of the Order.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006600


Insufficient information
21. Paragraph A.4(7) is engaged where an objection from any owner or occupier of
    any adjoining premises has been made to the proposed development or where the
    submission of further information was requested. Prior approval is then required as
    to the “impact of the proposed development on the amenity of any adjoining
    premises.”
22. No representations were made regarding the proposed development to either the
    application or appeal. Drawings were requested by the Council and consequently
    paragraph A.4(7) is relevant and under subsequent paragraph A.4(9) require the
    consideration of the impact of the proposed development not only on those who
    made a representation but on the amenity of occupiers in all adjoining premises.
23. Whilst the plans have been identified as having deficiencies, they do however
    illustrate to the neighbouring occupiers what development is proposed and its
    likely effect on their living conditions. Whilst the plans have not provided with
    certainty that the proposed extension would comply with the requirements of the
    Order, they do enable an assessment of the effects of the development and were
    sufficient for neighbouring occupiers to make a representation if they wished to do
    so. Consequently, despite the plan deficiencies, sufficient information has been
    provided to assess the proposed development’s effect on the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers. However, as I have determined that the proposed
    development would not comply with the requirements of Part 1, Class A of the
    Order, an assessment of the proposal on neighbouring amenity is not necessary.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons given above, the proposal fails to demonstrate that it would satisfy
    the requirements and limitations set out in Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A.1(d), and
    A.1(k) of the Order. I therefore find that the appeal should be dismissed.



P Brennan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
