Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by A James BSc (Hons) MA MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006330
Elm Cottage, Further Ford End, Further Ford End Road, Clavering, Essex
CB11 4SG
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Smith against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•    The application reference is UTT/25/2657/LB.
•    The works are described as ‘proposed internal alterations and rear extension including the demolition
     of existing derelict conservatory.’


Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     While there is some discussion within the appellant’s statement as to whether the
       appeal property is curtilage listed, the appellant confirms that for the purposes of
       this appeal, the building is treated as curtilage listed. The appellant has also
       submitted a listed building consent application for the works and I have determined
       the appeal accordingly.
3.     Although the appellant submitted both planning and listed building consent
       applications to the Council, only the listed building consent appeal is before me.
4.     Section 1(5)(b) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (the Act) confirms that any object or structure within the curtilage of the
       building which, although not fixed to the building, forms part of the land and has
       done so since before 1st July 1948, shall be treated as part of the listed building,
       which in this case is known as ‘Further Ford Farmhouse’ (Ref: 1322459).
5.     As the appeal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to section 16(2)
       of the Act.
6.     Since the Council issued its decision notice, a new National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Both main parties
       have been given the opportunity to comment on it and I have taken all comments
       received into consideration.
7.     Following the Council’s determination of the application, the Uttlesford Local Plan
       2021–2041 (the Local Plan) was adopted in March 2026 and now forms part of the
       development plan. It supersedes the Uttlesford Local Plan 2005. I am required to
       determine the appeal on the basis of the development plan at the time of my

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006330


       decision. The Council, within its statement of case, identifies policies from the new
       Local Plan that it considers are relevant to this appeal. The appellant has had the
       opportunity to comment on the Council’s case and I have taken all comments
       received into consideration.
Main Issue
8.     The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve a Grade II listed building,
       known as ‘Further Ford Farmhouse’, and any features of special architectural or
       historic interest that it possesses,
Reasons
9.     Further Ford Farmhouse is a Grade II listed building, which dates from around the
       17th or 18th century. It is two storeys high and has a timber frame. The building has
       a plastered finish, with a plain tiled roof. The building has been extended over the
       centuries. Further Ford Farmhouse forms part of a historic farmstead.
10. Elm Cottage is an independent dwelling, which lies a short distance away from the
    farmhouse and forms part of the historic farmstead. It is an attached building,
    which forms one side of a group of former agricultural buildings that are arranged
    around a courtyard. Elm Cottage is single storey in height and has a rectilinear
    plan form. It has a slate roof and rendered walls, with some weatherboarding on
    the gable end. The elevation facing the courtyard is devoid of openings. The
    opposite elevation is heavily fenestrated.
11. Based on my site visit and the evidence before me, I find that the listed building’s
    special interest insofar as is relevant to this appeal is derived from its historic and
    architectural interests as an illustration of architecture from around the 17th or 18th
    century. The building’s surviving historic fabric, presence of traditional materials
    and its rural surrounds make important contributions in these regards. Pertinent to
    this appeal, Elm Cottage has historic, physical and functional associations with the
    farmhouse and has heritage value as being part of the historic farmstead and
    courtyard arrangement. Its modest, rectilinear plan form and positioning enclosing
    one side of the courtyard help to illustrate its historic function as part of the wider
    farmstead. The historic farmstead, including Elm Cottage contributes in a positive
    way to the special interest and significance of Further Ford Farmhouse as a
    designated heritage asset.
12. The proposal seeks to demolish the existing conservatory and construct two
    projections on the elevation that faces away from the courtyard. The existing
    conservatory is of low architectural merit and is in a dilapidated condition and does
    not make a positive contribution to the special interest of the listed building.
    However, the siting of the conservatory respects the building’s simple, rectilinear
    plan form. The demolition of the conservatory would result in a modest
    enhancement to the listed building.
13. The proposed extensions would have a lower ridge height than the existing
    dwelling, which would help them to appear subservient to the existing dwelling in
    terms of height. The proposal would also utilise traditional materials, which would
    respect the existing building and the setting of the farmhouse. I appreciate that the
    proposed works would not be visible from the public realm and that no changes
    are proposed to the elevation facing the courtyard or farmhouse. However, listed


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006330


         buildings are safeguarded for their inherent architectural and historic interest
         irrespective of whether or not public views of the building can be gained.
14. The proposed extensions would be almost as deep as the principal part of the
    dwelling. The proposed extensions by reason of their size, design and siting would
    significantly erode the building’s simple rectilinear plan form, which is integral to
    one’s understanding of the building’s role as part of the historic farmstead and
    courtyard arrangement.
15. Policy HE5 of the Framework requires that proposals affecting heritage assets
    should be accompanied by an assessment of the significance of the assets
    affected (including any contribution made by their setting) and of the potential
    effect of the proposal on their significance. The level of detail should be
    proportionate to the assets’ importance. The Framework also requires that
    appropriate expertise is employed where necessary.
16. The proposal seeks to remove some internal walls and fabric beneath some of the
    windows to form new door openings. While the appellant states that the partitions
    were installed in the mid-20th century, there is no compelling evidence before me
    that all the fabric that would be lost is modern. Accordingly, I am unable to
    determine whether the proposal would result in the loss of any historic fabric. The
    loss of historic fabric would cause further harm to the special interest of the listed
    building.
17. The appellant argues that the appeal scheme is less intensive than an earlier
    scheme. However, that scheme was dismissed at appeal1 and therefore does not
    establish an acceptable benchmark or fallback position. While the current proposal
    may be reduced in scale, I must assess it on its own merits. Overall, I find that the
    proposal would result in harm to the special interest of the listed building.
18. Policy HE6 of the Framework advises that when considering the effect of a
    proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
    should be given to the asset’s conservation. In this case, I find that the proposal
    would cause harm to the special interest of the listed building, albeit the harm
    would be at a low level. Nonetheless, a low level of harm does not equate to a low
    planning objection and the Framework is clear that any harm to a designated
    heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight. Where a
    proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the
    Framework states that the effect on the asset and its significance should be
    weighed against any public benefits from the proposal.
19. The proposal would result in investment into the property, which would have a
    small economic benefit, which I give limited weight in my decision as a public
    benefit. There is no compelling evidence before me that the proposal would
    increase the number of people using local services when compared to the existing
    situation and I therefore give this argument very limited weight in my decision. The
    appellant states that the proposal would improve the energy efficiency of the
    dwelling. However, there are limited details before me of any energy efficiency
    measures that would be employed and I give this aspect limited weight in my
    decision.



1
    Appeal ref: 3346333


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6006330


20. The proposal would provide improved privacy and living conditions for the
    occupants of the dwelling and improve the functionality and circulation space
    within the dwelling. While the proposal would improve the quality of one housing
    unit within the district, the improvements to the accommodation would be primarily
    a private benefit and consequently, I give this argument limited weight in my
    decision.
21. The removal of the dilapidated conservatory would result in a modest
    enhancement to the building. However, there is no substantive evidence before
    me that the demolition of the conservatory is solely reliant on the appeal scheme.
    Neither is there any clear and convincing justification that the appeal scheme
    represents the least harmful option for securing the public benefits.
22. It is clear that the benefits which would accrue would primarily be of a private
    nature. There is no compelling evidence to suggest that the use of the building as
    a dwelling would cease in the absence of the proposed changes. As a result, I do
    not find them necessary to secure the viability and long-term conservation of the
    building.
23. Overall, I give the public benefits limited weight in my decision. Consequently,
    there would be insufficient public benefits arising from the proposal to outweigh the
    harm that I have identified. Given the above, I conclude that, on balance, the
    proposal would fail to preserve the special interest of the listed building. The
    proposal would fail to satisfy the requirements of the Act and Policies HE4, HE5
    and HE6 of the Framework. The proposal would also conflict with Core Policies 61
    and 62 of the Local Plan. These policies among other things, require that
    proposals conserve, and where appropriate enhance, the special character,
    appearance and distinctiveness of the historic environment and retain the special
    interest that justifies a listed building’s designation through appropriate design that
    is sympathetic to the asset and its setting.
Other Matters
24. I acknowledge the support for the proposal by private representatives and the lack
    of objection from the Parish Council. However, this does not alter my findings set
    out above.
Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.

A James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
