Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by Paul Martinson BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6006905
Whitlees, Elsdon, Hexham NE19 1BT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 for the
    development of land carried out without complying with conditions subject to which a previous
    planning permission was granted.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Queenborough and Schwarz against the decision of
    Northumberland National Park Authority.
•   The application Ref 25NP0102, dated 13 November 2025, was refused by notice dated 12 January
    2026.
•   The application sought planning permission for conversion of bastle and adjoining byre into two
    holiday accommodation units and ancillary store without complying with conditions attached to
    planning permission 25NP0019 dated 18 August 2025.
•   The conditions in dispute are No 2 and No 18 which state:
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the following approved
    plans and documents: • The Application Form received on the 10th March 2025. • The Location plan
    received on the 10th March 2025. • The Proposed Parking Plan received on the 10th March 2025. •
    The Taxus Ecology Bat Survey Report, Whitlees Barns, February 2025 received on the 10th March
    2025. • The Foul Drainage Assessment received on the 17th March 2025. • The Land Contamination
    Screening Assessment received on the 17th March 2025. • The Revised Structural Survey received
    on the 7th May 2025. • The Existing and Proposed Internal Elevations (drawing no- PR-2002)
    received on the 9th June 2025. • The Proposed Internal Lining (drawing no- PR-5001) received on
    the 9th June 2025. • The Amended Proposed Site Plan (drawing no. PR-0001) Rev B received 18th
    July 2025. • The Proposed Elevations (drawing no. PR-2001) Rev C received 18th July 2025. • The
    Amended Existing and Proposed Floor and Roof Plans (drawing no. PR-1001 Rev C) received 18th
    July 2025.
    18) All arrow slit openings shown on the Proposed Elevations (drawing no. PR 2001) Rev C received
    18th July 2025 shall be frameless and set back in their opening by a minimum of 100mm.
•   The reason given for condition 2 is: For the avoidance of doubt, to enable the Local Planning
    Authority to adequately manage the development and to ensure the proposal accords with
    Northumberland National Park Local Plan policies ST1, ST2, ST4, DM6, DM7, DM10, DM11, DM14
    and DM15 and the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF).
•   The reason given for condition 18 is: To protect the special interest of the Listed Building in
    accordance with policies ST1, ST2 and DM14 of the Northumberland National Park Local Plan 2020.

Appeal B Ref: 6006903
Whitlees, Elsdon, Hexham NE19 1BT
•   The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
    1990 (as amended) against a refusal to vary or discharge conditions of a listed building consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Queenborough and Schwarz against the decision of
    Northumberland National Park Authority.
•   The application Ref 25NP0102 sought to vary condition No 2 and remove condition No 8 of listed
    building consent Ref 25NP0020LBC granted on 18 August 2025.
•   The conditions in dispute are No 2 and No 8 which state:
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the following approved
    plans and documents: • The Application Form received on the 10th March 2025. • The Location plan
    received on the 10th March 2025. • The Proposed Parking Plan received on the 10th March 2025. •


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006903


       The Taxus Ecology Bat Survey Report, Whitlees Barns, February 2025 received on the 10th March
       2025. • The Revised Structural Survey received on the 7th May 2025. • The Existing and Proposed
       Internal Elevations (drawing no- PR-2002) received on the 9th June 2025. • The Proposed Internal
       Lining (drawing no- PR-5001) received on the 9th June 2025. • The Amended Proposed Site Plan
       (drawing no. PR-0001) Rev B received 18th July 2025 • The Proposed Elevations (drawing no. PR-
       2001) Rev C received 18th July 2025. • The Amended Existing and Proposed Floor and Roof Plans
       (drawing no. PR-1001 Rev C) received 18th July 2025.
       8) All arrow slit openings shown on the Proposed Elevations (drawing no. PR 2001) Rev C received
       18th July 2025 shall be frameless and set back in their opening by a minimum of 100mm.
•      The reason given for condition 2 is: For the avoidance of doubt, to enable the Local Planning
       Authority to adequately manage the development and to ensure the proposal accords with
       Northumberland National Park Local Plan policies ST1, ST2, ST4, DM6, DM7, DM10, DM11, DM14
       and DM15 and the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF).
•      The reason given for condition 8 is: To protect the special interest of the Listed Building in
       accordance with policies ST1, ST2 and DM14 of the Northumberland National Park Local Plan 2020.


Decisions
1.       Appeal A: The appeal is dismissed.
2.       Appeal B: The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.       The appeals relate to a Grade II listed building1 referred to on the National
         Heritage List for England as Bastle house c.50 yards north of Whitlees (the Bastle
         House). I have therefore had special regard to sections 16(2) and 66(1) of the
         Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
4.       I have taken into account the national decision-making (DM) policies contained
         within the new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’), as
         published on 17 August 2026. Any reference to the Framework below is therefore
         a reference to this new version.
Background and Main Issues
5.       Planning permission, Ref 25NP00019, was granted for conversion of bastle and
         adjoining byre into two holiday accommodation units and ancillary store. An
         accompanying listed building consent, with the same description was granted
         alongside the grant of planning permission under Ref 25NP0020LBC.
6.       Appeal A follows the refusal by the Council of a subsequent application made
         under Section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) that
         sought to amend the grant of planning permission in order to allow the provision of
         larger windows than the approved arrow slits. This type of application is possible
         as a condition was imposed on both the original planning permission and the listed
         building consent, specifying the approved plans.
7.       Appeal B follows the refusal of the Council to grant a variation to the approved
         plans condition that would permit the installation of the windows proposed as part
         of the development that comprises Appeal A. An appeal against a refusal of a
         variation or discharge of a condition previously imposed on a grant of listed
         building consent is possible under section 20(1)(b) of the Act. Appeal B is on this
         basis.

1
    List Entry Number: 1155121.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6006903


       The main issues relating to both Appeal A and Appeal B are therefore, whether the
       appeal proposal would preserve the Grade II listed building of Bastle house c.50
       yards north of Whitlees, or any features of special architectural or historic interest
       which it possesses, and, as such, whether the conditions imposed on planning
       permission Ref 25NP0019 and listed building consent Ref 25NP0020LBC continue
       to serve a useful purpose.
Reasons
Special Interest and Significance
8.     The bastle house was constructed in the sixteenth or early seventeenth century as
       a defensible bastle or fortified farmhouse within what, at the time, was a contested
       border region at risk of attack from Border Reivers. As is typical of such bastle
       houses, the building comprises massive walls, incorporating substantial individual
       stones with few openings.
9.     Previously of two storeys, the building was likely lowered to single storey as its
       defensive role grew obsolete. Within the building, the thicker ground floor masonry
       reduces with a notable step which would likely have accommodated the first-floor
       beams. The reduction in height could have occurred around 200 years ago,
       perhaps to provide masonry for the construction of the attached bays forming a
       byre and store. These lack the wall thickness of the main bastle house building but
       retain the characteristic lack of openings. The building does have two blocked up
       openings in the eastern gable, in addition to the door openings on the south
       elevation. The building today comprises three adjoining bays and is understood to
       have been used for agriculture since its reduction in height.
10. The special interest and significance of the bastle house is derived from the
    austere simplicity of its vernacular architecture, distinctive to the Border region, its
    association with a specific historical period, its massive stone construction and
    monolithic massing, the predominantly blank character of its walls with few
    openings and a high solid-to-void ratio, and the legibility of its evolution through
    successive phases of change.
Proposal and Effects
11. The extant planning permission and listed building consent approved the
    conversion of the building into two holiday lets with an ancillary store. The
    proposed conversion would utilise the main bastle house as a single holiday let
    and the adjoining attached bay of the former byre as a second holiday let. The final
    bay would be used as a store.
12. As part of the conversion, consent was given for the insertion of new openings in
    the structure of the building. These comprise a row of three narrow ‘arrow slit’
    openings to the western gable of the former byre, and two pairs of arrow slits to
    the north elevation. One pair of arrow slits are proposed to the attached byre and
    one to the main bastle house. New openings also include a large rooflight to the
    bastle house and a rooflight to each adjoining bay.
13. The arrow slits, as new openings, interrupt the blank appearance of the north
    elevation. Nonetheless, being arrow slits, they have some authenticity, being
    reminiscent of the defensible nature of the bastle house. Their narrowness,
    recessed nature and frameless design would also help to reduce their effect on the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006903


       building and maintain the blank appearance, simplicity and high solid to void ratio
       of the north elevation and building as a whole.
14. The appeal scheme proposes to replace each pair of arrow slits on the north
    elevation with a wider single window. The appellant sets out that these are
    required for escape purposes and for improving daylight levels within the interior.
15. The proposed windows would be significantly wider than the approved arrow slits
    and would diminish the high solid to void ratio of the building to a greater extent.
    The proportions of the 600mm wide opening would not relate to any other opening
    in the building, and I am not directed to any historic precedent for windows of the
    position, scale or proportion. Consequently, the proposal would lack the
    authenticity of the approved arrow slits and would introduce window proportions
    more akin to those of modern domestic windows. On this basis, the proposed
    windows would relate poorly to the historic character of the bastle house, to the
    detriment of its special interest and significance.
16. I have been provided with a 1:10 scale elevation drawing of the proposed
    windows. This appears to show the glazing as a single frameless panel, similar to
    the arrow slit. However, in my experience, an openable window capable of
    providing a means of escape would require a framed casement. This leads me to
    question the accuracy of the submitted drawings. The introduction of a frame and
    casement would increase the domestic appearance of the window and make it
    more visually prominent within the north elevation and the building as a whole. On
    this basis, the proposed windows would appear incongruous on this elevation and
    would fail to respect the building's historic character and appearance, harming its
    special interest and significance.
17. Whilst I appreciate that some removal, repair and reinstatement of masonry would
    be required to form the approved arrow slits, I am not persuaded that the resulting
    loss of historic fabric would be equivalent to that arising from the appeal proposal.
    Even if a larger opening were initially created, the central column would be formed
    from the reinstatement of the displaced stone. By contrast, the appeal proposal
    would necessitate the removal of additional masonry and, consequently, a greater
    loss of historic fabric, to the detriment of the listed building's special interest and
    significance.
18. I note that the openings are located on a less prominent elevation that is less likely
    to be publicly visible. However, listed buildings are safeguarded for their inherent
    architectural and historic interest irrespective of whether or not public views of the
    buildings can be gained.
19. For the above reasons, the appeal proposal would fail to preserve the Grade II
    listed building of Bastle house c.50 yards north of Whitlees, or any features of
    special architectural or historic interest which it possesses. This would be contrary
    to the clear expectations of sections 16(2) and 66(1) of the Act. For the same
    reasons the proposal would cause harm to the significance of this designated
    heritage asset.
Public Benefits and Balance
20. When considering the impact of proposed development on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, the Framework sets out that great weight should be
    given to the asset’s conservation. It makes clear that the more important the asset,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006903


       the greater the weight should be. This is irrespective of the degree of harm that
       would occur.
21. Having regard to my above reasoning, I consider the harm to the designated
    heritage asset to be of a moderate level. Framework Policy HE6 sets out that
    where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits resulting from the proposal. Important public benefits
    can include securing the long-term reuse of a vacant or underused listed building
    and enabling energy efficiency and low carbon heating measures to be employed.
22. The proposal would secure the long-term reuse of a vacant or underused listed
    building. This would represent a substantial benefit of the appeal scheme.
    However, there is little evidence before me that this benefit is entirely dependent
    upon the provision of the windows that have resulted in the harm that I have set
    out above. This benefit could be provided through a more sensitive scheme, as
    evidenced by the existence of the extant approvals. This limits the weight I have
    attributed to this as a benefit.
23. The appellant sets out that the proposed windows would improve the functionality
    and safety of the approved accommodation by providing a practical means of
    escape for holiday guests. However, as is set out by both parties, the Building
    Regulations offer flexibility for historic buildings, and it has not been demonstrated
    that the proposed window is the only means of providing a suitable escape route
    from the building.
24. I am not convinced that there would be significant differences in terms of natural
    light levels between the appeal scheme and the approved scheme, particularly
    when noting the likely need for a window frame which would also limit light levels. I
    am also mindful of the size of the approved rooflights, the large openings on the
    south elevations and the open plan nature of the building. I therefore do not share
    the appellant’s view that the approved windows undermine the long-term
    sustainability of the conversion.
25. Public benefits would flow from the use as holiday accommodation contributing to
    rural tourism and visitor spend. However, as I have set out above, these benefits
    are not dependent on the precise nature of the scheme before me and would also
    be generated by the extant approvals.
26. Overall, the moderate public benefits I have set out above are not sufficient to
    outweigh the considerable importance and weight I am required to attach to the
    moderate level of harm to the significance of the designated heritage asset.
27. The proposal would fail to preserve the Grade II listed building of Bastle house
    c.50 yards north of Whitlees, or any features of special architectural or historic
    interest which it possesses. This would be contrary to the requirements of sections
    16(2) and 66(1) of the Act and the provisions within the Framework which seek to
    conserve and enhance heritage assets. The harmful impact would also be contrary
    to Policies DM6 criterion 2(f) and DM14 criterion 3 of the Northumberland National
    Park Local Plan (2020) which, amongst other things, together, seek to ensure new
    development, including conversions, are of a high quality design that reinforces the
    distinctive historic character of the National Park and conserves the historic
    environment, including heritage assets.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006903


28. In finding that harm arising from the appeal scheme is not outweighed by public
    benefits, I therefore also conclude that condition 2 and condition 18 of planning
    permission Ref 25NP00019 and conditions 2 and 8 of listed building consent Ref
    25NP0020LBC continue to serve a useful purpose and are reasonable and
    necessary in that regard.
Other Matters
29. I have regard to the comments of Elsdon Parish Council, however, a lack of
    objection does not necessarily equate to a lack of harm.
Conclusion
30. Appeal A: The proposal would conflict with the Act, the development plan and the
    Framework. There are no material considerations of sufficient weight that would
    lead me to conclude otherwise. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude that
    Appeal A should be dismissed.
31. Appeal B: For the above reasons and having regard to all matters raised, I
    conclude that Appeal B should be dismissed.

Paul Martinson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
