Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 July 2026
by E Everitt BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006961
Paddock north of Spring Acres, West End Lane, Henfield, West Sussex BN5 9RE
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Mr T Tingey against the decision of Horsham District Council.
•      The application Ref is DC/26/0041.
•      The development proposed is erection of up to 9 self-build dwellings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
         advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
         the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
         suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the
         detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
         these 2 stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if
         permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.       The appellant has provided a site layout plan. As the application is for permission
         in principle, I have considered the plan on the basis that it is indicative only.
5.       A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
         during the consideration of the appeal. The main parties were provided with the
         opportunity to comment on the relevance of the Framework to the appeal, and I
         have taken account of the comments received, and the Framework, in making my
         decision.
6.       The appellant raises a number of matters with respect to the Council’s actions that
         they invite the Inspector to consider as unreasonable behaviour, but has not made
         a costs application. In consideration of the merits of the case and the behaviour of
         the Council, I see no reason to instigate an awards of costs myself.



1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006961


Main Issue
7. The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development in terms
   of its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development, with
   particular regard to:
            •   development plan policies concerning the location of development; and
            •   the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
Location
8.      Policies 2 and 3 of the Horsham District Planning Framework (excluding South
        Downs National Park) (adopted 2015) (the HDPF) outline the development
        strategy for the District, directing development primarily towards settlements with
        employment, services and facilities and leisure opportunities and access to public
        transport services. Policy 4 of the HDPF identifies that outside built-up area
        boundaries the expansion of settlements will be supported in specific
        circumstances.
9.      The appeal site comprises an open parcel of land fronting onto West End Lane.
        Existing residential dwellings are present close to the appeal site. Nevertheless,
        the appeal site is undisputably located within the open countryside. It does not
        adjoin an existing settlement edge, nor is it a site allocated for housing in the
        HDPF or the Henfield Neighbourhood Plan 2017-2031 (adopted 2021) (the HNP).
        As such, the proposed development would be contrary to Policy 4 of the HDPF.
10. Policy 26 of the HDPF sets out that outside built-up area boundaries the rural
    character and undeveloped nature of the countryside will be protected against
    inappropriate development, with any proposal required to be essential to its
    countryside location and 1. support the needs of agriculture or forestry; 2. enable
    the extraction of minerals or the disposal of waste; 3. provide for quiet informal
    recreational use; or 4. enable the sustainable development of rural areas. It has
    not been put to me that the proposal is essential to its countryside location or that
    it would accord with any of the criteria in Policy 26 of the HDPF.
11. The appellant argues that the site is sustainably located compared to sites subject
    to recent appeals and decisions by the Council2. Unlike in some of these cases,
    the Highway Authority has not objected to the appeal proposal. Nonetheless, I
    note that its consultation response identifies that the site location is not sustainable
    in transport terms, due to very limited public transport options and no footways,
    even if the conclusion reached is that this is to be expected in a rural location.
12. The appellant also argues that, in line with the findings in the latter cited appeal in
    respect of accessibility to services and facilities, a pragmatic approach to access
    to sustainable transport options is needed in the context of the current housing
    land supply shortfall. Even were I to agree on this point, which I will return to in my
    planning balance, this matter does not overcome the failure to comply with the
    relevant provisions of Policies 2, 3, 4 and 26 of the HDPF. This is irrespective of
    whether West End Lane is well used by walkers and cyclists and whether the
    appeal site is located a shorter distance from services and facilities than some of

2
    APP/Z3825/W/25/3361339, APP/Z3825/W/25/3360134, APP/M3645/W/24/3352066 and DC/26/0735


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6006961


        the cited cases, which relate to different proposals in different contexts and will
        have been assessed on their own individual circumstances in any event.
13. For these reasons, I conclude that the site would not be suitable for residential
    development, with regard to Policies 2, 3, 4 and 26 of the HDPF, the relevant
    provisions of which I have outlined above.
Character and appearance
14. The appeal site has an open character. It fronts onto a section of West End Lane
    which is characterised by built development to the south and predominantly open
    land to the north. While there is some development to the north of the road, this is
    sporadic and screened from the surrounding area by established vegetation.
    Consequently, the area is viewed and experienced as comprising development on
    a single side of the road. Views towards the surrounding countryside through open
    parcels of land, including the appeal site, contribute to an open, verdant character
    in the area. The pattern of development along this part of West End Lane
    distinguishes the area from the settlement of Henfield which is more densely
    developed.
15. The appeal proposal would introduce built form on a parcel of land which is
    currently open. Even though there are existing urbanising features in the
    surrounding area, the introduction of buildings onto the site would depart from the
    established pattern of development. The proposal would also erode views from
    West End Lane towards the surrounding countryside. In doing so, the proposal
    would urbanise the area and detract from its open, verdant character and
    appearance. This is irrespective of the proposal relating only to the part of parcel
    of land abutting West End Lane, with the remainder to remain open and
    undeveloped.
16. The submitted indicative site layout plan reflects the pattern of development
    immediately south of the appeal site, illustrating that built form similar in form to the
    nearby buildings could be accommodated on the site. Nevertheless, by reason of
    the introduction of built development onto a currently open parcel of land, the
    proposal would unduly urbanise the area, eroding the established pattern of
    development which distinguishes the area from the densely developed settlement
    of Henfield. The development would, therefore, detract from the character and
    appearance of the area, even if were to have a similar form to that of nearby
    existing buildings.
17. Furthermore, even if the appeal proposal would generate less traffic than the
    previously proposed natural burial ground3, it would increase the built form in the
    area and result in additional domestic paraphernalia and activity. The extent of
    built form and level of activity would be dependent on the number of dwellings
    delivered. However, based on my observations during my site visit, I am not
    satisfied that any built form on the site could be accommodated without harm to
    the open, verdant character of the site and the contribution this makes to the
    character and appearance of the area. This is particularly due to the reasonably
    small scale of the site which limits the potential for landscaping of sufficient scale
    to effectively screen the development.



3
    APP/Z3825/W/25/3375037


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006961


18. In this regard, irrespective of the quantum of dwellings delivered on the site, the
    proposal would materially and detrimentally alter the character and appearance of
    the area, contrary to the requirements as well as the underlying aspirations and
    intentions of Policies 25, 32 and 33 of HDPF. In this context, the appellant’s
    agreeableness to a lesser quantum of development does not lead me to an
    alternative conclusion on this matter.
19. My attention has been drawn to Policy L3 of the Framework regarding making
    efficient use of land. Policy L3 sets out that development footprints should make
    the best use of a site’s development potential, taking into account the policies in
    the Framework. For the reasons given above, the proposal would, regardless of
    the quantum of dwellings delivered on the site, conflict with Policy DP3 of the
    Framework which seeks development proposals which respond to their context so
    that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Therefore, the efficiency
    of the use of the land is not determinative.
20. The appellant indicates that they would be agreeable to the imposition of
    conditions relating to boundary treatments to screen the development and
    materials. However, the PPG specifies that it is not possible for conditions to be
    attached to a grant of permission in principle4. In any event, irrespective of the
    specifications of boundary treatments and materials, for the reasons set out above,
    residential development on the site would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area.
21. Accordingly, I conclude that the site would not be suitable for residential
    development, with regard to the character and appearance of the area. As such,
    the proposal would be contrary to the relevant provisions of Policies 25, 32 and 33
    of the HDPF and Policies 1 and 10 of the HNP. Among other things, these policies
    seek high quality development which protects, conserves and enhances the
    landscape and townscape character and results in a positive landscape and visual
    impact.
Other Considerations
22. The appeal site is located in the Sussex North Water Supply Zone, development
    within which has the potential to adversely affect the integrity of the Arun Valley
    Special Area of Conservation, Special Protection Area and Ramsar Sites. Habitats
    Regulation 63(1) states that a competent authority, before deciding to give any
    consent or permission, must make an appropriate assessment of the implications
    of the plan or project for that site. However, given my reasoning in respect of the
    suitability of the location for residential development, and that the appeal is
    dismissed, there is, therefore, no requirement upon me in that regard. Even were I
    to find that the proposal was acceptable in this respect, it would be neutral in my
    determination of the case.
23. The appellant highlights that the appeal site is not located within the Green Belt.
    They assert that, in the interests of protecting the Green Belt, weight should be
    given to sequentially preferable countryside outside the Green Belt. However,
    each proposal must be considered on its own individual circumstances, against the
    national and local policies relevant in that particular case, as I have done with this
    appeal. The appellant also suggests the site is partially previously developed and
    that, consequently, very special circumstances do not need to exist to justify the
4
    PPG Paragraph: 020 Reference ID: 58-020-20180615


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decision 6006961


        development. The Framework does not require very special circumstances to be
        demonstrated for development on non-Green Belt land. As such, irrespective of
        whether part of the site is previously developed, these matters are not
        determinative in my decision.
24. Even if the site is available now and the Inspector undertaking the examination of
    the emerging Local Plan indicates a need for additional housing, such matters do
    not alter my assessment of the appeal proposal. Similarly, a lack of harm to the
    living conditions of occupiers of adjoining properties does not lead me to an
    alternative conclusion on the main issue.
25. Matters relating to access arrangements, the set back of the proposed dwellings
    from the road frontage and their design and energy efficiency are not
    determinative at this permission in principle stage.
26. My attention has been drawn to Policy L3 part 2.c. of the Framework regarding the
    density of development within reasonable walking distance of well-connected
    stations. From the information before me, it is evident that the appeal site is
    located some distance from a train station and that it would not accord with the
    definition of ‘reasonable walking distance’ set out in Annex B of the Framework.
    This matter is, therefore, not determinative.
27. The appellant has drawn my attention to Policy L1 of the Framework, which relates
    to planning for an effective use of land. However, Policy L1 is identified as a
    plan-making policy, which paragraph 8 of the Framework specifies should not be
    used when making decisions on development proposals. I have, therefore, not
    considered this policy.
28. I appreciate the frustrations of the appellant regarding the Council’s approach to
    the application, including in respect of a perceived failure to approach the proposal
    positively and proactively as required by the Framework, and consider a lesser
    quantum of development. I also appreciate the frustrations of the appellant in
    respect of a lack of engagement with the Council following the determination of the
    application and perceived lack of consistency in the application of development
    plan policies and approach to the planning balance compared to recent decisions
    made by the Council5. Nonetheless, I have assessed the appeal scheme on the
    basis of the plans and information before me. Ultimately, therefore, these matters
    do not lead me to an alternative conclusion on the main issues.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
29. The site is not suitable for residential development in terms of its location, the
    proposed land use and the amount of development, with particular regard to
    development plan policies concerning the location of development and the
    character and appearance of the area. As such, the proposal would conflict with
    the development plan as a whole.
30. I acknowledge that the HDPF dates from 2015, prior to the publication of the
    current iteration of the Framework. However, the Framework makes clear in
    Annex A that policies should not be given reduced weight simply because they
    were adopted prior to the publication of the Framework. Policies relating to the
    location and accessibility of development are not materially inconsistent with the

5
    DC/23/2278 and DC/26/0735


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006961


       emphasis within the Framework on directing growth towards locations which are or
       can be made sustainable. Policies relating to character and appearance are also
       consistent with the Framework’s emphasis on development that responds to its
       context and enhances its surroundings. As such, I afford them due weight.
31. Notwithstanding this, Policy S3 of the Framework establishes that decisions on
    development proposals should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S5 of the Framework states that only certain forms of
    development should be approved outside settlements, as specified in the policy.
32. This includes Policy S5 part 1.e. which allows for limited infilling within groups of
    houses. As I have explained above, the appeal site is located on a section of West
    End Lane which is characterised by predominantly open land to the north of the
    road, with only sporadic development present. Consequently, I do not consider
    that the site is located within a group of houses, with Policy S5 part 1.e. therefore
    not applicable. It has not been put to me that the proposal would accord with any
    of the other criteria set out in part 1 of Policy S5 of the Framework.
33. Part 4 of Policy S5 states that development proposals which do not fall within one
    of the categories set out in the policy should only be approved in exceptional
    circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to
    promoting sustainable patterns of movement.
34. There would be a variety of benefits to the scheme, including the provision of new
    self-build housing on a small site, support for which is found in the Framework.
    These benefits attract substantial weight in favour of the development. However,
    given the scale of the proposed development, the benefits would be small in scale.
    Consequently, I attach moderate weight to them. There would also be economic
    benefits during construction and following occupation, to which I attach moderate
    weight in favour of the proposed development.
35. While these benefits weigh in favour of the proposal, they would not substantially
    outweigh the harm I have identified above in respect of the effect of the proposal
    on the character and appearance of the area. This is even if a pragmatic approach
    to access to sustainable transport options is taken and weight attached to the
    comparative accessibility of the appeal site relative to the cases cited by the
    appellant.
36. Accordingly, even though the provisions of Policy S6 (previously paragraph 14) of
    the Framework are no longer applicable as of June 2026, 5 years after the
    adoption of the HNP, in this case, the application of the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development does not indicate that permission should be granted.
37. In conclusion, therefore, for the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with
    the development plan and the material considerations do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. As such, the appeal
    should be dismissed.

E Everitt
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
