Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Terceiro BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6006259
2 Ashfield Cottages, Horns Hill, Hawkhurst, Cranbrook, Kent TN18 4XD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jack Nethercott (Prime Oak) against the decision of Tunbridge Wells
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00015/FULL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of oak framed garden room to the side.

Appeal B Ref: 6006260
2 Ashfield Cottages, Horns Hill, Hawkhurst, Cranbrook, Kent TN18 4XD
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jack Nethercott (Prime Oak) against the decision of Tunbridge Wells
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00016/LBC.
•    The works proposed are the erection of oak framed garden room to the side.

Decision
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     There are two appeals on this site. They relate to the planning application and
       listed building consent for the same scheme. To avoid duplication, I have dealt
       with them together, except where otherwise indicated.
4.     As the appeal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to sections
       16(2) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (the Act).
5.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       on 17 August 2026, and I have had regard to this in my decision. The main parties
       were invited to provide comments on the revised Framework and the comments
       received have been taken into account in my determination of the appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006259


Main Issue
6.       The main issue on both appeals is the effect of the proposal on the special interest
         of the Grade II listed building, Ashfield Cottages.
Reasons
7.       The appeal site forms one part of the Grade II listed building known as Ashfield
         Cottages, which dates to the 18th century with an earlier structural core, likely
         dating from the late 15th or early 16th century. This layered historic development is
         typical of rural buildings within the High Weald and contributes to the building’s
         overall historic interest and authenticity. The host dwelling has been enlarged with
         a modest single storey side extension.
8.       The listed building comprises of two dwellings, albeit the listing description1
         indicates that it would have been a single dwelling historically. The building is two
         storeys with attic with half-hipped roof and gablets, and prominent central chimney
         stacks. The external materials include red brick to ground floor and weather-
         boarding on first floor with plan tiled roof. The building’s design and materials
         make for a pleasing appearance.
9.       The special interest and significance of the listed building derive, in part, from its
         architectural form, historic fabric, survival as a modest rural cottage pair and its
         contribution to the character of Horns Hill. The relationship between the two
         cottages is an important element of this significance, and the pair read as a
         coherent whole rather than as isolated dwellings. The building can be appreciated
         from within the property’s garden, other third-party viewpoints, and public views of
         its front and side elevations and roofscape can be gained from Horns Hill.
10. The appeal proposal seeks to construct a single storey side extension, which
    would project into the garden area of 2 Ashfield Cottages (No 2). Despite its single
    storey height and recessed position in relation to the front elevation, the width of
    the extension, in combination with its depth, would result in a significant addition to
    No 2 and would disrupt the visual balance between the pair of cottages even given
    the differences between the two. Albeit the proposal would have an oak frame and
    a simple form, its scale would fail to be subservient and would overwhelm the
    proportions and architectural detailing of the host building. This would be harmful
    to the building’s historic and aesthetic value.
11. The extension would be linked to its host by a flat roofed structure, which would
    have a solid appearance and would therefore fail to successfully provide a
    separation between historic and new fabric. Moreover, the excessive amount of
    glazing within the extension would starkly contrast with the host building.
    Accordingly, the combination of the design, detailing, glass and proportions would
    pay little regard to those of the host building. This would present an incongruous
    addition which would fail to satisfactorily read as a contemporary addition to the
    listed building and would harm its appreciation, including from public viewpoints
    within Horns Hill.
12. Whilst I acknowledge that the proposal would be attached to a modern addition
    and would not result in the loss of historic fabric, significance derives from more


1
    List Entry Number:1325546


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6006259


       than surviving fabric alone and includes the building’s form, proportions,
       appearance and legibility.
13. Policy HE6(1) of the Framework advises that, when considering the potential effect
    of a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE4(2)
    states that any harm to the significance of a designated asset, including from
    development within its setting, should have a clear and convincing justification.
14. Given the scope of works, the proposal would harm the significance of the listed
    building. Any harm to a designated heritage asset is a matter of considerable
    importance and weight. Where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, Policy HE6(4) informs us that the
    effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
    benefits resulting from the proposal, including securing the long-term reuse of a
    vacant or underused listed building.
15. The proposal would be acceptable in terms of other aspects, including its effect on
    living conditions of the nearest neighbours. However, this is a neutral matter that
    neither weighs for or against the appeal scheme.
16. The proposal would improve the dwelling’s internal floor space and while it would
    contribute to the building’s long term viable use, there is nothing before me to
    suggest that this could not be achieved in another, less harmful manner.
    Furthermore, there is limited evidence before me to confirm that the dwelling would
    not be viable without it. There would be some economic benefits brought about
    through the construction phase. However, these public benefits either alone or in
    combination would be insufficient to outweigh the substantial weight attached to
    the heritage harm identified. Accordingly, the proposal would harm the listed
    building.
17. Given the above, the proposal would fail to preserve the special historic interest of
    the Grade II listed building, Ashfield Cottages, thus failing to satisfy the
    requirements of the Act, the Framework and would conflict with the relevant
    provisions of Policies EN4 and H11 of the Tunbridge Wells Local Plan 2025.
    These, amongst other things, seek to preserve and enhance heritage assets and
    support extensions that are compatible with the character and appearance of the
    main dwelling and its setting, including in terms of design, size, mass, external
    finishing materials, and detailing.
Other Matter
18. The site lies within the High Weald National Landscape (NL), and its special
    qualities include a detailed agricultural tapestry of fields, small woodlands and
    farmsteads. Section 245 of the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 includes a
    requirement to seek to further the statutory purpose of conserving and enhancing
    the natural beauty of National Landscapes. While I have identified harm in terms of
    heritage, this harm would not affect the natural or scenic qualities of the wider
    landscape given its localised impacts. Therefore, the proposal would have an
    acceptable effect on the NL and would conserve its natural beauty.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006259


Conclusion
19. For the above reasons and having regard to all other matters raised I conclude
    that the appeals are dismissed.

P Terceiro
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
