Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 June 2026
by Laura Bartle BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006811
Hall Croft House, Castleford Road, Normanton
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Jadie Westwood against the decision of Wakefield Metropolitan District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01975/FUL.
•    The development proposed is conversion to form beauty hub.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion to form
   beauty hub at Hall Croft House, Normanton in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref 25/01975/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Council's evidence indicates that the development has already commenced.
   This has not been disputed by the appellant, and I have determined the appeal on
   that basis with reference to the plans before me.
3. A Noise Assessment dated March 2026 was submitted with the appeal. It responds
   to the Council’s reason for refusal and was carried out after the planning application
   was determined by the Council. The Council had the opportunity to consider its
   findings, and I am satisfied that there would not be procedural unfairness if I take it
   into account. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given
       an opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the
       appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching my decision.
       References to the Framework in my decision are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the development on:
           •    the living conditions of nearby occupiers, with particular regard to noise and
                disturbance; and
           •    highway and pedestrian safety, having particular regard to parking
                provision, vehicle manoeuvring and traffic movements associated with the
                use.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006811


Reasons
Living conditions
6. The appeal site relates to an existing vacant commercial building that the main
   parties do not dispute was previously in office use. It is located within a
   predominantly residential area within the built-up part of Normanton. However, it is
   also situated adjacent to a petrol filling station and in proximity to other commercial
   activity on Castleford Road and around the junction with High Street.
7. The development provides hairdressing, beauty treatment facilities, sunbeds and a
   gym/pilates area within the footprint of the existing building and without any
   external alterations. Although those activities would generate customer arrivals and
   departures throughout the day, such activity is characteristic of many service-based
   commercial uses.
8. Whilst the noise assessment submitted with the appeal does not specifically
   consider noise breakout from the proposed pilates gym area, I am satisfied that the
   likely effects of this element of the development can be assessed from the
   evidence before me. The plans indicate that the area occupies a relatively modest
   part of the first floor and that it is largely enclosed within the building. Furthermore,
   the evidence before me indicates that only a single window serves that part of the
   premises, thereby limiting opportunities for noise breakout.
9. Pilates and similar exercise activities are not generally associated with high levels
   of activity, impact noise or loud music. Whilst users will inevitably generate some
   noise, I have seen no convincing evidence that the use of the pilates/gym area,
   either alone or in combination with the other elements of the development, would
   result in noise and disturbance of a level that would materially harm the living
   conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
10. I recognise that the development may generate a greater level of activity than the
    previous office use of the premises. However, having regard to the nature of the
    proposed activities, the characteristics of the building, its surroundings and the
    acoustic evidence before me, I am not persuaded that the operation of the beauty
    hub will result in unacceptable levels of noise or disturbance. Subject to conditions
    controlling the hours of operation and preventing the use of amplified sound
    systems within the building, the development will provide satisfactory living
    conditions for neighbouring occupiers
11. Accordingly, I conclude that the development will not harm the living conditions of
    nearby occupiers, with particular regard to noise and disturbance. It therefore
    accords with Policies LP56 and LP67 of the Wakefield District Local Plan (WDLP)
    insofar as proposals are required to respond to the likelihood of emissions which
    may have an unacceptable effect on the amenity of the local area and for
    development to have no significant detrimental impact on the amenity of
    neighbouring residents. I am also satisfied that the development will accord with
    Policy P3(2) of the Framework, which seeks to ensure that proposals should not
    give rise to, or contribute to, an unacceptable level of noise.
Highway and pedestrian safety
12. The appeal site benefits from hardstanding areas that provide parking for up to 6
    vehicles served by an existing vehicular access, shared with the adjoining petrol


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006811


     filling station and associated commercial activities. The development will generate
     demand for staff and customer parking, and it is likely that parking demand will, at
     times, exceed the parking available within the site. It is likely, therefore, that some
     users will rely on parking available within the surrounding area. However, it is likely
     that some staff and customers will walk or cycle given that the appeal building is in
     a residential area.
13. Whilst the beauty hub will result in a different pattern of activity to the former office
    use of the building, including a greater turnover of customer visits, the premises
    benefit from a lawful office use which could operate without further planning
    permission, and which would itself generate vehicle movements and parking
    demand. Whilst the development is likely to increase activity beyond that
    associated with the former use, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that
    the resulting increase in vehicle movements and parking demand is sufficient to
    give rise to unacceptable highway impacts.
14. I recognise that some nearby on-street parking is subject to time restrictions and
    that users may therefore experience some inconvenience in locating a parking
    space. However, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that this will result
    in unsafe parking practices, obstruction of the highway or conflict with pedestrians.
    Inconvenience in finding a parking space does not, in itself, amount to harm to
    highway safety.
15. I have also had regard to the shared access arrangement and the activity
    associated with the adjoining petrol filling station, car wash and parcel lockers.
    Whilst the development will add some vehicle movements to those already using
    the access, I have seen no convincing evidence that the likely increase will
    materially prejudice the safe operation of the access or result in unacceptable
    conflict between vehicles and pedestrians.
16. Taking all matters into account, I am not persuaded that the development results in
    unacceptable impacts on highway or pedestrian safety. Accordingly, I conclude that
    the proposal would comply with Policies SP13 and LP27 of the WDLP and with
    Policy TR6(4) of the Framework, insofar as they seek to ensure that development
    does not result in unacceptable impacts on highway safety.
Conditions
17. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council and have imposed
    those that are necessary having regard to the tests in the Framework.
18. The plans condition is imposed to provide certainty. I have also imposed conditions
    restricting the hours of operation and preventing use of amplified sound systems
    within the building. Given the proximity of nearby residential properties, these
    conditions are necessary and reasonable in the interests of safeguarding living
    conditions and in accordance with Policies LP56 and LP57 of the WDLP. With
    regards the opening hours condition, I have replaced the reference to “operate”
    with “open to customers” for precision.
19. To promote sustainable travel choices and reduce reliance on more polluting forms
    of transport, it is necessary to secure the provision of both covered cycle parking
    and electric vehicle charging infrastructure. The precise details have not been
    provided as part of the appeal proposal and therefore a condition requiring their
    subsequent approval and implementation is necessary and accords with Policies

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006811


     LP27 and LP34 of the WDLP. I have combined the Council’s suggestions into a
     single condition in the interests of precision and brevity.
20. A condition is necessary to secure details of any plant, machinery, ventilation or
    extraction equipment and any associated noise mitigation measures, in the
    interests of safeguarding neighbouring living conditions. I have simplified the
    Council's suggested wording in the interests of precision and brevity.
21. The Council has suggested a condition requiring a Car Park Management Plan.
    However, as I have found that the development will not result in unacceptable
    impacts on highway or pedestrian safety, I am not satisfied that such a condition is
    necessary to make the development acceptable. I have therefore not imposed it.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the development will not result in
    unacceptable harm to the living conditions of nearby occupiers and will not result in
    unacceptable impacts on highway or pedestrian safety. The development therefore
    accords with the relevant policies of the development plan. Accordingly, having
    regard to the development plan as a whole and all other material considerations, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

Laura Bartle
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006811


Schedule of 5 conditions

    1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans:

         Location Plan and Block Plan
         Block/Site Plan
         Proposed Ground Floor and First Floor Layouts

    2) Within three months of the date of this decision, details of secure, covered cycle
       parking facilities and an electric vehicle charging point shall be submitted in
       writing to the Local Planning Authority for approval. The approved cycle parking
       facilities and electric vehicle charging point shall be implemented within three
       months of the Local Planning Authority's approval and shall thereafter be
       retained, maintained and kept available for their intended purposes.

    3) No external plant, machinery or equipment, including ventilation or extraction
       equipment, and no internal plant, machinery or equipment that vents directly to
       the exterior of the building, shall be installed until details of its specification,
       location and any noise mitigation measures have been submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The equipment shall be
       installed and operated in accordance with the approved details and thereafter
       retained and maintained as such.

    4) The beauty hub uses hereby permitted shall not be open to customers outside
       the hours of 09:00 until 20:00 Monday to Sunday (including Bank and Public
       Holidays).

    5) No use of sound amplification systems, tannoy systems, live music
       performances, karaoke or similar entertainment shall take place at any time
       within beauty hub use hereby approved.


End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
