Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Mark Harrison BA(Hons) DipTP LLM MIoL MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006329
340 Heathway, Dagenham, London RM10 8NJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Toyin Rose Akintokun against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Barking & Dagenham.
•    The application ref. is 25/01514/FULL.
•    The development proposed is demolition of existing outbuilding and construction of a new
     outbuilding, a part two storey part single storey side extension and a single storey rear extension
     including relocation of the side entrance door and alterations to fenestration, to create a new two-
     storey 1x bed dwelling with associated car parking at land adjacent to 340 Heathway, Dagenham
     RM10 8NJ.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2.     The main issues are the effect of the development on:
       •   the character and appearance of the area, with particular regard to the non-
           designated heritage asset (NDHA); and
       •   highway safety, with particular regard to the provision of car parking.
Reasons
       Character and appearance
3.     The appeal property is a two-storey end-of-terrace house. The surrounding area is
       predominantly residential, characterised by small blocks of symmetrical terraces
       and semi-detached dwellings. The frontages of which have been largely unaltered.
       It is located within the Beacontree Estate, which because of its homogenous layout
       and consistent architecture is a recognised NDHA. Properties in the area benefit
       from reasonably generous rear gardens as a further noticeable characteristic of
       the area.
4.     The proposed development would extend the appeal property to create a separate
       new one-bedroom dwelling. Viewed from the front, this would comprise a part two-
       storey, part single storey extension to the side. A small part of the rear garden
       would be enclosed with fencing to create a private outdoor space for the new
       dwelling.
5.     At the ground floor level, the proposed side extension would extend to the
       boundary of the appeal site. The width of the proposed side extension is such that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006329


       it would not appear subservient to the host dwelling. The part two-storey, part one-
       storey frontage of the proposed development would be out of keeping with the
       character of the Beacon Tree Estate. This, together with the proposed new
       dwelling having a narrower frontage than its neighbours, would serve to unbalance
       the short terrace that No.340 forms part of.
6.     The appeal development, owing of its lack of subservient design would be out of
       keeping with other properties. Its scale and appearance would be injurious to the
       immediate street scene and the wider NDHA.
7.     The appellant draws my attention to a recently approved scheme at the appeal
       property. The approved scheme allows the construction of a two-storey side
       extension, a single storey rear extension and a roof extension.
8.     Given that this is an extant planning permission, I conclude that there is a greater
       than theoretical possibility that it might be implemented. Therefore, this represents
       a fallback position, which is a material consideration in determining this appeal.
9.     From the plans and elevations provided, I can see that the two-storey elements of
       both schemes are very similar. Both schemes have single storey rear extensions.
       The appeal proposal introduces a single storey side extension. Whereas the
       approved scheme was a householder application to extend the property, the
       appeal proposal is to create a separate attached dwelling. Given these differences,
       I ascribe moderate weight to the fallback position.
10. Whilst the fallback would serve to unbalance the terrace of properties, the appeal
    proposal would be more harmful, due to the single storey side extension filling all
    the currently undeveloped gap right up to the side boundary of the site. The appeal
    proposal represents an over-development of what is a modest sized plot. In
    addition, the front elevation would feature two front doors, making it obvious that
    the extension is a self-contained dwelling which is narrower than its neighbours.
11. The private outdoor space to the rear of the new dwelling, whilst meeting minimum
    standards for a one-bed dwelling as set out in Policy D6 of the London Plan (LP)
    (March 2021), would divide the existing garden space into two smaller spaces that
    would be out of character with the reasonably generous rear gardens generally
    enjoyed by properties in this area.
12. Despite the existence of a fallback position, the appeal proposal must be assessed
    on its own merits. I find that the appeal proposal would cause significant harm to
    the character and appearance of the area, in particular the NDHA, resulting from
    its lack of subservience and by creating a narrow dwelling that unbalances the
    host terrace.
13. The proposed development is therefore contrary to Policies D4 and HC1 of the LP
    and Policies DMD1, DMD4 and SP2 of The Barking and Dagenham Local Plan
    (BDLP) (September 2024) which seek, amongst other things, to ensure that
    development proposals make a positive contribution to the character of the
    surrounding area and that development within NDHAs should respect its local
    context and avoid materially detracting from its significance.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006329


       Highway safety
14. The appeal property is block paved to the front, with space to accommodate two
    cars. However, there is no dropped kerb access, so any parking on this area is not
    a formalised arrangement. There is also a parking bay on the pavement directly in
    front of the property as part of the Controlled Parking Zone (CPZ) covering this
    area. Designation of the CPZ indicates that the appeal property is within an area
    that experiences local parking pressures.
15. The Council’s Delegated Report states that a dropped kerb and driveway to the
    appeal property would not be permitted, as it would extinguish the CPZ parking
    bay, leading to a reduction in formal on-street parking capacity. The proposed on-
    site parking arrangements could lead to conflicts between cars entering and exiting
    the block paved area to the front of the property and any vehicles using the CPZ
    parking bay and also entering or exiting the adjacent health centre. These vehicle
    movements would also present a potential risk to pedestrian safety.
16. The appellant notes that the Borough’s interim parking standards set a maximum
    requirement of 0.5 parking spaces per dwelling for sites, such as this one, which
    are within 400m radius of Dagenham Heathway Station. Given the good local
    public transport links, the appellant would be prepared to remove the on-site
    parking element of the proposal. They also suggest that revised plans would be
    submitted at appeal demonstrating a car-free development.
17. Nonetheless, no such revised plans were provided as part of the appeal. In any
    event, beyond scope for condition use which I have considered, it is not for the
    appeal process to evolve schemes. Plus, the first main issue is still overwise
    pivotal to my overall conclusion. The description of development also includes
    reference to associated car parking. I must therefore assess this proposal on the
    plans as submitted, which includes two on-site parking spaces.
18. The proposed development would be harmful to highway safety, with particular
    regard to the provision of car parking. The Proposed Site Plan shows on-site car
    parking arrangements that would have no driveway to access them. Instead, cars
    would need to unlawfully cross the public footway, posing a risk to pedestrian
    safety.
19. As such, the proposed development would fail to comply with Policies T1, T2, T4,
    T6 and T6.1 of the LP and Policy DMT2 of the BDLP which seek, amongst other
    things, to ensure that new developments control parking provisions to avoid
    dominance of vehicles on streets and to not increase road danger.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
20. Pursuant to Section 70(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and Section
    38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, decision makers should
    first have regard to the development plan and then to any other material
    considerations.
21. If regard is to be had to the development plan for the purpose of any determination
    to be made under the planning Acts the determination must be made in
    accordance with the plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
22. There is clear conflict with the development plan policies as identified by the main
    issues. Accounting for the relevant policies within the National Planning Policy

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006329


       Framework and all other material considerations I find that the appeal should be
       dismissed.



Mark Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
