Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by Mr D Szymanski BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:


Appeal Ref: 6006289
Land north Of Lyndale, Twitty Fee, Danbury, Chelmsford CM3 4PG
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr R Bewers against the decision of Chelmsford City Council.
• The application Ref is 25/01593/OUT.
• The development proposed is described as Reinstatement of previous dwelling and erection of 1no.
  self-building.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The application is made in outline with all matters reserved for future approval.
       Insofar as they provide indications of potential access, appearance, layout, scale
       and landscaping, I have considered the submitted plans as indicative only of how
       the appeal site could be developed. In its appeal statement the Council confirmed
       that due to receipt of a payment seeking to secure mitigation measures for
       designated habitats sites, it no longer objects to the appeal proposal on these
       grounds. I have had regard to this in setting out the main issues below.
3.     The Council did not refuse permission for reasons in respect of whether the
       proposal could secure a self- or custom build dwelling, and its implications for
       Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG). However, the parties’ evidence raises issues in this
       respect, so I have sought substantive comments upon these matters, which I have
       had regard to in setting out the main issues below and in determining this appeal.
       No party would be prejudiced by this approach.
4.     Since the appeal was lodged the Government has published the revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (2026) (the Framework) and the 2024 and 2025
       Housing Delivery Test results, which I have given the Council and the appellant
       the opportunity to comment upon, and taken into consideration in the
       determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
       • whether or not the proposal would be compliant with policies for the location of
         development to access services and facilities;
       • the effect of the proposal upon the character and appearance of the area;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006289


       • the effect of the proposal upon the significance of Twitty Fee as a non-
         designated heritage asset (NDHA); and,
       • whether or not the proposal is compliant with policies and guidance for BNG.
Reasons
Location
6. Policy S7 of the Chelmsford Local Plan (2020) (the CLP) explains the spatial
   strategy applies spatial principles to focus new housing to the most sustainable
   locations by making the best use of previously developed land in Chelmsford Urban
   Area; sustainable urban extensions around Chelmsford and South Woodham
   Ferrers; and around Key Service Settlements (KSCs) outside the Green Belt in
   accordance with the settlement hierarchy. The spatial principles seek to, amongst
   other things, locate development at well-connected and sustainable locations.
7. The appeal site is in the countryside a significant distance northeast of the KSC of
   Danbury, which contains a moderate range of services and facilities. This includes
   some pubs, tea/coffee shops, small supermarkets, recreational facilities, nurseries,
   primary school, library, a village hall, post office, and commercial and employment
   uses. Although, to access a number of other services and facilities, such as certain
   professional services, larger retail offerings and leisure and recreation facilities, and
   further education provision, trips to other settlements would be required.
8. Danbury’s services and facilities are spread across it. Some of the closest are
   approximately 850m from the site, such as a bus stop, pub and small supermarket.
   Although many are further from it. To walk or cycle to services and facilities would
   require walking or cycling along Twitty Fee and/or Hopping Jacks Lane and Runsell
   Lane. Though vehicles may not be travelling at or near the national speed limit
   along all parts, the routes include significant sections that are largely unlit, some
   single-track with no footways and limited refuge from traffic. Once within Danbury
   the speed limit reduces and there are some lighting and footways.
9. However, taking onto consideration various attributes of routes, they would not be
   particularly attractive and convenient, even to those that would be physically able to
   make the journeys, particularly outside daylight hours, or in inclement weather. To
   access what appears to be a fairly regular bus service to other settlements, for
   similar reasons, the routes along Twitty Fee and/or Hopping Jacks Lane and
   Runsell Lane would not be regarded as particularly attractive or convenient.
10. I take into account that opportunities to maximise sustainable transport solutions
    will vary between urban and rural areas. However, based upon the distances and
    nature of routes, it is likely the proposal would result in a significant proportion of
    car journeys with a significant number of additional private vehicular journeys and
    miles per year, and so would not be in a sustainable location.
11. Therefore, for the reasons set out above the proposal would not be compliant with
    policies for the location of development to access services and facilities, in conflict
    with Policy S7 of the CLP, the relevant provisions of which I have set out above.
Character and appearance
12. In combination, CLP Policies S11 and DM8 state permission will be granted for new
    buildings and structures in the rural area that do not adversely impact upon the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006289


     identified intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside, and subject to it falling
     within certain development categories. The character and appearance of the area
     includes rural country lanes lined by trees and hedgerows, some forested areas,
     fields, small numbers of dwellings, and despite part of a rural industrial site on the
     opposite side of the lane, it has discernibly rural character and appearance.
13. The appeal site was once occupied by a residential building. Following an
    enforcement notice the dwelling was largely demolished over around 40 years ago.
    While there are a building slab and some small piles of waste, the garden land has
    succeeded to informal vegetation. Notwithstanding the low-level building remains,
    it has a largely naturalised informal verdant appearance, which on balance makes
    an overall positive contribution to the character and appearance of the area.
14. While the proposal is in outline with all matters reserved to be considered under
    future reserved matters and other conditional submissions, it would result in a new
    detached dwelling, more formalised access, hardstandings, parked vehicles,
    associated comings and goings, the creation of garden areas and associated
    residential paraphernalia. It is inherent in the proposal that there would be a
    significantly greater mass and scale of built development to what currently exists,
    with a marked formalisation and domestication of the site. This would be
    significantly harmful to the intrinsic character, appearance and beauty of the appeal
    site and the area.
15. That there might be no increase in the historic footprint and there other buildings in
    the wider area, does not mean an absence of harm. It has not been demonstrated
    schemes secured by planning conditions could fully and adequately mitigate the
    harmful effects. Even if much of what is quite a thin front hedgerow could be
    retained while complying with the Highway Authority’s suggested conditions, and
    allowing for further matured landscaping, a development would be visible from part
    of Twitty Fee around the site access and from a neighbouring property to the south.
16. There is a raised building slab visible, which while low level and surrounded by
    informal vegetation, is not covered, and I am not fully convinced the remains of the
    building can be said to have blended into the landscape. Upon this basis it would
    fall within the definition of previously developed land (PDL). Though were I to take
    a view the proposal was of a type supported by and not in conflict with sections A)
    – C), given my findings above it would not comply with Policy DM8 as a whole.
17. For the reasons set out above, the proposal would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area, in conflict with Policies S11 and DM8 of the CLP, the
    relevant provisions of which I have set out above.
NHDA
18. Twitty Fee is a protected lane and a NDHA, where DM14 states that proposals will
    be permitted where they retain the significance of the NDHA. Proposals resulting in
    harm to significance should demonstrate the level of harm or loss is justified
    following a balanced judgement of the significance of the asset, and harm is
    minimised through retention of features of significance and/or good design and/or
    mitigation measures. Policy DNP16 of the Danbury Neighbourhood Plan (2024)
    states that proposals will only be supported where demonstrated they would not
    detrimentally affect their character and setting.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006289


19. The objective of Framework policies is to conserve and enhance the historic
    environment. Heritage assets should be conserved in a manner appropriate to
    their significance, so they can be enjoyed for their contribution to the quality of life
    of existing and future generations. Policy HE7 2) states where a proposal would
    harm the significance of a NDHA, it should be weighed against the benefits and a
    balanced judgement made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the
    significance of the NDHA.
20. From what I saw, the significance of the lane derives from its historic rural origins,
    its narrow width, lining with banks, trees, mixed hedgerows, informal vegetation,
    and its associated biodiversity value. Its setting includes the land either side of it
    along its length. There has been some erosion along its corridor from the industrial
    site opposite and occasional dwellings. However, the land adjacent to the industrial
    site includes banks and boundary vegetation. The limited amount of development
    along it, fields and trees, do contribute positively to its setting and significance.
21. In its present form, the field gate, vegetation, verdant, informal and largely open
    appearance of the appeal site makes some minor positive contribution to the
    setting and significance of the NDHA. To provide a safe and suitable access for
    the dwelling, the Highway Authority seeks a visibility splay that has no obstructions
    above ground level within a 2-metre parallel band along the nearside carriageway
    edge across the entire site frontage indicated on the plan.
22. The appellant has provided little of substance to assess the significance of the
    NDHA, to demonstrate the extent of vegetation requiring removal, or assess the
    effect of this upon significance, or a justify mitigation, in conflict with development
    plan and Framework objectives. However, it would appear to me the splay would
    require works to and maintenance of a significant amount of vegetation.
23. Even were relatively little vegetation required to be physically removed, there would
    be on-going maintenance, and from the very limited evidence before me, it would
    formalise a significant section adjacent to the highway corridor, eroding its verdant
    informal nature, which would be inherently harmful to the NDHA’s significance.
    Planting would need to be sufficiently set back and likely take a very significant time
    to establish and would not appear to be capable of fully mitigating the harm.
24. Therefore, for the reasons set out above, I conclude the appeal scheme would be
    harmful to the significance of Twitty Fee as a NDHA and would be conflict with
    Policy DM14 of the CLP, the relevant provisions of which I have set out above.
BNG
25. If the proposal is secured as a Custom- and/or Self- Build (CSB) dwelling it would
    be exempt from statutory BNG. Though the appellant also suggests it may also
    meet the de-minimis exemption, a consent would apply to the whole site which is
    greater than the current de-minimis exemption. The proposal could also not be
    considered under future exemptions. If not secured as a CSB dwelling, then it must
    meet all the requirements of relevant BNG legislation, policies and guidance.
26. In providing guidance on how BNG should operate the Planning Practice Guidance
    (PPG) explains the minimum national information requirements include detail of the
    pre-development site value at the appropriate date and the completed metric
    calculation tool. This allows consideration of the existing habitat baselines so there


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006289


     is a common understanding about the pre-development value, and if the
     biodiversity gain condition is capable of being discharged successfully.
27. While I note the appellant’s ecological evidence, including professional evidence in
    the Ecological Survey and Assessment, it does not provide the fully detailed
    information to sufficiently demonstrate the pre-development value, and completed
    metric calculation tool. Therefore, at present, it does not meet the minimum
    information requirements, so it is necessary for the appeal proposal to be secured
    as a CSB dwelling in order to avoid conflicting with BNG requirements.
28. I have significant concerns the imposition of conditions possibly including one that
    includes the appellant and his family as the occupiers of the dwelling for a time
    limited period, would be unlikely to pass the tests in Policy DM6 of the Framework
    due to reasonableness and the practicalities of enforcement.
29. To ensure a CSB dwelling remains in the possession of the appellant, any
    restriction needs to be legally applied to them. Were it sold and the appellant not to
    be the occupier before a given occupation period, not only would the appeal
    scheme no longer have permission to exist with a potential remedy of demolition,
    the BNG requirements for the ‘pre-development’ site value could no longer be met.
    Therefore, the BNG reason for conditions being required would be unenforceable
    and any proper remedy unlikely to be either reasonable or possible to achieve.
30. In consequence, a planning obligation is necessary to secure the proposal as a
    CSB dwelling. While the appellant has offered one, an obligation is not before me,
    so a CSB dwelling would not be secured. The PPG advises that in exceptional
    circumstances a condition to require an obligation might be appropriate where
    there is clear evidence the delivery of a development would otherwise be at risk,
    such as for particularly complex developments. However, this has not been
    demonstrated to be the case.
31. Therefore, the appeal scheme would not be compliant with policies and guidance
    for BNG. This conflicts with Framework Policy N2 1) a) which expects decisions to
    provide net gains for biodiversity, as well as conflicting the minimum information
    requirements in the PPG, the relevant provisions of which I have set out above.
Other Matters
32. The Councils’ fourth reason for refusal refers to the effect upon designated habitats
    sites from recreational disturbance and not securing a contribution in accordance
    with the Essex Recreational disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (the
    Essex RAMS). However, I am informed the appellant has made a contribution in
    accordance with the Essex RAMS. Were I to assume full mitigation would be in
    place and legally secured, the evidence is that the contribution is necessary to
    mitigate adverse impacts, and does not indicate it would result in an overall net
    benefit. Therefore, as I am dismissing this appeal for other substantive reasons, it
    is not necessary to consider this matter in detail.
Planning Balance
33. The appeal scheme would result in the provision of a further dwelling to supply
    which might be built out relatively quickly. I am informed the Council can
    demonstrate an over-supply of CSB plots but can only demonstrate a 3.88-year
    deliverable housing land supply (HLS). As it does not appear to comprise an


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006289


     isolated site, Framework Policy HO11 does not appear relevant, but Policy S5 1) d)
     and h) state in the cases of redevelopment of PDL, or where a 5 year HLS cannot
     be demonstrated, proposals should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so
     would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
     the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
34. While noting the HLS shortfall, a single dwelling would still only be a small benefit
    to supply. It is not demonstrated that downsizing to the appeal site is the only
    option available to the appellant, and while sympathetic to the difficulties the past
    dwelling demolition caused the appellant and his family, I see no reason in the
    present day this could attract anything other than limited weight at best.
35. The proposal would result in a small economic benefit during construction and once
    complete a small on-going spend in the local economy. It is also possible the
    scheme could secure new landscaping which would appear of an overall level that
    would be some limited benefit. There is nothing to substantively demonstrate the
    renewable energy benefits could be anything other than a minor net benefit at best.
36. Were I to agree the proposal is, or subject to the imposition of suitably worded
    conditions could be, compliant with policies and standards in respect of matters
    such as resource and energy efficient design, materials, the living conditions of
    future and neighbouring occupiers, archaeology, parking and access standards,
    protecting and mitigating any adverse effects upon protected species, and
    designated habitats sites, these would be neutral matters in the balance.
37. However, the proposal conflicts with development plan policies for the location of
    new housing because it would not be well located for sustainable access to
    services and facilities. It would be significantly harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area, and result in harm to the significance of a NDHA, for which
    neither the magnitude nor suitably justified mitigation is demonstrated. It would
    also not secure a CSB dwelling and so BNG requirements have not been
    demonstrated to be met. The policy conflicts and harms are such that these
    matters substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposal when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework. Therefore, the appeal
    should not succeed.
Conclusion
38. The proposal conflicts with the development plan read as a whole and the
    Framework taken as a whole. There are no material considerations, including the
    policies of the Framework, that indicate the decision should be made other than in
    accordance with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, the
    appeal should not succeed.



Dan Szymanski
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
