Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 July 2026 by E Clifford BA (Hons) MA
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006957
Land to rear of 1A St James Road, Torquay TQ1 4AZ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant technical details consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Stephen Darke against the decision of Torbay Council.
•   The application Ref is P/2025/0366, sought consent pursuant to permission in principle
    Ref P/2024/0710.
•   The development proposed is described as “technical details consent application for the demolition
    of buildings and development of 1no. new dwelling”.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and technical details consent is granted for the demolition of
   buildings and development of 1no. new dwelling at land to rear of 1A St James
   Road, Torquay TQ1 4AZ in accordance with the terms of the application,
   Ref P/2025/0366, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Procedural Matters
3. The proposal is for Technical Details Consent following the grant of Permission in
   Principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) advises that this is an alternative
   way of obtaining planning permission for housing-led development. The permission
   in principle has established that the location, land use, and amount of development
   is suitable in principle. The Technical Details Consent that is the subject of this
   appeal can consider the remaining detailed matters but cannot reopen what has
   been agreed at the Permission in Principle stage. I have determined this appeal on
   that basis.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. With regard to the main issues of this appeal, the relevant policies
   are not materially different from the previous iteration of the Framework. I am
   therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation with the main
   parties since, with the above in mind, their respective cases would not be
   prejudiced.
5. I have been made aware that there is currently another application being
   considered by the Council for this site (P/2025/0810). Regardless of the outcome of
   that particular application, I have made my recommendation for this appeal on the
   merits of the proposal before me.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006957


6. I have been provided with one amended floor plan/ elevation drawing and a
   Daylight/Sunlight Report (13 March 2026) as part of this appeal. The drawing
   proposes a minor amendment to the proposed scheme, removing a singular
   window seeking to address the Council’s concerns in respect of the privacy of
   occupiers of 3 St James Road. The Daylight/Sunlight Report seeks to address
   concerns raised regarding loss of light and overshadowing. As these documents
   were accessible via the Appeals Portal prior to the submission of the Council’s
   statement of case and interested party comments, I am satisfied that no party
   would be prejudiced by my acceptance of these documents. I have thereby
   proceeded with the appeal on that basis.
Main Issues
7. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
               •    character and appearance of the area; and
               •    the living conditions of occupiers of 1 and 3 St James Road, having
                    particular regard to outlook, light and privacy.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
8. The appeal site is a small patch of land located to the rear of properties on
   St James Road. The site is located in a close-knit, predominantly residential area
   and currently hosts a number of utilitarian structures in varying states of dereliction.
   The largest of these structures is a Nissen hut. Close to the appeal site and fronting
   onto St James Road there is a short terrace of residential properties and,
   immediately bounding the appeal site, 1 St James Road (No 1) which is a building
   containing flats. To the side of No 1, there is an access road which leads to the
   appeal site and the rear of several properties which front onto Forest Road. Upton
   St James CofE Primary School is also nearby and sits alongside the access road
   serving the appeal site.
9. The wider area shares these urban, predominantly residential characteristics, with
   the surrounding streets largely defined by the density of the rows of terraced
   housing. There is also an established presence of low-level apartment blocks in situ
   behind properties along St James Road. The buildings in the area have a notable
   traditionality to their appearance including pitched roof forms and a mix of facing
   materials including brickwork and painted render elevations.
10. Owing to its asymmetrical design, with the roof sloping to a lower eaves level
    towards St James Road, the dwelling would respond to the natural incline of the
    topography and would read as having a maximum height comparable to No 1. As a
    result of its sympathetic scale, pitched roof form, and rendered elevational
    treatment it would sit comfortably amongst the immediate close-knit surrounds, also
    integrating well into the traditionality of the wider street scene. Furthermore, the
    clearance of the existing structures on the site would allow for sufficient space
    around the property for a garden, parking, and courtyard, preventing any sense of
    overdevelopment. A condition could be attached requiring precise details of the
    render to further ensure that the proposed dwelling would assimilate well with the
    established built form of its surroundings.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6006957


11. Therefore, the proposed development would have an acceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the area. In that regard, it would comply with the
    requirements of Policy DE1 of the Torbay Local Plan (2015) (LP) and Policy TH8 of
    the Torquay Neighbourhood Plan (2019) which require development to be
    well-designed, acknowledge local character and have a clear urban structure and
    grain that integrates with the surrounding context, as well as to respect the local
    character in terms of height, scale and bulk and reflect the identity of its
    surroundings.
Living Conditions
12. 1 and 3 St James Road (Nos 1 and 3) have modest gardens. Consequently, the
    current buildings on the appeal site, have an established presence within the rear
    aspect of these properties. Given the tight-knit urban grain, and most particularly
    the proximity of the existing buildings on the appeal site, this also results in some
    overshadowing to the gardens serving these properties.
13. The asymmetrical design of the proposed dwelling would ensure that the scale and
    mass of the elevation nearest to the rear elevations of Nos 1 and 3 would be
    minimised. Together with the position of the dwelling set away from the rear
    boundary of No 1 and also set in from the boundary with No 3, this would ensure
    that the rear facing windows on all floors, and the private outdoor spaces at these
    neighbouring properties, would retain a suitably spacious aspect. In addition, the
    outlook from No 1 would be enhanced through the reduction in height to the nearby
    existing structure that is proposed for conversion to a cycle store.
14. The Daylight/ Sunlight Report (DLR) submitted as part of the appeal indicates that
    there is the potential for some overshadowing of the external spaces serving No 1
    and No 3, particularly during the morning. However, when compared to the
    shadows caused by the existing structures on the site, there is nothing to suggest
    that there will be anything more than a negligible difference in the level or position
    of the shadows. The DLR also indicates that there will be a marginal increase in the
    ‘lit area’ of amenity area at No 3. Therefore, and in the absence of evidence to the
    contrary, the proposal would have an acceptable effect in respect of levels of
    sunlight.
15. The Vertical Sky Component assessment indicates that there would be a very
    minimal effect on the daylight reaching the rear facing windows of No 1, and indeed
    one window would see an increase in the daylight levels. Given that the windows
    serving No 3 are set further away and more offset, there is also nothing to suggest
    any material effect on daylight received within that property.
16. The new proposed drawing submitted as part of this appeal (25.04-EDS-XX-00-DR-
    A-(02)04 Rev 03) omits a previously proposed first floor window on the ‘north
    elevation’. The Council had expressed concerns regarding a loss of privacy to No 3
    as a result of that window, and I am satisfied that its removal from the scheme
    alleviates this concern. The proposed ground floor openings would be below the
    established fence level and would not result in any material reduction in privacy for
    occupiers of No 3.
17. Overall, the proposed development would have an acceptable effect on the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers, having particular regard to outlook, light and
    privacy. In that regard, it would comply with Policy DE3 of the LP requiring
    development to be designed to not unduly impact upon the amenity of neighbouring

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006957


     and surrounding uses and to assess development under specific criteria which
     include but are not limited to having particular regard to outlook and to consider the
     impact of overlooking and privacy.
Other Matters
18. The Permission in Principle has established that the site is suitable for residential
    development and as such concerns regarding this suitability cannot be revisited as
    part of this appeal.
19. Third-party concerns have been made regarding the following issues: character
    and appearance, living conditions of neighbouring properties, ecology and wildlife,
    waste collection, disruption during construction, planting schemes and site access
    for emergency vehicles.
20. The issues relating to character and appearance and living conditions have been
    largely addressed under the main issues. The revised drawing includes the
    provision of a bedroom window to the east facing land owned by the nearby school.
    Given its heavily vegetated state, there is no indication that this is in regular use or
    would be in the future. In any case, it is not uncommon for windows of neighbouring
    residential properties to provide views of school owned land. Therefore, a condition
    requiring that window to be obscure glazed could not reasonably be substantiated.
    However, it is reasonable to require that bathroom windows be obscure glazed to
    this elevation and the ‘south’ elevation in line with the Council’s suggested
    condition.
21. Regarding waste collections, the Council are satisfied that the proposed bin store
    would be within a reasonable distance, having regard to Policy W1 of the LP, to
    enable kerbside collection. I have no evidence before me to lead me to disagree
    with this conclusion.
22. The Council have confirmed that the access road is currently lightly trafficked,
    which is in line with my on-site observations, and there is no substantive evidence
    to suggest there would be highway safety issues resulting from the proposed
    development. The Council has also confirmed that the access road is wide enough
    to enable fire engine access. I have no reason to disagree with this conclusion.
23. In terms of concerns raised in respect of potential effects on wildlife, the appellant’s
    Ecology Report does not identify any significant issues and there is no subjective
    evidence before me to suggest there would be harm in this regard.
24. Any roots from the indicated planting and their relationship with neighbouring land
    would be a private matter.
Conditions
25. Other than the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to ensure that the
    development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans for the reason of
    certainty. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, whilst the
    plans are clear that grey roof tiles would be utilised, the precise finish and colour of
    external walls and windows is unclear. Therefore, a condition requiring precise
    details of the facing materials is necessary. I have also attached the
    aforementioned condition relating to the provision of obscure bathroom windows in
    the interests of the privacy of occupiers of the dwelling.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006957


26. I understand that the site is located within a critical drainage area and I have
    attached the Council’s suggested condition relating to surface water drainage.
    Whilst the submitted Flood Risk Assessment suggests that there is insufficient
    space within the appeal site to provide ‘traditional soakaways’ on the basis of the
    distance of structures from existing buildings, highways and the site boundary, it is
    unclear whether this rules out any other types of soakaway. The condition allows
    for alternative means of surface water drainage to be explored if the ground
    conditions are not suitable for soakaways. I have also attached the suggested
    condition requiring a drain to be installed across the access point to prevent
    rainwater from the site entering the highway in the interests of highway safety.
27. A condition relating to the development being carried out in accordance with the
    recommendations of the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal is also necessary to
    ensure that the scheme aligns with the requirements for all developments to
    positively incorporate and promote biodiversity features in Policy NC1 of the LP.
28. I have added the suggested condition relating to the submission and agreement of
    a Construction Management Plan to be agreed upon with the Council prior to the
    commencement of work. This is to ensure that the works are carried out in a safe
    and appropriate manner, minimising the impact on neighbouring occupiers. As the
    site has a previous industrial use, I have also attached a condition requiring a Land
    Contamination Risk Assessment to be undertaken prior to the commencement of
    the development, in order to comply with the requirements of Policy ER3 of the LP
    regarding public health and safety.
Conclusion and Recommendation
29. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

E Clifford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
30. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006957


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing no’s: 25.04-EDS-XX-0-DR-A-(01)01 Revision 2 (existing and
              proposed block plans), 25.04-EDS-XX-00-DR-A-(01)03 Revision 03
              (proposed site plan), 25.04-EDS-XX-00-DR-A-(02)04 Revision 03 (proposed
              dwelling- asymmetric roof), 25.04-EDS-XX-00-DR-A-(01)01 Revision 02
              (existing and proposed site plan), and 25-04-EDS-XX-00-DR-A-(04)01
              Revision 04 (street elevations).
     3)       Prior to their use in the development hereby approved, precise details of the
              external facing materials shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority
              for approval in writing. The development shall then be completed in the
              approved materials.
     4)       The building hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the W/C window in
              the ground floor south elevation and bathroom window in the first-floor east
              elevation have been fitted with obscured glazing, and no part of those
              windows that is less than 1.7 metres above the floor of the room in which it is
              installed shall be capable of being opened. Once installed the windows shall
              be retained as such thereafter
     5)       Notwithstanding the submitted flood risk assessment, surface water drainage
              shall be provided by means of soakaways within the site which shall comply
              with the requirements of BRE Digest 365 for the critical 1 in 100-year storm
              event plus 50% for climate change. If demonstrated that the ground
              conditions are not suitable for soakaways or will result in an increased risk of
              flooding to surrounding buildings, roads and land, prior to any development
              above slab or ground level or creation of any new hard surface, details of an
              alternative means of surface water drainage shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The details of the
              alternative means of surface water drainage shall include evidence of how
              surface water will be dealt with in order not to increase the risk of flooding to
              surrounding buildings, roads and land. As Torbay is a Critical Drainage Area
              the submitted means of surface water drainage shall ensure that all off site
              surface water discharges from the development must be limited to the
              ""Greenfield"" run off rate for the 1 in 10 year rainfall event with attenuation
              designed so as there is no risk of flooding to properties or increased risk of
              flooding to adjacent land for the critical 1 in 100 year storm event plus a 50%
              allowance for climate change. On site all surface water shall be safely
              managed up to the ""1 in 100-year critical rainfall event plus 50% allowance
              for climate change"" conditions. This will require additional water storage
              areas to be created thereby contributing to a reduction in flooding
              downstream. To adhere to current best practice and take account of urban
              creep, the impermeable area of the proposed development must be
              increased by 10% in surface water drainage calculations. The development
              shall not be utilised until the approved surface water drainage system has
              been completed as approved and it shall be continually retained and
              maintained thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006957


     6)       No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until a
              Construction Method Statement has been submitted to, and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Statement shall provide for:
              i)    procedures for maintaining good neighbour relations including complaint
                    management;
              ii) delivery, demolition, and construction working hours;
              iii) mitigation measures as defined in BS 5528: Parts 1 and 2: Noise and
                    Vibration Control on Construction and Open Sites;
              iv) measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during construction;
              v) the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;
              vi) loading and unloading of plant and materials;
              vii) storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development;
              viii) a scheme for recycling/disposing of waste resulting from demolition and
                    construction works.
              The approved Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to
              throughout the construction period for the development.
     7)       The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
              recommendations set out in Section 5.0 of the South West Ecology - Ecology
              Report (June 2025). This shall include the installation of a Schwegler
              Sparrow Terrace box in the north or east elevation of the new dwelling
              hereby approved under the eaves. Once installed this feature shall be
              retained in perpetuity.
     8)       No development shall take place on site until a full investigation of the site
              has taken place to determine the extent of, and risk posed by, any
              contamination of the land and the results, together with any remedial works
              necessary, have been agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
              new dwelling hereby approved shall not be occupied until the approved
              remedial works have been implemented and a remediation statement
              submitted to the Local Planning Authority detailing what contamination has
              been found and how it has been dealt with together with confirmation that no
              unacceptable risks remain.
     9)       Prior to the first use of the access hereby approved, a drain shall be installed
              across the access to prevent rainwater from the site entering the highway
              (i.e. the private unadopted lane outside the site and St James Road below it).
              Once installed the drain shall be permanently retained.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
