Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 July 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006617
Springbank, Beech Avenue, Exeter, Devon EX4 6HE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Brahm Norwich against the decision of Exeter City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/0383/FUL.
•    The development proposed is a single storey dwelling.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by Mr Norwich against Exeter City Council. This
      application is the subject of a separate decision.
Background and Main Issues
3.    The application form and accompanying evidence show that the proposal is
      intended to be a self-build dwelling, which would render it exempt from otherwise
      mandatory biodiversity net gain (BNG) requirements. Whilst this matter was not a
      reason for refusal on the Council’s decision notice, the appellant has been
      afforded the opportunity to comment on the matter and submit further information
      during the appeal process. I am therefore content that the appellant has not been
      prejudiced by me including it as a main issue in my decision.
4.    The main issues are therefore:
           •    the effect of the proposal on biodiversity with particular regard to BNG.
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area, with
                particular regard to the Pennsylvania Conservation Area (CA); and
           •    the effect of the proposal on the Exe Estuary Special Protection Area
                (SPA).
Reasons
Biodiversity Net Gain
5.    BNG is a mandatory requirement of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country
      Planning Act 1990 (TCPA) (as inserted by Schedule 14 of the Environment Act
      2021). However, certain planning permissions including for self-build and custom
      build development are exempt from the BNG requirement.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006617


6.      No planning obligation under S106 of the TCPA has been submitted in relation to
        securing the proposed dwelling as self-build, although the appellant has suggested
        a planning condition and has referred to conditions used by other Council’s and a
        Planning Inspector within a differing appeal decision1.
7.      However, a condition requiring occupation by the person who built the dwelling for
        3 years would not be enforceable and if the owner sells or leaves the property
        before the timeframe for occupation is complete, the house would no longer have
        permission to exist. Therefore, such a condition would not pass the tests of
        conditions as outlined in the National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) and
        Planning Practice Guidance and cannot be attached.
8.      Consequently, I do not have any mechanism before me that ensures that the
        proposed dwelling would indeed be constructed and occupied as a self-build
        dwelling. As such, based on the submissions in this case, the appeal scheme
        would not ensure that this property would be self-build. Therefore, the BNG
        exemption would not apply in these circumstances, and the development would be
        subject to the statutory BNG condition.
9.      The minimum information required by Article 7(1A) of the Town and Country
        Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 is not
        before me. Whilst a BNG statement and Ecological Constraints Report is before
        me, I do not have a completed biodiversity metric calculation tool or tools.
        Consequently, I do not have sufficient information to conclude that appropriate
        BNG could be secured and there is insufficient information to conclude that the
        BNG objective would be met and the BNG condition is capable of being
        successfully discharged.
10. The Biodiversity Gain (Town & Country Planning) (Amendments and Transitional
    Provisions) (England) Regulations 2026 (The Regulations) introduces a new
    exemption to any development on a site no larger than 0.2 hectares where the
    development would not affect onsite priority habitat. Whilst the appeal site is below
    0.2 hectares in size, The Regulations are clear that this exemption only applies to
    planning applications received on or after the 6 August 2026. As such, this
    exemption does not apply to the proposal before me.
11. Consequently, there is insufficient information before me to conclude that the
    proposal would have an acceptable effect on biodiversity with particular regard to
    BNG, or that it would be in accordance with Schedule 7A of the TCPA, as set out
    above.
Character and appearance
12. The appeal site is an area of garden associated with Springbank and within the
    CA. The wider area contains low density built form of a traditional appearance,
    featuring both large dwellings within large grounds, and smaller dwellings within
    smaller gardens. The nearby Pennsylvania Park, as well as mature trees and
    gardens provide the area with a pleasant verdant character.
13. The Pennsylvania Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan 2007
    (AAMP) outlines the contributary features of the CA. These include an early 19th
    century high class residential development; one of the finest Regency terraces in

1
    APP/P4605/W/24/3355180


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006617


         the South West; Important mature treescape that makes a significant contribution
         to the character and appearance of the area; Retention of rural character; Variety
         of boundary walls and railings; and an historically important private park.
14. Having regard to these features, I find that the significance of the CA as a whole is
    derived, in part, from period properties and architecture, and its association with
    Pennsylvania Park and overall verdant character. Although not as prominent within
    the CA as other mature trees, larger trees at the appeal site (including three which
    are subject to Tree Preservation Orders (TPO)) do contribute to the surrounding
    verdant character, and as such the appeal site provides a modest positive
    contribution to the significance of the CA.
15. The proposal would introduce a single storey dwelling onto the appeal site, which
    due to its low height and mono pitch roof would sit comfortably within the natural
    topography and appear visually recessive on the hillside. Due to the roof form and
    large areas of glazing the proposal would have a somewhat contemporary
    appearance.
16. However, it’s external material palette references that of the nearby properties and
    the high-quality design results in a building which is of appropriate scale and visual
    massing and would sit comfortably with surrounding period architecture. Moreover,
    in combination with its positioning within the appeal site, which results in the
    building being largely screened from public views by topography and mature
    planting, the proposal would assimilate well into the area and CA.
17. Nevertheless, the proposal would require the removal of three trees and crown
    reduce another. The appellants Aboricultural Impact Assessment2 (AIA) outlines
    that the three trees for removal are ‘C’ category, that being trees of low quality with
    an estimated remaining life expectancy of at least 10 years, or young trees with a
    stem diameter below 150 mm. The AIA states these trees to be ‘early mature’ and
    I observed that due to their size and position within the appeal site, have a neutral
    effect on the character or appearance of the CA.
18. The AIA also demonstrates that the footprint of the proposed dwelling would be
    outside of any root protection area (RPA). However, the proposed parking and
    turning area would be over the RPA of a TPO tree (Tree 07) which the AIA
    classifies as a ‘B’ category, that being trees of moderate quality with an estimated
    remaining life expectancy of at least 20 years. This accords with my observations
    of the tree. Whilst due to its size and location this tree positively contributes to the
    character and appearance of the CA and wider area, the AIA includes a detailed
    methodology to achieve the construction of the parking area without any adverse
    effects to the tree.
19. Given the conclusions of the AIA, I see no reason why, subject to the imposition of
    an appropriate planning condition, the proposal could not be constructed in a
    manner that would protect the root areas of the TPO trees, or indeed other
    retained nearby trees and the positive effect they have to the character and
    appearance of the area. As such, the proposal would have a neutral effect on the
    significance of the CA.
20. Both the appellant’s ‘Daylight/shading analysis’ and the AIA illustrate a shading arc
    formed by the retained trees. The trees would shade differing parts of the

2
    Doug Pratt Tree Consultancy Ref: 2515/AIA Rev B


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              3
Appeal Decision 6006617


      proposed dwelling throughout the day. However, due to the quantum of glazing
      and spatial relationship of the dwelling within the appeal site, as well as outdoor
      garden space, the retention of the trees would still allow sufficient amount of
      daylight and outlook so as to not significantly affect future occupiers living
      conditions. As such, the proposal is unlikely to result in significant additional
      pressure for tree works which could diminish the contribution of the trees to the
      character and appearance of the area.
21. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would not have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the area, with particular regard to the CA. The
    proposal would accord with policies DG1 and C1 of the Exeter Local Plan First
    Review 2025 (LP). These policies seek, amongst other things, to promote good
    design in all development proposals and ensure development within conservation
    areas pay special attention to preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of the conservation area.
SPA
22. The appeal site is within the zone of influence of the SPA. The SPA is noted for
    the following qualifying features: Slavonian grebe (Non-breeding); Dark-bellied
    brent goose (Non-breeding); Eurasian oystercatcher (Non-breeding); Pied avocet
    (Non-breeding); Grey plover (Non-breeding); Dunlin (Non-breeding); Black-tailed
    godwit (Non-breeding); and the overwintering assemblage of over 20,000
    migratory waterfowl.
23. The SPA’s conservation objectives seek to ensure their integrity is maintained or
    restored as appropriate, with the SPA and Ramsar site contributing to the aims of
    the Wild Birds Directive.
24. Human presence and activity associated with the Exe Estuary can lead to
    physiological impacts, such as increased stress, the redistribution of birds, the
    reduced intake rate of food as a response to disturbance, and increased energy
    expenditure as birds react to disturbance. The South-east Devon European Site
    Mitigation Strategy (SMS) advises that such disturbance can be considered similar
    to habitat loss, and where significant effects cannot be ruled out or avoided,
    measures to mitigate for any potential impact are required.
25. The proposal would result in the permanent increase of persons residing at the
    site. This increase could have a significant effect on the SPA and interests of the
    protected site because persons residing at the appeal site could access the
    protected areas for recreational purposes. On this basis, either alone or in
    combination with other plans and projects, the proposal would be likely to have a
    significant effect on the integrity of the SPA and its relative features.
26. The SMS sets out detailed mitigation measures and areas within which mitigation
    would be required where residential development is clearly linked to recreational
    use. It states that the effects of development can be mitigated by way of a financial
    contribution towards mitigation measures – ranging from on-site management,
    education and enforcement to the creation of alternative recreation space.
27. A Unliteral Undertaking under S106 of the Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as
    amended) secures a Habitat Mitigation Contribution in accordance with the SMS.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006617


28. As the competent authority following appropriate assessment, I am satisfied that
    with the proposed mitigation, the development does not have an adverse effect on
    the integrity of the SPA.
29. On this basis the proposal would not have a significant effect on the SPA and
    would accord with objective 8 of the Exeter Core Strategy 2012 and LP Policy LS2.
    These seek, amongst other things to ensure development would not harm the
    integrity or conflict with the conservation objectives of the SPA.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
30. The Council are unable to demonstrate a five-year housing land supply of
    deliverable sites, with the appellant stating, and not disputed by the Council, that it
    has a 4.32 year supply.
31. I have found that the proposal would accord with the development plan policies
    cited by the Council within their reasons for refusal, and on the basis of the policies
    provided to me, the development plan as a whole. However, I have also found that
    there is no robust mechanism before me to secure the proposal as a unit of self-
    build housing, and therefore I cannot afford this any weight. Nevertheless, benefits
    of the proposal include providing one new dwelling in an area close to services
    and facilities where there is a shortfall in the delivery of housing, along with the
    associated social and economic benefits from the construction and future
    occupation of the proposal.
32. As such, the proposal would direct development to a sustainable location and align
    with the objectives of the Framework which seek to significantly boost housing
    supply and support the economy. Nevertheless, taking into account the small scale
    of the development for a single dwelling, this only results in modest benefits.
33. However, important biodiversity requirements have not been shown to have been
    met. Whilst a future planning application in relation to a similar development may
    now benefit from an exemption from the BNG requirements, the dates of
    implementation of the exemption in relation to submission of applications is clearly
    and laid out within legislation, and therefore I afford modest weight to the potential
    of any future application to be exempt.
34. It has not been demonstrated that the proposal would have an acceptable effect
    on biodiversity with particular regard to BNG, or that it would be in accordance with
    Schedule 7A of the TCPA. This is a material consideration which I afford great
    weight.
35. Even taking into account the extent of the housing undersupply, this important
    adverse effect would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the modest benefits
    set out above when assessed against the Framework taken as a whole, even with
    particular regard to key policies. Consequently, the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development would not apply in this case.
36. For the reasons given above, I find that although the proposal would accord with
    development plan as a whole, material considerations indicate that the appeal
    should be dismissed.

S Harrington INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
