Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by D Ellis MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006224
Land near Fanshawes, Ware Park, Ware SG12 0DX
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
    The appeal is made by Mr C Williams against the decision of East Hertfordshire District Council.
    The application Ref is 3/25/1052/PIP.
    The development proposed is residential development for up to 4 dwellings.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
      August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
      2024. This latest version of the Framework has introduced plan-making and
      national decision-making policies and is effect from the day of publication. The
      appellant and the Council have had the opportunity to comment on the new
      Framework.
3.    The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
      advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
      housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
      stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
      is suitable in-principle, and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when
      the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
      of these two stages.
4.    The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
      land use and the amount of development. All other matters are considered as part
      of a subsequent technical details consent application if permission in principle is
      granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
5.    An applicant can apply for permission in principle for a range of dwellings by
      expressing a minimum and maximum net number of dwellings as part of the
      application. In this instance, permission in principle has been sought for a
      minimum of one and a maximum of four dwellings.
Main Issues
6.    The main issues are:
               whether or not the proposal would be inappropriate development in the
                Green Belt having regard to any relevant development plan policies and the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006224


                National Planning Policy Framework, including with regard to whether the
                site is suitable for residential development having regard to its location and
                the accessibility of services and facilities;
               the effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt;
               whether or not the site is suitable for residential development, having regard
                to its location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development, with
                particular regard to the effect of the proposal on the setting of nearby listed
                buildings; and
               if the proposal would be inappropriate development, whether or not the
                harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would be clearly
                outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very special
                circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Inappropriate development
7.    Policy GBR1 of the East Herts District Plan October 2018 (EHDP) states that
      planning applications within the Green Belt will be considered in line with the
      provisions of the Framework.
8.    Policy GB6 of the Framework establishes that development in the Green Belt is
      inappropriate except in certain circumstances as listed in Policy GB7. For non-
      major development such as the appeal scheme, paragraph 1.g. of Policy GB7
      states that development would not be inappropriate where the development would
      utilise grey belt land and would not fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken
      together) of the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan; there is an
      evidenced unmet need for the type of development proposed; and the
      development would be in a sustainable location, with particular reference to Policy
      TR3 of the Framework.
9.    The Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year housing land supply, and
      therefore there is an evidenced unmet need for the proposed dwellings.
      Furthermore, the Council accepts that the proposal would utilise grey belt land and
      that the proposal would not fundamentally undermine the purposes of the Green
      Belt. Based on the evidence before me, the proposal would not contribute to
      unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas or result in neighbouring towns merging
      into one another, and it would preserve the setting and special character of historic
      towns. I have also had regard to the appeals referred to in Copthorne1,
      Dormansland2, Godalming3 and Colney Heath4. I therefore have no reason to
      disagree with the Council’s conclusions in this matter.
10. Turning to whether the proposal would be in a sustainable location, EHDP Policy
    DPS2 and Policy TR3 of the Framework both seek to locate development in
    sustainable locations. Paragraph 1.a. of Policy TR3 states that development
    proposals which could generate a significant amount of movement, in the context
    of the area within which they would be situated, should be in locations which are

1
  Appeal ref. APP/M3645/W/24/3347328
2
  Appeal ref. APP/M3645/W/24/3339699
3
  Appeal ref. APP/R3650/W/24/3352222
4
  Appeal ref. APP/B1930/W/24/3342701


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006224


         sustainable. Paragraph 1.a. further states that this means the location should limit
         the need to travel, particularly by private car, and offer a genuine choice of
         transport modes for residents and users, unless the nature of the development
         would make this impractical. Paragraph 2 of Policy TR3 states that the
         Connectivity Tool should be used alongside other relevant quantitative or
         qualitative evidence in assessing the connectivity of particular locations proposed
         for development.
11. The Connectivity Tool gives a score out of 100 for how well-connected a location is
    with regard to walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport. The score is a
    relative measure which shows how places compare to other places rather than
    whether its connectivity is “good” or “bad” in isolation. The appellant asserts that
    the appeal site has a connectivity score of 49 and falls within the rural-urban
    classification for ‘Rural hamlets and isolated dwellings’. As such the connectivity
    score would fall in the 90th percentile for that rural-urban classification. However,
    whether or not a development proposal would be in a sustainable location is a
    matter of planning judgement and the Connectivity Tool only forms part of this
    assessment.
12. EHDC Policy TRA1 requires development to primarily be located in places which
    enable sustainable journeys to be made to key services and facilities and to
    ensure that a range of sustainable transport options are available to occupants or
    users.
13. The appeal site is 0.72km from Hertford and 1.15km from Ware. However, these
    distances are to the edge of these settlements and the distance to key services,
    facilities and public transport would be significantly further. Furthermore, the route
    between the appeal site and the edge of these settlements would mostly consist of
    a single-track road with no street lighting or pavement which would make it
    unattractive as a walking, wheeling or cycling route, particularly after dark.
14. Consequently, access to and from the site would therefore be largely dependent
    on private cars to access services and facilities. Given the modest number of
    dwellings in the vicinity of the appeal site, the proposal for up to four new dwellings
    could generate a significant increase in vehicle movements compared to the
    existing context.
15. I have been referred to a development which was allowed at appeal for rebuilding
    works to provide two dwellings in Over Alderley5. The site was within the
    settlement of Over Alderley, which had limited services and facilities. The
    Inspector did however conclude that whilst there was no pavement providing easy
    or convenient separate pedestrian access, the nearby larger settlements were
    within realistic and comfortable cycling distance and a designated cycle route was
    close by. The current appeal site has an unattractive cycling route to Hertford and
    Ware and there is no designated cycle route nearby. Furthermore, the
    photographs provided by the appellant appear to show that the site in Over
    Alderley is accessed from a two-lane road, whereas the appeal site is accessed
    from a single-lane road. For these reasons the Over Alderley development is not
    directly comparable to the scheme before me.



5
    Appeal ref. APP/R0660/W/24/3354674


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006224


16. Reference has also been made to an appeal which allowed permission in principle
    for a residential development at Hilltop Country House, Butley Town6. Unlike the
    appeal before me, the site was located immediately next to the village of Butley
    Town, whose services included a bus stop, with facilities further afield in
    Tytherington which could be accessed via a well-lit continuous footpath to the side
    of a road. Furthermore, facilities in Bollington were accessed by travelling along a
    narrow and unlit road without a continuous footpath and with limited space on the
    side of the road for refuge. The Inspector concluded that this route did not provide
    an environment which is conducive to walking or cycling. Similarly, services in
    Prestbury were accessed by travelling along a road which is unlit, has no footpath,
    and is subject to the national speed limit. The Inspector concluded that occupiers
    of the proposed dwellings would not be encouraged to walk or cycle to Prestbury
    to access facilities. In the appeal before me, the routes to Hertford and Ware seem
    to have more in common with the routes from Hilltop Country House to Bollington
    and Prestbury than the route to Tytherington. As such, the Hilltop Country House
    appeal does not justify the appeal proposal before me, which has been determined
    on its own merits.
17. For the reasons above and notwithstanding the connectivity score, I am not
    persuaded that the site is well connected to the services, facilities and public
    transport that are provided within the nearby settlements, or that the proposed
    development is accessible, or will be made accessible, by a range of transport
    modes, even if electric charging points and cycle storage were provided. The
    proposal would therefore conflict with EHDP Policies DPS2 and TRA1, as well as
    Policy TR3 of the Framework.
18. As the proposal would not be in a sustainable location, the proposal would fail to
    accord paragraph 1.g. of Policy GB7 of the Framework. The proposal would
    therefore be inappropriate development which is, by definition, harmful to the
    Green Belt. This would result in conflict with both the Framework and, by
    association, EHDP Policy GBR1, the aims of which I have set out above.
19. I note the age of the EHDP, however its policies in these matters are largely
    consistent with the Framework. Furthermore, paragraph 2 of Annex A of the
    Framework states that development plan policies should not be given reduced
    weight simply because they were adopted prior to the publication of the
    Framework. I therefore attach great weight to the conflict with EHDP policies in
    these matters.
Openness
20. Openness is an essential characteristic of the Green Belt, and one of the
    fundamental aims of the Green Belt is to keep land permanently open. The
    Planning Practice Guidance states that openness is capable of having both spatial
    and visible aspects, so that both the visual impact of the development and its size
    may be relevant7.
21. Details of the possible layouts of the new dwellings would be considered at the
    technical details consent stage. Nevertheless, the construction of up to four new
    dwellinghouses, with the related domestic paraphernalia, on land which is currently
    undeveloped would undoubtably reduce both the spatial and visible aspects of

6
    Appeal ref. 6002211
7
    Planning Practice Guidance, Paragraph: 001 Reference ID: 64-013-20250225


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decision 6006224


       openness of the Green Belt in this location. As such, the provision of up to four
       dwellings in this location would cause harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
Setting of nearby listed buildings
22. Section 66 (1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires that special regard shall be had to the desirability of preserving a listed
    building or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest that
    it possesses.
23. There are three grade II listed buildings in the vicinity of the appeal site to the
    north. The ‘Pomarium and Walled Garden, on North Side of Stable Yard at Ware
    Park’ is a C17 or earlier stable block, now a house, with garden walls to the rear.
    The ‘Forecourt Wall to Pomarium’ is an C18 stable yard screen wall, now a
    forecourt wall to a house. The ‘Hermitage and Grotto Gardens at Ware Park’ is a
    C17 hermitage with a mid C19 semi-octagonal arched loggia with grotto gardens.
    Insofar as is relevant to this appeal, the significance of all three listed buildings is
    derived from their architectural features and historic nature and association with
    Ware Park.
24. Although it does not form part of the reason for refusal, the site falls within the
    locally listed Ware Park, a former mediaeval deer park. Ware Park has special
    historic interest due to its early date and to the significance of its historic
    development, including Ware Park Manor. Ware Park’s boundary, large open
    areas with isolated trees of great significance and remnants of the historic avenues
    still remain and contribute strongly to its significance. The spire of the grade II
    listed Church of the Holy Trinity in Bengeo is also visible from the appeal site.
25. The Council raised no objection with regards to the effect of the development on
    the setting of Ware Park and the Church of the Holy Trinity as details including the
    scale, design and siting of the proposed dwellings would be considered at the
    technical details consent stage, and therefore it was not possible to fully assess
    the level of the impact the scheme would have on the open character of this part of
    Ware Park and existing views the spire of the Church of the Holy Trinity.
26. The three grade II listed buildings are not visible from the appeal site however, as
    details including the scale, design and siting of the proposed dwellings are not
    considered at this stage, the possibility remains that one or more of the new
    dwellings would be visible from some or all of the listed buildings. However, given
    the lack of these details at this stage, including the exact number of dwellings to be
    built, I am unable to conclude that the proposal would harm the setting of the listed
    buildings. For the same reasons, I also agree with the Council’s conclusions
    regarding Ware Park and the spire of the Church of the Holy Trinity.
27. As such, at this stage the proposal would not conflict with EHDP Policies HA1 and
    HA7, insofar as they require development proposals to preserve and where
    appropriate enhance the historic environment and to preserve the setting of listed
    buildings. The proposal would also accord with Policies HE4 and HE6 of the
    Framework, insofar as they require heritage assets to be conserved in a manner
    appropriate to their significance, and for substantial weight to be given to the
    conservation of a heritage asset.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006224


Other Matters
28. I acknowledge the Council’s concerns regarding the accuracy of the red line
    boundary, however I note that the Council validated and determined the
    application based on the submitted drawing. Nevertheless, as I am dismissing the
    appeal on other grounds, I do not need to consider this matter further.
Other Considerations
29. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S5 of the
    Framework has regard to development outside settlements. However, paragraph 5
    of Policy S5 states that this policy does not apply to development proposals in the
    Green Belt, which should be determined in accordance with Policies GB6, GB7
    and/or GB8 as appropriate. For the reasons given earlier, the proposal would
    constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
30. The Council states that it cannot demonstrate a 5-year supply of housing sites.
    The appellant asserts that the housing land supply is between 3.4 and 3.7 years,
    and the Council does not dispute these figures. There is, therefore, a significant
    shortfall in housing land. I have had regard to the Wickford appeal8, the Written
    Ministerial Statement ‘Building the Homes We Need’ (July 2024), and the Plan for
    Change which was published under a previous government. However,
    notwithstanding these Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight
    should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards
    meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community.
31. I note the findings in the Brentwood BC judgement that factors which, when
    together, may clearly outweigh harm so as to generate very special circumstances,
    are not circumscribed by policy, and a series of ‘ordinary’ factors are capable of
    generating that outcome.
32. The provision of up to four additional units would make a modest but meaningful
    contribution to the existing supply. Economic and social advantages would also
    arise from the construction and occupation of a new house, although these would
    be limited by the scale of the scheme. The scheme would contribute to the vitality
    and sustainability of this rural community. A biodiversity net gain could be secured
    as part of the scheme at the technical details consent stage. Taken together and
    having regard to the lack of a five-year housing land supply, these benefits,
    because an additional dwelling would result, should be attributed substantial
    weight.
33. However, the proposed extensions would cause harm to the Green Belt by way of
    inappropriateness and through reducing openness, to which substantial weight
    should be afforded. Development should not be approved unless the harm to the
    Green Belt, and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by other considerations.
    Those I have identified would not attract sufficient weight to clearly outweigh the
    totality of the harm and subsequent development plan conflict. The proposal would
    therefore fail to accord with Policies GB6 and GB7 of the Framework.
    Consequently, the very special circumstances necessary to justify the proposed
    development do not exist.


8
    Appeal ref. APP/V1505/C/23/3314641


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006224


Conclusion
34. I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan and that material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

D Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
