Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by N Bowden BA(Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006990
Land at Netteswell, The Crescent, Watford WD18 0QW
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by A J Taylor against the decision of Watford Borough Council.
    The application Ref is 25/01081/FUL.
    The development proposed is the erection of a pair of two-storey one bedroom properties together
     with winter gardens, private amenity space, refuse and cycle storage.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
      published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework could affect the
      merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, consulted the parties with
      regard to these changes. I have taken account of these comments, where made,
      in my decision.
3.    A planning obligation was submitted with the appeal, and I have taken account of
      this in reaching my decision here.
Main Issues
4.    The main issues are:
           a) the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
              the High Street / King Street Conservation Area (CA),
           b) whether the proposed development delivers mandatory biodiversity net
              gain,
           c) whether the proposed development would provide satisfactory living
              conditions for the future occupants of the dwellings, and
           d) the effect of the proposed development on on-street parking.
Reasons
       Effect on CA
5.    The site is set within the CA which is formed of the southern part of the town’s
      High Street, King Street and areas between these roads and the ring road.
      Buildings within the CA are commonly two or three storey and range from 16th and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006990


         17th century buildings along the High Street to the more common 19th and 20th
         century homes along smaller back streets. The area derives its significance from
         the presence of some of the oldest buildings in Watford along with showing an
         evolution of the growth of the settlement over time.
6.       The area at, and around, the appeal site has been subject to a number of modern
         and somewhat insensitive changes with the most notable example being the ring
         road (Exchange Road). Up until recently, the appeal site was of assistance in
         screening this less appealing feature from the CA due to the presence of a belt of
         trees which have been recently removed without the benefit of conservation area
         consent.
7.       S72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
         requires that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or
         enhancing the character or appearance of that area. Paragraph 1 of policy HE6 of
         the Framework further sets out that when considering the potential effect of a
         development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
         substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
8.       The proposal seeks to construct a pair of semi-detached houses along a narrow
         strip of land between the car park and Exchange Road. The homes would be quite
         slim, owing to the nature of the site and almost directly address the street and car
         park to the front and ring road to the rear. The houses would be of a two storey
         format with single storey style wings to either side providing sheltered outdoor
         amenity space.
9.       The houses themselves are of an acceptable style and appearance in their own
         right. They represent an improvement to the previously refused and dismissed
         scheme1 in terms of their design with improved articulation to the rear and an
         overall style that is not inharmonious with the older buildings within the CA. They,
         however, would sit on a very narrow strip of land and occupy a position, and have
         a general orientation and format that would be at odds with the traditional pattern
         of buildings and streets within the CA.
10. Moreover, since the consideration of the previous appeal – where the inspector
    observed (at paragraphs 8 and 9) that there were more trees over a larger area
    than that indicated on the submitted plans. From the evidence provided to me and
    from observations at my site visit, all these trees have since been removed and
    this has had a deleterious effect on both the character and appearance of the CA.
    Due to the proposed construction of the houses, replacement of the trees would
    not be possible and this would permanently remove an important feature of the CA
    and be detrimental to both the character and appearance of the CA.
11. Paragraph 2 of policy HE9 of the Framework notes that not all elements of a
    conservation area will necessarily contribute to its significance. Where a
    development proposal would result in the loss of a building or other element which
    contributes to the character or appearance of a conservation area that is desirable
    to conserve, the assessment of impact should take into account the relative
    significance of the element affected and its contribution to the significance of the
    conservation area as a whole.



1
    Council ref: 22/00988/FUL PINS ref: APP/Y1945/W/22/3310039


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6006990


12. Whilst I find that the trees which have been removed were not an integral
    component of the CA, they would have performed an important function in
    screening the more significant elements of the CA from the negative impacts of the
    ring road. In this regard, the loss of the trees and their softening impact is therefore
    significant. This effect would not be achieved by the construction of two new
    dwellings which would, at best, have a neutral effect on the CA. It is not within my
    gift to require replacement planting, however, were I to grant permission for these
    dwellings, it would remove any opportunity for replacement planting that could
    achieve levels of screening and a softening effect comparable to that which has
    already been lost.
13. Accordingly, I must conclude that the position of the proposal would be detrimental
    to the character and appearance of the CA contrary to policies SS1.1, CDA2.2,
    QD6.1, QD6.2, QD6.4, HE7.1 and HE7.2 of the Watford Local Plan (WLP) and
    policy HE9 of the Framework insofar as it would cause harm to the significance of
    a heritage asset.
14. The site is also in proximity to a number of listed buildings. Whilst I have found
    harm to the setting of the CA, these listed buildings are all too distant from the
    appeal site to be directly affected by this proposal.
         Biodiversity net gain
15. The proposal cannot secure mandatory on-site biodiversity net gain. As an
    alternative solution, the appellant is proposing to purchase off-site credits, and this
    approach is not inconsistent with DEFRA guidance2. The appellant estimates that
    1.42 units would be required to compensate for losses on the site. However, the
    DEFRA guidance also highlights that “you cannot create off-site biodiversity gains
    by removing habitats and then putting them back. If you damage habitats on your
    land, you’ll have to make up for the damage before you can make a gain.”
16. The site has already been the subject of unauthorised tree clearance and, as no
    biodiversity metric was provided with the appeal, it is not clear to me whether the
    metric has taken this into account. Nevertheless, were permission to be granted, a
    suitably worded condition could ensure that the correct number of units were
    identified and applied.
17. As such, I conclude that the proposal could comply with policies SS1.1, QD9.1,
    QD9.2 and QD9.8 of the WLP and provisions of Schedule 7A (Biodiversity Gain in
    England) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
         Living conditions
18. The application and appeal were supported by a Noise Impact Assessment (NIA)
    which concluded that significant adverse noise impacts will be avoided with
    suitable mitigation measures. Whilst the Council have expressed concerns
    regarding the veracity of the NIA, I note that this has been prepared by suitably
    qualified persons and that the report itself is thorough and comprehensive.
    Accordingly, I have no reasons to doubt its conclusions.
19. I do recognise that the outdoor amenity areas are likely to be subject to excess
    noise exposure, even with mitigation including roofing and 2.4 metre high walls.
    Nevertheless, being mindful of the site’s location in a town centre environment and
2
    Guidance: Make off-site biodiversity gains as a developer


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   3
Appeal Decision 6006990


       that the amenity areas serve one bedroom homes, I am satisfied that this would
       achieve an acceptable compromise of providing some outdoor space given the
       benefits of being located in a town centre location.
20. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal complies with policies SS1.1, HO3.11,
    QD6.1, QD6.2, QD6.4 and CC8.5 of the WLP and Framework insofar as the
    proposal would support the health and wellbeing of the future occupants.
       On-street parking
21. The appeal site is located within a Controlled Parking Zone (CPZ) and where it is
    the approach of the Council to restrict the entitlement of the proposed dwellings to
    parking permits within the CPZ. The appeal was submitted with a planning
    obligation in the form of a Unilateral Undertaking (UU). This, in summary, cedes
    the rights of any future occupants from applying for a parking permit within the
    CPZ. I sought the observations of the Council on the wording of the UU but no
    comments were made.
22. The appeal is to be dismissed on other substantive issues and whilst an obligation
    has been submitted, it is not necessary to look at it in detail, given that the
    proposal is unacceptable for other reasons. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the
    provision of the UU is sufficient for me to conclude that the proposal can comply
    with policies ST11.1 and ST11.5 of the WLP insofar as it would ensure that on
    street parking within the CPZ would be restricted.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
23. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Within
    settlements, Framework policy S4 states that development should be approved,
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the Framework’s national decision-making
    policies.
24. The proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the CA,
    due to the removal of trees and the inability to replace these were permission to be
    granted for this proposal. The screening effect of the trees from the ring road
    contribute to its significance.
25. There are benefits to the scheme and these include the provision of two new
    dwellings in a sustainable location. Energy efficiency and low carbon heating can
    be secured by way of conditions. However, these important public benefits are of
    insufficient weight by comparison to the substantial weight which should be given
    to the heritage asset’s conservation.
26. Taking these points together, the benefits of granting planning permission would
    be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework. The proposal therefore
    conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations do not indicate
    that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. For the
    reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

N Bowden
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
