Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by J Bowyer BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006697
Land adj to Woodstock House, Mole Street, Ockley, Surrey RH5 5PB
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by I Jones, Green Heritage Development Ltd against the decision of Mole Valley
       District Council.
•      The application Ref is MO/2025/1071.
•      The development proposed is described as ‘retention of barn’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of development in the banner heading above is that entered by the
   appellant on the appeal form which is consistent with the Council’s decision notice.
   However, retention is not an act of development in the terms of the Town and
   Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (‘the Act’). I have therefore determined
   the appeal on the basis that it is seeking retrospective planning permission for
   development carried out. For the avoidance of doubt, I have nevertheless dealt with
   the appeal on the basis of the development as it is shown on the submitted plans.
3. The planning history of the appeal site includes a prior notification application for
   ‘the erection of an agricultural barn of 17 metres x 9 metres with associated
   hardstanding and access track’ under Class A, Part 6, Schedule 2 of the Town and
   Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
   amended) (‘the GPDO’)1 (‘the PA Scheme’). The Council’s determination was that
   prior approval was not required. There is no dispute between the parties that the
   barn on the site for which planning permission is now sought does not accord with
   the PA Scheme plans, or indeed an earlier prior notification proposal which I
   understand showed a barn in a different location on the site2.
4. In determining the appeal application, the Council’s first reason for refusal states
   that the building as constructed is not lawful under the terms of Class A, Part 6,
   Schedule 2 of the GPDO, asserting that it is not considered to be used for
   agricultural purposes and nor is it situated on an agricultural unit.
5. However, the appeal application is seeking planning permission and so should be
   determined in accordance with the development plan unless material
   considerations indicate otherwise. Whether the development would be lawful under

1
    Application ref MO/2021/0390
2
    Application ref MO/2020/1430

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006697


     the terms of Class A, Part 6, Schedule 2 of the GPDO is not therefore
     determinative as to whether or not planning permission should be granted.
6. Nevertheless, in the circumstances of this case and having regard to the content of
   policies in the Mole Valley Local Plan 2024 (‘the LP’), the use of the building is
   relevant to my assessment of the proposal. I have also considered the weight to be
   afforded to the PA Scheme as a fallback within my decision.
7. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (‘the Framework’) in August 2026. The main parties have had the
   opportunity to address the change in written comments and I have determined the
   appeal having regard to the comments received and the updated Framework.
Main Issues
8. The main issues are:
     i) the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
     ii) the effect of the proposal on the setting and significance of nearby listed
          buildings; and
     iii) whether or not the proposal would make adequate provision for vehicle
          parking and manoeuvring.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
9. The appeal site is located within an Area of Great Landscape Value (‘AGLV’) and
   ‘Countryside Beyond the Green Belt’ as designated by the LP. It is part of a field
   parcel which sits between the access driveway to Woodstock House and Volvens
   Cottage and Volvens Farm House. The surrounding landscape predominantly
   comprises open fields and woodland parcels, amongst which are occasional
   isolated properties or clusters of buildings, generally in residential or agricultural
   uses. In many cases, the buildings sit on generous plots with mature landscaping
   providing for a spacious setting and screening to development. As a result, there is
   an open and distinctly rural quality to this part of the countryside which contributes
   positively to the landscape character and scenic beauty of the AGLV.
10. Policy EN2 of the LP sets out that within Countryside Beyond the Green Belt, the
    rural character and largely undeveloped nature of the countryside will be protected
    for its own sake. It outlines that certain forms of development will be permitted
    where they comply with other relevant policies, including buildings or other
    structures which it has been demonstrated are reasonably necessary to support
    agricultural, horticultural or forestry use of the site, in accordance with Policy EC6.
11. The appellant states that the barn is for agricultural use, specifically storage of hay
    and associated equipment, and I saw some hay and machinery present at my visit.
12. However, while the appellant suggests that planning policy does not require proof
    of profitability, accounts or a commercial scale enterprise for an agricultural use,
    Policy EC6 of the LP includes a specific requirement that an agricultural building
    would be sited on land which is in use for agriculture for the purposes of a trade or
    business or where it has been demonstrated that there is a reasonable prospect of
    a viable trade or business becoming established if the building is permitted.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006697


13. In this case, the appeal site is a relatively small parcel, which does not even include
    the whole of the field that the barn sits on. The appellant’s statement includes a
    comment that the site is part of an established agricultural unit comprising
    approximately 14ha of land which is registered with DEFRA. However, the
    submitted plans do not indicate other land in the control of the appellant beyond the
    appeal site and no other further information or detail is provided to substantiate
    such an assertion. From the very limited information provided, it is also far from
    clear that the building is sited on land in use for agriculture for the purposes of a
    trade or business. Nor is there firm evidence to demonstrate that there would be a
    reasonable prospect of a viable trade or business becoming established. It has not
    therefore been demonstrated that the proposal would meet the requirement within
    Policy EC6.
14. Even if I were satisfied that the barn is on land in use for agriculture for the
    purposes of a trade or business, there is no clear evidence to demonstrate that the
    scale of the building is reasonably necessary for the intended purposes. Moreover,
    I saw that the barn as built has a first-floor level which is inaccessible internally.
    The structure of the first-floor level is relatively low above the ground offering only
    very minimal clearance over the tractor that I saw within the barn and potentially
    limiting access by other models/machinery. The doors to the barn are additionally
    of fairly restricted dimensions that would seem likely to make accessing the space
    with machinery and loading/unloading hay awkward. It further seems to me that the
    sole means of accessing the first floor level by way of narrow doors within the gable
    would be similarly likely to make practical use of the upper floor for hay storage
    challenging. These factors in combination raise some doubt in my mind over the
    functional practicality of the building and so whether it is for a purpose and scale
    which is reasonably necessary for the purposes of agricultural activities which is
    also a requirement of LP Policy EC6.
15. For these reasons, I am not satisfied on the basis of the information that is before
    me in this appeal that the barn has been demonstrated to be reasonably necessary
    to support agricultural, horticultural or forestry use of the site in accordance with
    Policy EC6. It would not therefore be a form of development that Policy EN2 of the
    LP indicates may be permitted in Countryside Beyond the Green Belt.
16. In reaching this view, I note the appellant’s argument that a barn of the size and
    function now proposed has already been accepted as reasonably necessary
    through the PA Scheme. However, the details before me indicate significant
    differences between the development constructed and the PA Scheme including in
    the overall form and appearance of the barn and the position of the access which
    would have been taken from the driveway to Woodstock House under the PA
    Scheme rather than Mole Street as now proposed. Because the development has
    not therefore been carried out in accordance with the details submitted with the PA
    Scheme application which is a requirement of Class A, Part 6, Schedule 2 of the
    GPDO (‘Class A’), the building currently on the site would not comprise permitted
    development under that Class.
17. Moreover, any development carried out pursuant to the PA Scheme determination
    would also still ultimately need to comply with all other conditions and limitations of
    Class A. The Council’s determination of the PA Scheme that prior approval was not
    required does not certify, and certainly not on an ongoing basis, that development
    would inevitably accord with all aspects of Class A.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006697


18. It is not within my remit in considering this appeal to determine whether or not an
    alternative development including the PA Scheme would be lawful. It would be
    open to the appellant to make an application under section 191/192 of the Act
    should they wish to ascertain the lawfulness of any particular development and my
    determination of this appeal under section 78 of the Act would not affect the issuing
    of a determination under section 191/192.
19. That said, Class A relates to development reasonably necessary for the purposes
    of agriculture within an agricultural unit of 5 hectares or more. Under the definitions
    at D.1 (1) of Part 6, Schedule 2 of the GPDO, and summarising, an agricultural unit
    means agricultural land which is occupied for the purposes of agriculture, and
    agricultural land means land in use for agriculture which is so used for the purposes
    of a trade or business. Given my concerns above with regard to the lack of
    evidence around agricultural use of the site, whether this is for the purposes of a
    trade or business and whether the building is reasonably necessary, I am not
    persuaded that I currently have sufficient evidence to determine with confidence
    that the PA Scheme could still be implemented in compliance with Class A and the
    definitions at D.1 (1) of Part 6, Schedule 2 of the GPDO.
20. Taking these matters together, the PA Scheme is not in my view compelling
    evidence that the barn now before me in this appeal is reasonably necessary to
    support agricultural, horticultural or forestry use of the site as would be required by
    Policies EN2 and EC6 of the LP. There is also some doubt in my mind that the PA
    Scheme remains a realistic fallback, and on the basis of the information that is
    before me in this appeal, the appellant’s assertion that the building approved under
    the PA Scheme could be erected at any time without planning permission is not
    therefore persuasive.
21. Turning to effects on the countryside here, I understand that the appeal site prior to
    the development was part of an open field which would have contributed to the
    rural character and appearance of the area.
22. Notwithstanding my concerns that an agricultural requirement for the barn has not
    been adequately demonstrated in accordance with requirements of the LP, barns
    and other agricultural structures are not an unusual or unexpected feature in the
    countryside. Neither do I consider it remarkable that a barn, as a working building,
    might have its own gated access from the highway or some lighting.
23. The barn itself has a rectangular footprint and a simple form with solid elevations
    which do not include any glazing and while I have noted above that doors are
    relatively small to accommodate agricultural machinery or vehicles, they are larger
    than what would typically be found to the entrance of a domestic property. The roof
    is relatively low over the eaves, but agricultural structures vary in form and the
    angle of the pitch is not so shallow that I find it to appear unduly incongruous.
    Taking these factors together and noting the absence of fenestration in particular, I
    consider the barn to have a functional, utilitarian appearance in keeping with an
    agricultural structure. That there is a letterbox to the access does not alter that
    overall assessment.
24. There is some hardstanding around the barn, but this is not excessive in extent
    against the building and is of limited visibility from the road. The access is also
    unmade, and hardsurfacing is not in any event specified as forming part of the
    appeal development. In my assessment, these features do not appear incongruous


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006697


     or unduly urbanising when appreciated together with an ostensibly agricultural
     structure.
25. However, the barn’s physical presence undoubtedly reduces openness on the site.
    The loss of openness is also greater than would occur under the PA Scheme given
    the much higher eaves and gabled roof form which notably increase the barn’s
    upper bulk and mass. Given the relatively small scale of the barn against the
    surrounding parcel, the loss of openness is modest but it would appreciably
    diminish the undeveloped nature of countryside here.
26. The position of the barn relatively centrally within the parcel would appear a little
    awkward. However, it also means that the barn is set back from Mole Street relative
    to Volvens Cottage reducing its prominence in the street scene and wider
    landscape. The appellant has also proposed that additional planting could be
    provided to part of the boundary of the site with Volvens Cottage and Volvens Farm
    House which would further soften the overall visual impact.
27. Were I otherwise satisfied that the development would be of a type that Policy EN2
    of the LP indicates may be acceptable in the Countryside Beyond the Green Belt, I
    find taking the above factors together that it would assimilate suitably with its rural
    context and would not cause undue urbanisation.
28. Nevertheless, the proposal would reduce the undeveloped nature of this part of the
    countryside and insofar as it has not been satisfactorily demonstrated that the
    proposal would be reasonably necessary for agriculture and so of a form that may
    be appropriate within the Countryside Beyond the Green Belt, I find that the
    introduction of built from here would be undesirable and would cause unwarranted
    detriment to the character and appearance of the area.
29. In the absence of firm evidence to demonstrate that the development would be
    appropriate in the countryside, I therefore conclude that the proposal would cause
    harm to the character and appearance of the area and it would conflict with Policy
    EN2 of the LP. It would also be contrary to Policies EN4 and EN8 of the LP insofar
    as they include requirements broadly seeking development which contributes
    positively to local character and to ensure that the distinctive character and scenic
    beauty of the AGLV is not harmed.
Listed Buildings
30. There are Grade II listed buildings near to the appeal site at Volvens Farm House
    (‘the Farm House’) and a building listed as ‘Barn 30 metres North West of Volvens
    Farm House’ (‘the Barn’). I have therefore considered the proposal in accordance
    with section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
    1990 (‘the LBCA Act’) which requires special regard to the desirability of preserving
    listed buildings and their setting.
31. The Farm House is a two-storey with attic timber-framed house which includes a
    Horsham slab roof pierced by a corbelled chimney stack, colourwashed brick and
    rendered infill panels to the timber frame, and hoods above the ground floor and to
    the base of the attic gable. Insofar as it relates to the current appeal, I consider that
    much of its significance as a listed building would derive from its historic and
    architectural interest as a fine farmhouse which dates to the early 17th Century,
    albeit with later 20th Century extensions.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006697


32. The Barn has an ‘L-shaped’ plan form with a single-storey stable range positioned
    perpendicular to the main barn which has a lower extension to one side, and
    includes a half hipped tiled roof over a timber frame with coloured render infill
    panels set on a brick plinth. Insofar as it relates to this appeal, I consider that much
    of its significance would derive from its historic and architectural interest as an 18th
    Century barn and stable range associated with the Volvens Farm complex.
33. The listed buildings derive some further significance from their setting. Most closely
    from their relationship with one another and the wider former farmyard complex and
    grounds which suggest their historic status and agricultural use. However, the rural,
    agrarian quality of the wider surroundings inform an understanding and
    appreciation of their historic context, role and function. The evidence before me
    does not suggest a historic functional connection between the appeal site and the
    listed buildings. Nevertheless, its open and undeveloped character prior to the
    development would add to the rural quality of the area around the listed buildings,
    and in doing so, it makes some contribution to their significance.
34. I have found above that the barn has a functional, utilitarian appearance in keeping
    with an agricultural structure and that the access does not appear incongruous or
    urbanising when appreciated together with an ostensibly agricultural structure. The
    orientation of the building contrasts with the traditional courtyard plan of the
    Volvens farmstead. However, it sits some way apart from the courtyard and to my
    mind, its position together with its simple contemporary appearance means that it is
    read and understood as a separate modern addition which does not intrude on or
    confuse the historic layout or plan form of the complex.
35. However, the development reduces the open and undeveloped quality of the site
    which contributes to the significance of the nearby listed buildings and I have noted
    above that the loss of openness is greater than would occur under the PA Scheme.
    The higher eaves and bulkier roof form relative to the PA Scheme also increase the
    visual impact and prominence of the barn against the listed buildings and result in
    greater screening of them in some views from Mole Street, albeit from a relatively
    small area, thereby reducing opportunities to appreciate the buildings.
36. Given these factors, I find that there is some harm to the significance of both
    Volvens Farm House and the Barn as listed buildings through the development
    within their setting. The listed buildings themselves are not directly affected and the
    proposal affects only a small part of their wider setting. Given too the relatively
    limited scale of the proposal which would moderate effects on significance, I
    consider that there would not be ‘substantial harm’ in the terms of the Framework to
    either listed building and the harm in each case would be at a low level.
    Nevertheless, there is harm which the Framework indicates should be weighed
    against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
37. In doing so, the Framework advises that any harm to, or loss of, the significance of
    a designated heritage asset should have a clear and convincing justification. It
    states that when considering the potential effect of a development proposal on the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to
    the asset’s conservation. The harm to Volvens Farm House and the Barn would in
    each case be at a low level but it attracts considerable importance and weight.
38. Against this harm, the appellant argues that the development supports agricultural
    activity and rural land management and reduces the need to transport stored


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006697


     materials elsewhere. I acknowledge support in the Framework for the sustainable
     growth of businesses in rural areas including through development and
     diversification of agricultural enterprises and development to maintain and enhance
     farm viability and sustainability. However, given the very small size of the appeal
     site and in the absence of firm evidence to demonstrate that the site is in
     agricultural use for the purposes of a trade or business, it is far from clear that the
     proposal supports any significant level of agricultural activity or land management
     or that there would be significant impacts associated with transporting stored
     material in the absence of the development. The contribution to the rural economy
     is also unclear. The weight that I afford to these factors as public benefits of the
     proposal is accordingly limited.
39. The appellant also refers to avoiding environmental impacts and waste that would
    be associated with demolition and reconstruction of the building. Given the small
    scale of the building however, I consider that impacts would be small, significantly
    limiting the magnitude of any such a benefit. Biodiversity improvements would be
    similarly limited.
40. Contrary to an assertion in the appellant’s comments in respect of the revised
    Framework, the proposal would not use previously developed land, reuse an
    existing building or provide additional residential accommodation.
41. Moreover, while the appellant suggests that the PA Scheme would produce
    essentially the same heritage effects, I have noted that the appeal scheme results
    in a greater loss of openness and an increased relative visual impact and screening
    of the listed buildings than would occur under that development. Even if I were to
    consider the PA Scheme as a realistic fallback to the appeal development, it would
    not result in comparable harm to the listed buildings and is not therefore in my view
    compelling justification for the harm that would be caused.
42. In my judgement, the cumulative public benefits of the proposal would not be
    sufficient to outweigh the harm to Volvens Farm House nor the Barn which attracts
    considerable importance and weight and I am not persuaded that there is a clear
    and convincing justification for the harm that the appeal causes to the significance
    of listed buildings.
43. The proposal is therefore contrary to the LBCA Act and it would conflict with the
    aims of the Framework as it would fail to sustain the significance of two listed
    buildings and public benefits would not outweigh the harm. It would also be
    contrary to Policy EN6 of the LP which sets out that development proposals that
    result in less than substantial harm to a listed building will not be permitted unless
    public benefits outweigh the harm to the asset’s significance.
Vehicle Parking and Manoeuvring
44. Policy INF2 of the LP includes a requirement for non-residential development to
    provide parking in accordance with levels shown in Appendix 13, although there is
    no specific standard applicable to the agricultural storage use proposed.
45. Notwithstanding my concerns as to whether the barn has been demonstrated to be
    reasonably necessary for agriculture in accordance with LP Policy EC6, the
    agricultural use for storage of hay and machinery as proposed in the appeal could
    be likely to result in vehicles accessing the site, including fairly large vehicles
    associated with deliveries or collections. The details before me do not specifically

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006697


     indicate provision for parking and turning within the appeal site. Given the nature of
     the proposed use however, levels of vehicle movements would be likely to be fairly
     low at any one time. Furthermore, the nature of larger agricultural vehicles means
     that they would not necessarily require formal hard surfacing for access and I am
     satisfied that they would be reasonably able to park and turn within the site clear of
     the highway. The Council has not raised concerns that use of the access would
     otherwise result in adverse impacts on highway safety or convenience and given
     my observations of visibility and the levels and speed of traffic along Mole Street
     which I saw is subject to a 20mph speed limit past the site, I am satisfied that there
     would not be detriment.
46. I therefore conclude that the proposal would make adequate provision for vehicle
    parking and manoeuvring and I find no conflict with Policies INF1 or INF2 of the LP
    which include requirements broadly seeking to ensure provision for parking and
    that development does not result in unacceptable impacts on highway safety or
    severe adverse impacts on the highway network.
Other Matters
47. The appellant comments that there was limited proactive engagement by the
    Council and no request for additional supporting information or opportunity for
    clarification. However, these factors do not alter my assessment of the planning
    merits of the proposal which I have considered on the basis of the evidence that is
    before me, including that submitted by the appellant as part of the appeal.
Planning Balance
48. I have found that the proposal would make adequate provision for vehicle parking
    and manoeuvring. However, in the absence of firm evidence to demonstrate that
    the development would be appropriate in the countryside it causes harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. There is also harm to the significance of
    nearby listed buildings which is not outweighed by the public benefits of the
    development. The proposal is contrary to Policies EN2, EN4, EN6 and EN8 of the
    LP and taking these matters together, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan when it is read as a whole.
49. I acknowledge the PA Scheme, but I have noted above that this has not been
    implemented in accordance with the requirements of the GPDO and on the basis of
    the evidence that is before me in this appeal, I have some doubts that it remains a
    realistic fallback. Moreover, I have found that the appeal scheme has a greater
    effect on the undeveloped nature of the countryside and causes greater harm to the
    significance of the nearby listed buildings than would occur under the PA Scheme.
    The additional harm is limited, but taking these factors together, the weight that I
    afford to the PA Scheme as a fallback is limited.
50. In my assessment, the PA Scheme and the limited benefits of the development
    noted above would be insufficient to outweigh the harm that the proposal causes
    and the resulting conflict with the development plan when it is read as a whole.
51. Furthermore, I acknowledge Policy S5 of the Framework which concerns
    development outside settlements and outlines certain forms of development which
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework. The specified forms of development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6006697


     include development for agriculture. However, while the Framework does not
     specifically require that development for agriculture is for the purposes of a trade or
     business or shown to be reasonably necessary for the intended purposes, the
     absence of such justification in this case means that I consider the benefits of the
     development for agriculture to be unclear and the weight that I afford them is
     limited.
52. On the other hand, the adverse effects of the proposal on the character and
    appearance of the area and the significance of nearby listed buildings would be
    contrary to national decision-making policies in the Framework. In particular,
    provisions seeking consideration for landscape character and the natural beauty of
    the countryside and a clear and convincing justification for any harm to the
    significance of a designated heritage asset. In my assessment, the limited benefits
    of the proposal noted above would be substantially outweighed by the cumulative
    adverse effects. Policy S5 of the Framework does not therefore indicate that the
    development should be approved.
Conclusion
53. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan when it is read as a whole, and material considerations do not
    indicate that a decision contrary to the development plan should be reached. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Bowyer
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
