Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 June 2026
by Andrew Fuller BSc (Hons), Dip TP, MA, MRTPI, IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006722
Land off Drake Street, Welland, Worcestershire
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Miss Sarah Kane against the decision of Malvern Hills District Council.
•    The application Ref is M/26/00154/PIP.
•    The development proposed is described as an application for permission in principle for the
     proposed erection of up to 1 self-build dwelling.'

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
      advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
      housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
      the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
      suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the
      detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
      these 2 stages.
3.    The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
      land use and the amount of development permitted15. All other matters are
      considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if
      permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.    The description of development in the banner is from the Council’s decision notice.
      I have applied most of this as the description of development. I note that the
      appellant has used such a description on their appeal form and statement. I am
      satisfied this does not prejudice either party. The Council dealt with the proposal
      on this basis and so shall I.
5.    In terms of the amount of development, the application form indicated that
      permission in principle is sought for up to one dwelling and I have considered the
      appeal on that basis.
6.    The Council’s reason for refusal omitted a reference to a policy it considered the
      appeal scheme to conflict with, in respect of the settlement hierarchy referenced in
      its delegated report. However, the applicant has provided substantive comments
      upon this policy and the matter in question in the appeal process. The delegated
      report and reason for refusal included policies from the South Worcestershire

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate

15 PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615
Appeal Decision 6006722


      Development Plan (SWDP). On 26 March the SWDP was superseded by the
      South Worcestershire Development Plan Review (2026) (SWDPR). The parties
      have had the opportunity to comment upon its implications for the appeal scheme
      through the appeal process. I have had regard to the substantive evidence before
      me in setting out the main issues below and reaching my decision.
7.    The postcode provided on the application form is incorrect as it is linked to a site at
      some distance from the appeal site. The site is fixed by the submitted location
      plan, so I therefore have removed the postcode from the banner above.
8.    During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
      opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
      in my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Background and Main Issues
9.    The main issues, therefore, are whether the site is suitable for residential
      development, in terms of its location, land use and amount, with particular regard
      to:
      a) development plan policies concerning the location of development; and
      b) character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
Location
10. The strategy for new housing in the Council area is set out in Policy SWDPR 03 of
    the SWDPR. This seeks to direct new housing towards existing urban centres and
    defined rural settlements with existing facilities, services and transport
    connections. The policy also strictly controls development in the open countryside.
    More specifically to Welland itself, Policies DB1 and HLP of the Welland
    Neighbourhood Plan (2024) (WNP) seek primarily for housing to be located within
    the development boundary of the village.
11. The proposal is for a single dwelling within the open countryside. Therefore, the
    location conflicts with the spatial strategy of the SWDPR. The defined settlement
    boundary of Welland village is located on the opposite side of the street. The
    village is a Category 1 settlement, with a range of services and public transport
    connections. The site is located close to bus stops in both directions, however with
    only very limited weekday services.
12. On my site visit I crossed the 30mph carriageway and walked along the unlit
    footpath (on the opposite side of the street) to the village centre. I saw a small
    range of services and facilities including schools, a church, village hall and some
    limited retail with a post office.
13. Policy TR3 of the Framework seeks to direct development to locations that limit the
    need to travel, particularly by private car. Being in a rural area, the Framework
    seeks developments to take opportunities to improve walking, wheeling, cycling
    and public transport. However, based upon what I saw and experienced, in my
    judgement future occupiers of the proposal would be heavily reliant upon the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6006722


      private car for many day-to-day needs. Therefore, it would not be consistent with
      development plan and Framework accessibility objectives in this regard.
14. On my site visit, and as highlighted by the appellant, I saw that Welland has
    experienced some housing development over recent years. This included the
    modern housing on the opposite side of the road, as well as a house further along
    the street known as Millwood. There is limited information before me as to the
    planning history of those developments. It is clear, however, that the development
    opposite lies within the settlement boundary. Ultimately, there is no substantive
    evidence before me to draw any direct comparisons between those developments
    and the scheme before me.
15. For the above reasons, I conclude that the appeal site would form an inappropriate
    location for residential development, contrary to the relevant provisions of Policy
    SWDPR 03 of the SWDPR and Policies DB1 and HLP of the WNP. Together,
    these policies seek to direct new housing towards existing urban centres and
    defined rural settlements and to control development in the countryside.
16. The Council finds conflict with Policy SWDPR 02 of the SWDPR. This policy
    primarily relates to housing requirements and not specifically the location of
    development. I therefore find no conflict with this policy.
Character and Appearance
17. Located within a gently undulating area of open countryside, the appeal site forms
    part of the character area known as ‘Settled Farmlands with Pastoral Land Use’.
    The immediate area along Drake Street, including the appeal site, is typical of the
    areas character, comprising a dispersed settlement pattern of farmsteads and
    groups of wayside dwellings.
18. The appeal site consists of a linear strip of land leading away from the street and
    forming part of a wider field. Broadly comprising the width of the bell-mouth gated
    entrance to the field, it is one of a number of access points through hedging along
    the street leading to paddocks, fields and occasional residential properties.
    Largely, views into and across the immediate landscape are limited to these
    openings and occasional breaks in the hedging.
19. The site falls gently away from the street over the ridge in the landscape. As such,
    the break in the hedging at the appeal site, offers a broad but brief view across the
    immediate area of countryside on the approach towards the village core. The view
    in the opposite direction is constrained due to the presence of the field boundary
    hedging extending down the side of the site.
20. The appeal site is a narrow parcel of land that is well defined from much of the
    wider countryside, and viewed in the context of other scattered built form along the
    street. Though it has some connection with the wider landscape, the site does sit
    around the transition between the development boundary and the surrounding
    landscape, rather than being viewed as inherently part of that wider open
    countryside setting. Though a single dwelling might well be regarded as having
    some effect upon openness visible from part of the public highway, it could be
    designed to be very limited and in the most part what are, generally incidental
    views.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006722


21. The layout of more recent housing, located on the opposite side of the street,
    forms a meandering settlement edge interfacing with the site. As such, the appeal
    site in my judgement does not form part of a strongly defined or legible edge, but a
    somewhat fragmented boundary which responds to the dispersed settlement
    pattern of the landscape character area. The site, therefore, whilst in a relatively
    undeveloped context, is viewed as part of the mix of open space intermittently
    experienced between built form along Drake Street, rather than forming part of an
    uninterrupted landscape.
22. The submitted site plan illustrates a single house and outbuilding set back within
    the site and accessed using the broad form of the bell-mouth entrance. I am aware
    that this layout is only indicative, and I do not see any reason why a high quality
    and sensitively designed scheme could not be forthcoming at the Technical Detail
    Consent Stage that would ensure a sensitive and sympathetic proposal reflecting
    the local character and wider landscape setting.
23. A single house could be designed in such a way that its set back from the road
    would not be dominant in views from passersby in either direction. Even with the
    more formalised use of the access, hardstanding and associated domestic
    paraphernalia, the depth of the plot would allow for a layout and landscaping that
    would in time be discrete, sit comfortably within its setting and have little effect
    upon the wider landscape. I am satisfied that a suitably high quality and sensitive
    dwelling could be designed so as to not reduce the sense of or erode the
    prevailing character of the area.
24. Whereas those houses to the south are formally arranged in groups of ribbon
    development, a single dwelling on this sizable plot north of the highway would
    reflect the typical spatial pattern of distributed and fragmented housing on this side
    of the street. It would form part of the patchwork of development with significant
    gaps in between, not a consolidating development, viewed as harmfully
    encroaching into the countryside. Rather, in my judgement a dwelling in this
    specific site context could be designed so that it would not be inherently harmful
    and it would be read alongside, yet apart from other individual agricultural
    buildings, cottages and farmhouses.
25. Other self-build developments in Drake Street are not in close proximity to the
    appeal site and therefore would not result in a cumulative impact to landscape. As
    such, the integrity of the loose knit and dispersed pattern of development typical to
    this character area would remain.
26. My attention has been drawn to the presence of landscape in the local area that
    has retained pre-enclosure characteristics (1540-1799). However, this does not
    form part of the broader evidence relating to the landscape character of ‘Settled
    Farmlands with Pastoral Land Use’. Moreover, on my site visit I saw the hedging
    and field boundaries that surrounded the appeal site would remain and do not
    appear to form part of a pre-enclosure landscape.
27. The Malvern Hills National Landscape (NL) is some distance from the appeal site,
    generally beyond the centre of the village and the site is not within a protected
    landscape. Policies within the WNP seek to conserve and enhance the special
    qualities of the area’s landscape and scenic beauty. There is some limited visibility
    from the appeal site, mainly distant and elevated aspects of it. Nonetheless, the
    plans indicate it would be possible to set a house within the site so that views


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006722


      across the site towards the NL would remain unimpeded from much of the
      surrounding public realm and landscape.
28. From within the NL, the site would only be visible from distant and elevated areas
    where it would be read in conjunction with the wider village. Having regard to my
    duties under Section 245 of the Levelling-Up and Regeneration Act 2023, and to
    the policies of the Framework, I am satisfied the scheme could be sensitively
    designed so that there would be no harm caused to the NL and its wildlife, cultural
    heritage, landscape and scenic beauty. Therefore, the natural beauty of the NL
    would be preserved.
29. Overall, I conclude that residential development could be designed so that it would
    not harm the character and appearance of the area. As such, I find no conflict with
    Policies SWDPR 28 and SWDPR 34 of the SWDPR. These policies, in summary,
    require that development is appropriate to, and integrates with, the character of the
    landscape setting. Nevertheless, the lack of identified harm in this respect does
    not alter my findings in respect of the other main issue.
Other Matters
30. The proposal is for up to one new self-build house. The Malvern Hills District Self-
    Build and Custom Housebuilding Register Progress Report November 2025
    (Published January 2026) has been submitted in evidence before me. This
    indicates an adequate supply of self-build and custom-build plots against the need
    set out on the Part 1 of the Self-Build Register.
31. Nevertheless, a Unilateral Undertaking has not been submitted voluntarily with the
    appeal, so it is not secured that the appeal scheme would contribute towards
    meeting any current or future needs for a self-build dwelling. It would however be
    necessary to require such an agreement at stage 2, if self-build is still proposed at
    that point.
32. I understand the wishes of the appellant to continue their well-established
    business and live in the area, having had a long-standing connection with Welland
    and being the owner of the adjacent vineyard. However, I do not consider the need
    to build a house in this specific location, adjacent to the vineyard, to provide
    sufficient justification to outweigh the harm I have identified from the proposal.
33. The proposal would contribute towards the housing targets of the Council.
    However, following the adoption of the SWDPR, the Council can now demonstrate
    a five year housing land supply and a single house would make only a modest
    contribution.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
34. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development outside settlements, this means that policy S5 of
    the Framework should be applied.
35. Policy S5 sets out that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements. These are listed under criteria (a)-(j). The appellant has
    asserted that in this case criterion (e) is relevant as, in their view, the development
    constitutes limited infilling within groups of houses. However, the site is at some
    distance from built form to one side, and separated by a large paddock from a
    single house on the other. Accordingly, the proposal is not supported by criterion

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006722


      (e), nor do I have any substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that it would
      fall within any of the other listed criteria.
36. Where a development proposal does not fall within one of the categories set out in
    Policy S5, it should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects. The
    contribution to housing supply and economic benefits, with particular regard to
    spend at local facilities and services, would be benefits. However, these would be
    modest by reason of the overall scale and nature of the development. These
    benefits would not substantially outweigh the adverse effects, arising from the
    unsustainable location of the development.
37. Consequently, the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out within Policy S3 of the Framework.
38. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore,
    the appeal is dismissed.

Andrew Fuller
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
