Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 July 2026
by J J Evans BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6006948
Pavement O/S the Odeon, Kingsmead Leisure Complex, James Street West, Bath
BA1 2BX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of Bath
     and North East Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/04771/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphones.

Appeal B Ref: 6006951
Pavement O/S the Odeon, Kingsmead Leisure Complex, James Street West, Bath
BA1 2BX
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of Bath
     and North East Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/04772/AR.
•    The advertisement proposed is the installation of 2no. digital 75” LCD display screens, one on each
     side of the Street Hub unit.

Decision
1.     Appeal A: the appeal is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B: the appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     As set out above there are two appeals, one of which seeks planning permission
       for the installation of the street hub and removal of payphones (Appeal A) with the
       other seeking advertisement consent for the display screens (Appeal B). Each
       appeal has been considered on its individual merits, although to avoid duplication
       they have been dealt with together except where otherwise indicated.
4.     Green Park Railway Station, 17-21 Charles Street, and the Old Labour Exchange
       are grade II listed buildings, all of which are in the Bath Conservation Area. For
       Appeal A, as required by Sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
       Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), special regard has been
       paid to preserving a listed building or its setting or any features of special
       architectural or historic interest which it possesses, and of preserving or enhancing
       the character or appearance of a conservation area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6006948 & 6006951


5.     The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England)
       Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) stipulate that control may be exercised only in
       the interests of amenity and public safety. Although not determinative in
       advertisement cases, the Regulations allow the provisions of the development plan
       to be taken into account as far as they are material. Appeal B has been
       considered on that basis.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
       -   the effect of the scheme upon the character and appearance of the area,
           having particular regard to whether it would preserve the character and
           appearance of the conservation area, preserve the settings of nearby listed
           buildings, and the outstanding universal value of the Bath World Heritage Site;
           and
       -   the effect of the scheme upon public safety, with particular regard to crime and
           anti-social behaviour.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
7.     The street hub would be positioned in the public footway to the southern side of
       James Street West in an area that comprises a mix of services, retail, offices and
       residential premises, that include a leisure complex and a cinema. The area has a
       bustling, vibrant character and appearance.
8.     James Street West is a broad, straight road lined by mostly tall buildings of varying
       ages and architectural styles. Near the appeals site is a cluster of contemporary
       buildings, and their similar heights and shared use of the local stone creates a
       cohesive frontage that frames the road. Despite the mix of historic and modern
       development and the varied uses, the scale, materials, and immediacy of the
       relationship of buildings to the public realm reflects the historic urban grain of
       Bath's distinctive Neo-classical terraces. The road’s linear nature provides long
       views towards historic landmarks that include Green Park Railway Station and 17-
       21 Charles Street to the west, and St James Parade to the east. Although the
       appellant notes that not all parts of a conservation area or World Heritage Site
       (WHS) contribute equally to significance, in this case the area possesses a strong
       degree of visual and spatial cohesion that complements the significance of these
       designated heritage assets. Together with the area's vibrant bustling activity, well-
       defined street pattern, and the prominence of James Street West as a principal
       route into the city centre, these qualities contribute positively to the character and
       appearance of the conservation area and to the Outstanding Universal Value of
       the WHS.
9.     Green Park Railway Station dominates the area, making an imposing statement
       that is visible for long distances. Part of the special architectural and historic
       interest of this listed building is its former purpose, its size, its elegantly grand
       classical frontage, its construction from ashlar stone, and its elevated position, all
       of which emphasise the historic and social importance of this building within the
       city. It is a landmark building and destination, and it makes an important



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6006948 & 6006951


       contribution to the planned appearance of the city, and thereby to the conservation
       area and to the WHS.
10. Opposite the station is the listed terrace of 17-21 Charles Street. This elegant
    terrace of three storey houses comprises a group of Neo-classical styled buildings
    constructed of ashlar stone. The age of these buildings, their considered style,
    and that they create a cohesive harmony with other nearby terraces, is all part of
    the special interest of these listed buildings. The elevated position of this terrace
    allows it to be seen from long distances away, and such visibility is part of its
    significance.
11. To the east of the site is the Old Labour Exchange. This listed building occupies a
    corner plot, and was a former weights and measures office that has been vertically
    extended with modern upper floors. The former use of the building, along with its
    construction from ashlar stone, and its mannered style is part of the special
    interest of this listed building, as is the stonework being peppered with multiple
    shrapnel damage marks that occurred during the second world war. The survival
    of the building and its curious appearance is part of its significance, and it
    positively contributes to the character and appearance of the conservation area
    and WHS.
12. The street hub would be positioned perpendicular and close to the carriageway
    edge, and given its size, height and illumination and the straight nature of James
    Street West it would be visible from long distances away, including from Green
    Park Railway Station and from St James Parade. The breadth of the footway is
    such that the street hub would not compromise its functioning. However, apart
    from a waste bin, bollards and lighting columns, there is little street furniture near
    the site. In such an open context the street hub would appear as a conspicuously
    intrusive addition. It would draw the eye because of its size and positional
    relationship to users of the highway, and also because it would introduce large,
    illuminated screens into an area where the focus is upon the buildings rather than
    upon the public footway.
13. Modern buildings would be near the street hub, with the glazed frontage of the
    leisure complex forming a contemporary backdrop. Notwithstanding this, the
    street hub would appear as discretely separate from the linear continuity formed by
    the facades of nearby buildings, and this separation would exaggerate its
    prominence. Although some distance away from Green Street Railway Station
    and 17-21 Charles Street, the size, height and illumination of the street hub would
    draw the eye away from these focal buildings and also away from the curiously
    damaged appearance of the Old Labour Exchange, to the detriment of their
    significance. This distracting prominence would also erode the character and
    appearance of the conservation area and that of the WHS as the street hub would
    interrupt the openness of the public realm having a primacy that would detract
    from the linear cohesion of the built form.
14. The Council’s Pattern Book Lighting Strategy (2013) seeks to create a historic
    ambience in the city through minimising lighting. Illumination levels could be
    controlled and glare minimised, although as there are no other illuminated
    freestanding advertisements within the area, the intrusive harm of the street hub
    would be intensified, particularly as the footway comprises a broad open space. In
    such a context and whilst noting the vibrant, bustling nature of the area, the large
    static images upon the street hub would appear conspicuously intrusive. There is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6006948 & 6006951


       a bus shelter near to the junction of James Street West with Green Park Road and
       Charles Street, but it has a recessive, functional appearance due to its modest
       height, its dark colour, glazed panels, and absence of illuminated advertisements.
       As such it does not set a precedent for allowing the appeals.
15. The street hub would enable the removal of two payphones on Charles Street.
    Despite the long views that characterise the area, these are not visible from the
    appeals site. They have a plain utilitarian appearance and do not contain
    illuminated signage. Whilst the street hub would be part of the services upgrade,
    given the separation of the existing payphones from the site, and that there are
    other payphones nearby including in Avon Street and New Street, this tempers the
    weight deriving from this benefit.
16. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) requires that when
    considering the impact of development on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, great weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. In this
    case the proposal would lead to less than substantial harm, albeit at the lower end
    of the scale, due to the size of the street hub compared to that of the size of the
    WHS, conservation area and settings of the nearby listed buildings. Nevertheless,
    these harms must be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal.
17. The scheme would provide upgraded infrastructure that would be accessible to all
    with a range of services offered that would provide environmental, social, and
    technological benefits to users of the public realm. The facility could also be used
    for environmental monitoring and community advertising. The payphones on
    Charles Street would be removed, but this could be done irrespective of the
    scheme. The public benefits would therefore be modest and would not outweigh
    the considerable harm to the designated heritage assets.
18. The appellant has referred to another street hub permitted at appeal in a busy
    commercial area in Croydon (appeal refs: APP/L5240/W/21/3285401 &
    APP/L5240/H/21/3285402). However, there are fundamental differences between
    these cases and that proposed, namely that the permitted street hub was not
    within a conservation area nor WHS, nor did it impact upon the settings of any
    listed buildings. There were also other advertisements nearby, including totems
    and billboards. Given these differences, this comparison does not form a binding
    precedent for approving the appeals.
19. The Framework supports advanced, high quality and reliable communications
    infrastructure considering it to be essential for economic growth and social well-
    being. The street hub would accord with these objectives but would cause
    significant harm to the character and appearance of the area, failing to preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the conservation area, the settings of
    nearby listed buildings, nor the outstanding universal value of the WHS. Such
    harms would conflict with the Act and with Policies D1, D2, D4, D9, D10 and
    LCR7A of the Bath and North East Somerset Placemaking Plan (2017) (PP), and
    Policy D8 of the Bath and North East Somerset Local Plan Partial Update (2023)
    with their requirements that development should enrich the character and quality of
    places, contribute positively to local distinctiveness, identity and history, enhance
    the public realm and minimise the impact upon the visual amenity and character
    and appearance. There would also be conflict with Policies CP6 and B4 of the
    Bath and North East Somerset Core Strategy (2014) (CS), and PP Policy HE1, as


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6006948 & 6006951


       the scheme would fail to enhance and better reveal the significance and settings of
       heritage assets, nor protect and conserve the historic environment.
Public Safety
20. The street hub would be in a busy city centre location where there is a vibrant
    night-time economy. The area experiences high levels of crime and anti-social
    behaviour. Whilst the appellant considers the concerns of the Council and police
    to be speculative and not supported by site-specific evidence, within 100m of the
    site over 230 incidents have occurred in a twelve month period, with the majority
    being anti-social behaviour, violence against a person, and theft. This is a high
    level of occurrences. Moreover, the police have explained that there has been a
    persistent and ongoing issue of drug dealing and anti-social behaviour associated
    with the payphone and atm in New Street. There are also concerns regarding the
    misuse of free services, loitering and obstruction, and the interference with CCTV.
21. The appellant has suggested conditioning the BT Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour
    Management Plan (2021) (the Plan) to enable remote monitoring of the street hub
    and the use of algorithms to determine turning off calls and wi-fi when problematic
    use has been identified, along with regular maintenance and cleaning. The Plan
    has been conditioned as a means of reducing street crime and anti-social
    behaviour associated with a street hub in Croydon (appeal refs
    APP/L5240/W/21/3285401 & APP/L5240/H/21/3285402). However, details of the
    public safety incidents in the area around this street hub have not been provided to
    enable a comparison with the appeals scheme, thereby tempering the weight that
    can be attributed to this evidence.
22. The street hub would provide a focus for the open use of mobile devices in the
    public realm in an area with existing high levels of crime and anti-social behaviour.
    Furthermore, the Plan acknowledges that some locations draw attention to local
    crime occurrences and the misuse of free calls, as evidenced by the nearby
    payphone and atm in New Street being out of order and vandalised. In such
    circumstances there could be no certainty that conditioning the Plan and
    controlling calls and use and undertaking regular physical inspections would
    overcome the public safety issues raised by the Council and the police.
23. The nearest public CCTV camera is 70m away from the site, and several of the
    nearby businesses have security cameras. Whilst the appellant has pointed out
    that the street hub would comply with lighting standards, and that conditions would
    avoid impacts such as glare disrupting surveillance equipment, it would be in direct
    line of sight of at least two cameras that cover the public footways. There are also
    other cameras that would have a close and oblique relationship to the street hub.
    It might be that the street hub would deter crime and anti-social behaviour
    occurrences, but equally it could become a focus for them, and no bespoke
    assessment of the lighting impact of the scheme upon the cameras has been
    provided. Leaving the matter unresolved in this way provides no certainty that
    conditions could satisfactorily address these issues.
24. For these reasons the street hub would erode public safety and the suggested
    conditions would not overcome these harms. Consequently, there would be
    conflict with CS Policy CP6 and PP Policy D2, that seek amongst other things, to
    create safe streets and spaces.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6006948 & 6006951


Conclusion
25. The scheme would harm the character and appearance of the area and would
    unacceptably affect the setting of nearby listed buildings, as well as fail to preserve
    or enhance the character and appearance of the conservation area and the WHS.
    There would also be unacceptable public safety impacts. The suggested
    conditions would not overcome these harms. Accordingly, for the reasons given
    above, and having regard to all other matters raised, the appeals are dismissed.

J J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
