Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by L Clark BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6006802
Corner Of Parry Street and South Lambeth Road, London SW8 1DY
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against conditions imposed when granting
    express consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr John Geoffrey Bolitho against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Lambeth.
•   The application Ref 25/03071/ADV was approved on 30 January 2026, and express consent was
    granted for the display of an advertisement subject to conditions.
    The advertisement permitted is display of 2 internally illuminated digital advertisement panels, each
    measuring 4m x 6m.
•   The conditions in dispute are Nos 6, 7, 11 and 12 which state that:

    6.(A) Prior to the commencement of any soft landscaping works, the applicant shall arrange with
          Transport for London to carry out a Road Safety Audit, adhering to the TfL Management
          Document SQA-0170. Prior to the commencement of any soft landscaping works, the Road
          Safety Audit shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
          audit shall:

           (a) Be conducted by an independent qualified team and;
           (b) include all proposed soft landscaping and any development deemed to impact the physical
               structure of the site; and
           (c) Produce a report compliant with the TFL Management Document SQA-0170; and
           (d) Result in the publication of a report compliant with TfL Management Document SQA-0170;
               and
           (e) be carried out no later than one year of the date of this decision notice, or at a date and time
               confirmed by Transport for London, whichever is the latest. The landscaping works shall be
               carried out in accordance with the approved details.

       (B) Details of any recommended mitigation measures deriving from the Road Safety Audit should be
          submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and implemented no later
          than 6 months following the approval of the Road Safety Audit under Part (A)

     7. The internally illuminated advertisement display hereby permitted shall cease and the display
        structure and all fixtures and fittings shall be removed from the land, and the land reinstated to its
        former condition, within 3 months of the date of failure to comply with requirement A) below:

     A) Carry out and fully complete, within 6 months of the date of this decision, the soft landscaping
        scheme in accordance with the approved plans Planting Scheme (PY4811-006), Proposed View 1
        (PY4811-09), Proposed View 2 (PY4811-010), Proposed Landscaping View 1 (PY4811-011),
        Proposed Landscaping View 2 (PY4811-012), Proposed Landscaping (PY4811-013), Planning
        Statement (30 September 2025).

     11. Any advertisement displayed, and any site used for the display of advertisements, shall be
          maintained in a condition that does not impair the visual amenity of the site.

     12. Upon the expiry of this consent any advertisement(s) displayed and any site used for the display of
        advertisements hereby permitted shall not benefit from deemed consent under Schedule 3, Part 1,
        Class 14 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations
        2007 unless an application for renewal of this consent has been approved prior to the expiry of this
        consent.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006802



•     The reasons given for the conditions are:
      6. To ensure that the proposed development does not lead to an increase in road danger (London
          Plan Policy T4).
      7. To ensure the continued upkeep and visual amenity of the site, and compliance with Regulation
          14(5) of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007.
     11. To accord with Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England)
          Regulations 2007.
     12. To comply with the requirements of Regulation 14(5)(c) of the Town and Country Planning (Control
          of Advertisements) (England) Regulation 2007 to ensure that the advertisement(s) is removed
          following the expiry of the consent.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the express consent Ref 25/03071/ADV for the display of
       2 internally illuminated digital advertisement panels, each measuring 4m x 6m at the
       Corner of Parry Street and South Lambeth Road, London SW8 1DY granted on 30
       January 2026 by the Council of the London Borough of Lambeth, is varied by
       deleting conditions 11 and 12, varying condition 7 by deleting it and reimposed in a
       modified form and reimposing condition 6, with the following conditions:

        6. A) Prior to the commencement of any soft landscaping works, the applicant shall
              arrange with Transport for London to carry out a Road Safety Audit, adhering
              to the TfL Management Document SQA-0170. Prior to the commencement of
              any soft landscaping works, the Road Safety Audit shall be submitted to, and
              approved in writing by, the Local Planning Authority. The audit shall:

             (a) Be conducted by an independent qualified team and;
             (b) include all proposed soft landscaping and any development deemed to
                 impact the physical structure of the site; and
             (c) Produce a report compliant with the TFL Management Document SQA-
                 0170; and
             (d) Result in the publication of a report compliant with TfL Management
                 Document SQA-0170; and
             (e) be carried out no later than 12 months of the date of this decision notice, or
                 at a date and time confirmed by Transport for London, whichever is the
                 latest. The landscaping works shall be carried out in accordance with the
                 approved details.

           (B) Details of any recommended mitigation measures deriving from the Road
              Safety Audit should be submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local
              Planning Authority and implemented no later than 6 months following the
              approval of the Road Safety Audit under Part (A)

        7. The internally illuminated advertisement display hereby permitted shall cease,
           and the display structure and all fixtures and fittings shall be removed from the
           land, and the land reinstated to its former condition within 3 months of the date
           of failure to comply with requirement A) below:

             B) Carry out and fully complete, within 12 months of the date of this decision, the
                soft landscaping scheme in accordance with the approved plans Planting
                Scheme (PY4811-006), Proposed View 1 (PY4811-09), Proposed View 2
                (PY4811-010), Proposed Landscaping View 1 (PY4811-011), Proposed


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6006802


                 Landscaping View 2 (PY4811-012), Proposed Landscaping (PY4811-013),
                 Planning Statement (30 September 2025).
Preliminary Matters
2.     The address in the banner heading is that used by the Council on the decision
       notice, except for the postcode, which I have added from the application for
       advertisement consent. This is a more accurate location of the appeal site than that
       given by the appellant.
3.     I have also amended the description of development to that used by the Council on
       the decision notice. This is a more accurate description of the proposed development
       than that given on the application form and ensures that it accurately captures the
       scope of the proposal.
4.     The National Planning Policy Framework was revised in August 2026. As the
       changes do not materially affect the main issues in this case, the parties have not
       been invited to make further comment.
Background and Main Issues
5.     The Council granted advertisement consent for the retention of 2 internally
       illuminated digital advertisement panels subject to a number of conditions. This
       appeal has been submitted against four conditions that were imposed on the
       consent. With regard to condition 6, the appellant specifies that it relates to criterion
       (e) and the time constraint; and condition 7 relates to the time constraint of six
       months. The appellant contends that the timescales imposed are unrealistic and
       suggests 12 months for both conditions. With regard to condition 11, the appellant
       contends that this is a duplication of Standard condition 3 and seeks for this to be
       deleted for efficacy. The appellant contends that Council has failed to justify or
       explain the reasoning for condition 12 and seeks that this is also deleted.
6.     Accordingly, in light of the above, the main issues are whether:
           •     the time scales imposed for conditions 6(A)(e) and 7 are reasonable and
                 necessary; and,
           •     conditions 11 and 12 are reasonable and necessary, having regard to the
                 requirements of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
                 (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations).
Reasons
Condition 6
7. Condition 6 requires the appellant to arrange with Transport for London (TfL) to carry
   out a Road Safety Audit (RSA) prior to the commencement of any soft landscaping.
   The condition also requires that prior to the commencement of any soft landscaping
   the RSA shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local Planning
   Authority.
8. Criterion (e) sets out that the RSA shall be carried out no later than one year from the
   date of the decision, or at a date and time confirmed by TfL, whichever is the latest.
9. The appellant seeks to amend the timescale to 12 months. However, one year is the
   same as 12 months and, as such, there is no difference between what the Council has

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006802


       approved and what the appellant is requesting. The disputed condition is therefore
       reasonable and necessary. I consider that condition 6 should be reimposed.
Condition 7
10. Condition 7, however, sets out in Criterion A) that the soft landscaping scheme in
    accordance with the approved plans Planting Scheme shall be carried out and fully
    completed within 6 months of the date of this decision. Failure to comply with the
    timescales would trigger the removal of the advertisement display and the land
    reinstated to its former condition within 3 months of the date of failure to comply with
    the requirement of criterion A).
11. Given the RSA is required in connection with the soft landscaping, in my mind, the
    timescales in this condition conflict with those set out in condition 6. Whilst complying
    with the timescale in condition 6 is likely possible given the flexibility, condition 7
    effectively reduces the timescale by which the appellant has to carry out an RSA and
    subsequently obtain approval in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
12. Extending the timescales from 6 months to 12 months from the date of the decision
    does not prevent completion of the proposed landscaping, nor does it restrict the
    Council from taking the necessary enforcement action against any breach.
13. I note the Council’s concerns that the landscaping under a previous advertisement
    consent application1 was not implemented, and that this resulted in the site's continued
    dilapidated state. There is however no dispute in this case that the associated
    landscaping will not be completed or that the landscaping would not significantly
    enhance the visual amenity of the immediate area. The conditions are mutually
    exclusive and given the disparities between the timescales in conditions 6 and 7, it is
    reasonable and necessary in my mind to ensure that timescales are compatible.
14. Moreover, even if commitments had been made by the appellant with regard to the
    installation of landscaping under Ref 18/01901/ADV, it was for the Council to take
    enforcement action at the time. Failure to comply with conditions of that application
    falls outside the scope of my assessment, which must focus on the planning merits of
    the proposal.
15. I note that the Council invited the appellant2 to submit a s96(a) application to alter the
    condition in the event of the appeal being dismissed. While the Council does not set
    out what timescales it would find acceptable, an invitation to vary the condition does
    indicate its acceptance.
16. This, together with my findings above, leads me to believe that the timescale of 12
    months is reasonable and necessary. I therefore consider that condition 7 should be
    deleted and reimposed in a modified form as set out above.
Condition th
17. The Council do not dispute that this condition is a duplication of Standard condition 3.
    This condition is therefore not reasonable or necessary having regard to the
    requirements of the Regulations and should be deleted.




1
    Ref 18/01901/ADV
2
    Paragraph 7.19


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006802


Condition 12
18. Advertisements granted consent are subject to the standard conditions set out in
    Schedule 2 of the Regulations. In addition, Regulation 14 sets out powers to deal with
    applications. 14(7) requires that an express consent shall be subject to the condition
    that it expires at the end of such a period that the local planning authority may specify
    in granting consent, or a period of 5 years. Advertisements displayed after the expiry
    of express consent have deemed consent under Class 14 of Schedule 3.
19. 14(5)(c) of the Regulations sets out that the conditions imposed under 14(1) may
    include the removal of any advertisement or the discontinuance of any use of land
    authorised by the consent, at the end of a specific period, and the carrying out of any
    works required for the reinstatement of the land.
20. The Planning Policy Guidance (PPG) explains that express consent usually lasts for 5
    years and that unless the local planning authority has imposed a condition that an
    advert with express consent must be removed after the consent expires, it may
    normally continue to be displayed without submitting any further application3.
21. The PPG also states that all advertisements are subject to the standard conditions
    and where any additional conditions are imposed by a local planning authority, these
    must be supported by specific and relevant planning reasons4. This paragraph of the
    PPG goes on to state that conditions should never be imposed because the local
    planning authority wishes, as a matter of general policy, to prevent the operation of
    Class 14 in Schedule 3 of the Regulations.
22. As such, whether or not a condition to remove an advertisement is reasonable and
    necessary, such as condition 12 imposed by the Council, turns on whether the
    advertisement would be likely to be unacceptable at the end of the specified period.
    The reason for such a condition however, needs to be justified with specific and
    relevant planning reasons as to why the situation on site would potentially change to
    make the advertisement unacceptable in relation to amenity or public safety, at the
    end of this period.
23. Whilst the Council’s reasoning for this condition cites compliance with the
    requirements of Regulation 14(5)(c), it nevertheless omits justification.
24. I note the Council describes the site as being central to an area that has been
    undergoing significant change. The Council describe that there are several nearby
    applications for large-scale development, and there is a pattern of change to the
    arches and wider area, however no specific details have been submitted to
    substantiate this claim. I therefore have no substantive evidence before me to
    demonstrate the likely changes in the context of this advertisement, that would make
    it unacceptable on either amenity or public safety grounds after the 5-year period has
    expired.
25. Additionally, even if there was to be a change in the context of the site at the end of
    this period, the Council would have the option of issuing a discontinuance notice to
    control any harm that might arise.
26. In view of the above, I conclude that Condition 12 is unreasonable and unnecessary,
    having regard to the requirements of the Regulations, and should be deleted.

3
    Paragraph: 036 Reference ID: 18b-036-20140306
4
    Paragraph: 034 Reference ID: 18b-034-20140306


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            5
Appeal Decision 6006802


Other Matters
27. Whether the Council consider either a s96A Town and Country Planning Act 1990 as
    a non-material amendment, or a s73 for a variation of condition to be the expedient
    option for the alteration/removal of conditions, this falls outside the scope of my
    assessment, which must focus on the planning merits of the appeal proposal.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above, conditions 11 and 12 should be deleted, condition 7
    deleted and reimposed in modified form and condition 6 reimposed. I therefore
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

L Clark
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
