Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 4 August 2026
Site visit made on 17 June 2026 and 4 August 2026
by Paul Thompson DipTRP MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006950
Land off Middlebridge Road, Gringley-on-the-Hill DN10 4SE
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr S Worthington-Leese against the decision of Bassetlaw District Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/00810/FUL.
•      The development proposed is a new self-build dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.       An application for costs has been made by Mr S Worthington-Leese against
         Bassetlaw District Council and is subject of a separate decision.
Background and Main Issues
3.       In the Statement of Common Ground1 and at the Hearing, the Council confirmed
         that it no longer objected to the proposed development in relation to protected
         species and the adjacent Chesterfield Canal Site of Special Scientific Interest
         (SSSI), as advanced in its fifth reason for refusal. Mitigation in relation to such
         matters can therefore be controlled by planning conditions. The fifth reason for
         refusal therefore no longer forms part of the main issues in this appeal.
4.       Based on the remaining reasons for refusal on the decision notice, the main issue
         is whether the proposed development would be consistent with policies relating to
         housing in the countryside, including regarding the provision of self-build and
         custom housing, its accessibility to services and facilities, and the effect on the
         character and appearance of the site and its rural setting.
Reasons
Policy Background
5.       Policy ST1 of the Bassetlaw Local Plan 2020-20382 (LP) sets out the Council’s
         spatial strategy for the plan period 2020-2038. It is delivered through managed
         sustainable development and growth, appropriate to the size of each settlement or
         location to meet the evidenced need for new homes. The policy promotes making
         efficient and effective use of land, including re-using previously developed land
1
    Dated 22 June 2026.
2
    Dated 29 May 2024.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006950


       (PDL) in sustainable locations, and encourages development near transport hubs
       and key public transport nodes. It also explains that land outside of built-up areas
       of settlements in the hierarchy are treated as countryside, where development will
       only be supported if it is consistent with other policies in the development plan or
       national policy. This links to the relevant policies of the Framework, including the
       presumption in favour of sustainable development in Policies S3 to S6.
6.     For planning policy purposes, the appeal site lies in the countryside, outside of the
       village of Gringley-on-the-Hill, which is classed as a Small Rural Settlement. In
       these locations, LP Policy ST2 Part 3 supports residential development where it
       falls into one of four categories. Based on my findings above, the fourth category
       links to Framework Policy S5, which I address later. Policy ST2 also requires
       development to be consistent with the relevant criteria in Part 2 of the policy. In
       this appeal, criteria (a) and (c) are not engaged because the site is not in, or
       between, settlements.
7.     Returning to PDL, Policy ST2 Part 2(d) specifically relates to how PDL in relation
       to housing should be considered, and supports development which prioritises its
       re-use where possible.
8.     Policy ST2 Part 2 criteria (b) and (e) require that proposals do not, where
       appropriate, cause significant harm to the openness and distinctiveness of the
       surrounding countryside, and positively respond to the design principles as
       identified in Policy ST33. The latter expects all development to be of high-quality
       design. It should have a clear function, character and identity, based on a robust
       understanding of local context and constraints. Proposals should also respect the
       local context and complement the landform, layout, building orientation, scale,
       height, massing, type, materials, details and landscaping of surrounding areas.
       Policy ST35 is also relevant to the consideration of landscape and is supportive of
       proposals that contribute to the nature and quality of Bassetlaw’s landscapes
       where they protect and where possible enhance the distinctive qualities of the
       landscape character policy zone, identified in the Bassetlaw Landscape Character
       Assessment (2009) (BLCA), by conserving, restoring, reinforcing or creating
       relevant landscape forms and features.
9.     Regarding the accessibility of the development, LP Policy ST2 Part 2(f) requires
       development to provide well-designed, safe and convenient access for all. This
       includes, where appropriate, connections and improvements to infrastructure to
       promote walking, cycling, and use of public transport. LP Policy ST53 also
       supports development that contributes towards a sustainable transport network.
Consistency with Policies Relating to Housing in the Countryside
10. The appellant has proposed that a fallback position is available to enable a
    conversion of an existing non-residential building on site, under Policy ST2 Part
    3(c), and this would be replaced by the appeal scheme through 3(b). Furthermore,
    the appellant also indicates the appeal scheme would be consistent with other
    policies of the LP, as identified in category (d). To comply with Part 3 of the policy,
    a finding on the relevant parts of Policy ST2 Part 2 is relevant to the consideration
    of the categories of development. The Council’s reasons for refusal also referred
    to several of these aspects, so I start there.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006950


       Character and Appearance and Rural Setting
11. The appeal site lies to the west side of Middlebridge Road some distance north of
    Gringley on the Hill. There are other homes further to the north, while to the south
    is the Chesterfield Canal, and east of the site is a farmhouse and converted barn.
    These are all surrounded by agricultural land. The full extent of the west and south
    boundaries of the site, and part of the east are enclosed by mature planting,
    whereas the north boundary is largely open. The southern part of the site is
    overgrown, but the northern part is occupied by hardstanding and two relatively
    modest barn structures, clad in profile sheeting. The barns currently have an
    unkempt appearance and are visible through the open aspects of the site’s
    boundaries. They do not, therefore, make a positive contribution to the character
    and appearance of the site, but they are features consistent with their rural setting.
    Their scale also ensures they remain unassuming in views available from the
    locality. This is the baseline upon which the appeal must be considered.
12. This part of the district is in the Idle Lowlands – Policy Zone 03: Misterton, as
    defined by the BLCA, where built elements are generally farmsteads and small
    groups of cottages in the local vernacular. Key actions for this zone include
    conserving the open sparsely settled and rural character of the landscape by
    concentrating new small-scale development around existing settlement located at
    the boundaries of the Policy Zone, while being sympathetic to the scale and extent
    of existing settlement.
13. The proposed dwelling would be of two storeys, like others in the locality, but
    together it and the garage building would be of a proportionally much greater scale
    than the existing barns within the site. This increased and concentrated scale
    would appear visually domineering, particularly in the views from the bridge and
    other locations to the north along Middlebridge Road. The magnitude of the built
    form would therefore harmfully intrude into and detrimentally alter the character of
    the area, including the perception of the rural setting of the immediate landscape.
    Even if planting within the site is retained and added to, the harmful effects of the
    presence of the proposed buildings would persist as it would be unlikely to mitigate
    against this in a meaningful way.
14. The architectural design of the proposed dwelling and garage building would not
    be harmful to the appearance of the area, as it would be rural in nature. Moreover,
    the dwelling would be built of red brick, reinforcing a key aim of the BLCA. Juliette
    balconies are not commonplace within the locality, but inclusion of one to the west
    façade would not be detrimental to the overall composition. The varied roof form of
    projections from the house would also be modest aspects. Nevertheless, these
    absences of harm relating to the appearance of the proposal would not alter my
    conclusions in relation to the effect on the character of the site and its rural setting.
15. I have considered the size and appearance of the farmhouse and converted barn
    opposite, which the proposal takes cues from, and the other houses further to the
    north. These buildings may be similar in scale, but the barn associated with the
    farmhouse results from a conversion, so is not comparable with the proposal. In
    any event, the presence of these buildings does not justify the increase in scale
    now proposed on the site, or the harm that this would cause, even if that harm
    would be localised. I have also had regard to the appellant’s Design Response
    Statement, but the consideration of the proposal in relation to the National Design
    Guide does not alter my findings in respect of this matter.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006950


        Previous Developed Land
16. The evidence before me, including site photographs and plans, indicates that it is
    likely that part of the site includes PDL. This more closely relates to the footprint of
    the proposed buildings and the access into the site, which the appellant accepted
    at the Hearing. Nevertheless, in terms of LP Policy ST2, this would prioritise the
    re-use of PDL, where possible.
        Accessibility of the Site
17. There is common ground between the main parties that Gringley on the Hill
    incorporates a village hall, place of worship, access to a mobile post office, and a
    public house with a ‘pop-in’ shop inside. The latter provides daily essentials that
    can be ordered and collected in the morning.
18. Middlebridge Road is narrow and lacks street lighting and dedicated footways. The
    evidence before me indicates that it is not a particularly busy route, but it is subject
    to the national speed limit of 60mph. There is also an incline into the village,
    notably Horsewell’s Street. The other footpath routes are through nearby fields,
    which are also unlit. Although walking and cycling in rural areas is not uncommon,
    these conditions are not convenient or realistic for everyone who might need to
    reach services and facilities in the village, especially after dark or in bad weather.
    While the appellant’s family accept these conditions, their current circumstances
    could change in the future.
19. The main parties agree on the nature and frequency of the bus services available
    from the village. However, the route required to access these means their
    availability would be unlikely to discourage use of private motorised vehicles to
    make such journeys.
20. A greater dependency and choice to utilise private motorised transport in rural
    areas is borne out in the evidence, and some of these journeys may be short,
    including into the village. Moreover, while the commercial use of the site has
    ceased, the appellant travels to and from it on a regular basis from the village.
    Nevertheless, the proposal would not provide an opportunity to improve this
    situation through enabling choice. The introduction of a 4-bedroom dwelling, with
    additional rooms above the garage, would lead to regular, permanent travel by
    private motorised transport to access most of the occupants’ daily needs.
21. I have also had regard to the appeal decisions referred to in the appellant’s
    Statement of Case, notably the opposing findings of other inspectors in various
    locations. I have reached my own finding based on the site’s context and its
    proximity and the nature of the route to Gringley on the Hill, just as the inspectors
    did for the individual contexts of the situations before them. While this is for a
    single dwelling, and some trips could be made by electric vehicle, allowing this
    proposal would cumulatively increase the number of journeys made in the district
    by private motorised transport, which is the least sustainable travel option.
        Conversion to a Dwelling
22. I am presented with an illustrated conversion of an existing barn at the site to
    residential use3. Alongside this are reports from the main parties that put forward
    competing views regarding the structural condition of the barn. These are both
3
    Drawing Number 591.PCD.01.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006950


         compiled by individuals with equal qualifications. The existing buildings on the site
         were previously considered in an application for prior approval4, in which the
         Council established that these, and the site itself, were not last in agricultural use.
         As such, Class Q of the GPDO5 did not apply. I have not been referred to any
         other relevant Class of the GPDO. As such, even if I were to find that the identified
         building was structurally capable of being converted, it could not be considered
         under Class Q.
23. My consideration of LP Policy ST2 Part 3(c) is therefore hypothetical. A conversion
    would still require planning permission, and the Council would need to determine a
    planning application for that scheme. This would include the physical alterations to
    the exterior of the building. Outside of that process, which is subject to public
    consultation, and only for the purposes of this appeal, I consider those alterations
    to be relatively modest. They follow the existing form, scale, massing and
    proportion of the building and, due to the existing condition of the site, they would
    enhance the immediate setting. Despite this, given my finding in relation to the
    accessibility of the site, the illustrated conversion would not satisfy all the
    requirements of LP Policy ST2 Part 3.
         Replacement Dwelling
24. If I had come to a different conclusion in respect of the previous criteria, the appeal
    scheme would still not have amounted to a replacement of an existing dwelling, as
    the conversion has not taken place. Even if it had taken place, the proposal would
    be so considerably larger than the converted ‘original dwelling’ that it would not be
    a replacement of a similar size and scale to it. Accordingly, the consideration of the
    illustrated conversion and appeal scheme together would not result in compliance
    with Policy ST2 Part 3. As a consequence, the harm that would result from the
    appeal scheme would be greater than any notional fallback position argued in
    relation to the illustrated conversion.
         Whether Consistent with Other Policies
25. Policy ST2 Part 3(d) also refers to proposals for residential development in the
    countryside being supported where they are consistent with other LP policies.
26. Turning first to LP Policy ST28. This is supportive of self-build housing that helps
    meet the needs of those on the Self Build and Custom Housebuilding Register and
    this also requires compliance with other LP policies. I have identified harms that
    would ultimately conflict with identified policies of the LP in this main issue, so this
    would not bring compliance with the majority of those policies.
27. Notwithstanding this, as stated above, LP Policy ST1 includes an additional clause
    indicating that countryside development can be supported where it is consistent
    with national policy, in this instance the Framework’s presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. Framework Policy S5 applies and this states only certain
    forms of development should be approved outside settlements, as set out in a
    closed list of categories. The main parties agree that only categories (c), (d) and (j)
    are relevant to the appeal, which I address in turn below.
28. In carrying out the balancing exercise required by the above, I have had regard to
    the appeal decisions referred to in the appellant’s Statement of Case. However, I
4
    Planning Reference: 24/00104/PDN.
5
    The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, as amended.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               5
Appeal Decision 6006950


       am also mindful of the site’s context and any changes that have occurred in
       relation to local and national policy since any decisions were taken. In particular,
       the Framework takes a different approach to the presumption in favour of
       sustainable development, particularly for sites situated outside of settlements.
Consideration Against the Framework’s Policies
29. Despite the existing building being of permanent and substantial construction, my
    conclusions in relation to the fallback position and the scale and design of the
    appeal scheme mean that the proposal would not be for the same use and would
    be disproportionately larger than the buildings that it replaces. Hence, it would not
    meet Policy S5(1)(c).
30. I have already outlined that part of the site is likely to be PDL where existing
    buildings and hardstanding is present. The evidence refers to the presence of
    some structures below the ground surface elsewhere in the site, but these have
    blended into the landscape. This means there is not enough certainty to treat the
    rest of the site as PDL. While the remainder of the site would not contain new
    buildings, it would involve a material change of use to garden land. Framework
    Policy S5(1)(d) does not relate to the partial redevelopment of PDL, so the
    proposal would not satisfy it. On the same basis, I cannot give the proposal the
    substantial weight for re-using PDL referred to in Framework Policy L2. Instead, as
    the proposal would meet part of LP Policy ST2, I give this only moderate weight.
31. Below I set out what I consider to be the Council’s positions in relation to housing
    land supply and Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding (SBCH). These constitute
    evidenced unmet needs for the provision of housing, which the development would
    help address. Nevertheless, although the proposal could be accommodated taking
    into account availability of infrastructure, it would not be physically well-related to
    an existing settlement. Therefore, it would not satisfy Policy S5(1)(j).
32. On this basis, Policy S5(4) states development proposals which do not fall within
    one of the categories set out in this policy should only be approved in exceptional
    circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to
    promoting sustainable patterns of movement. Equally, had I reached an alternative
    finding on any of the above categories, Policy S5(1) indicates that these should be
    approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    in the Framework.
33. Policy S5(2) clarifies that the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects
    include, but are not restricted to, situations where the development proposal would
    fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies that state these
    should be refused in specific circumstances.
34. I therefore first set out the benefits of approving the development proposal:
       Housing Land Supply
35. At the Hearing, the Council did not dispute the appellant’s position on deliverable
    housing land supply in the district. The evidence shows that the assumptions
    about windfall sites, sites with planning permission that have not started, and sites


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006950


       without permission may be optimistic. Taken together, these factors point to a
       housing land supply of about 4.15 years. Consequently, for the purposes of this
       appeal, I have adopted this position, as it reflects the evidence available to me
       leading up to and at the time of the event. Framework Policy HO7 indicates that
       substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will
       contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
       community, as identified through relevant evidence. However, I am mindful that
       this would be a relatively modest contribution in terms of the overall need for
       homes within the district; and due to the location beyond the settlement, it would
       not contribute to the residential growth of Gringley on the Hill envisaged by Part 1
       of LP Policy ST2.
       Need for Self-Build and Custom Housing
36. Sites identified by the Council for SBCH should be considered based on the duties
    outlined in the 2015 Act6 (as amended), including Sections 1(A1) and (A2), 2A(2),
    2A(5) and 2A(6); and the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). These clarify what
    qualifies as a site and should be read together.
37. Firstly, Section 2A of the 2015 Act states an authority must give development
    permission on enough serviced plots of land to meet the demand for self-build and
    custom housebuilding in the authority's area in respect of each base period.
    Section 2A(5) then defines ‘development permission’ as planning permission or
    permission in principle (within the meaning of the 1990 Act).
38. At the Hearing, the Council clarified that its Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding
    Position Statement7 indicates that permissions are counted where at least one of
    the following criteria is met:
           •    self-build is defined in the description of development and within the
                decision notice;
           •    a self-build planning condition is attached to the planning permission;
           •    self-build is a requirement within a legal agreement attached to the
                permission;
           •    self-build has been verified by a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Part 2
                Exemption Claim Form.
39. CIL Exemption is prepared for the purposes of tax, so it is not relevant to the
    requirements of the 2015 Act, as persons can purchase and build out a scheme
    already given permission and then apply for the exemption. This does not satisfy
    Section 1(A2) of the 2015 Act, as SBCH does not include the building of a house
    on a plot acquired from a person who builds the house wholly or mainly to plans or
    specifications decided or offered by that person. Including permissions that rely
    only on CIL Exemption would therefore weaken the Council’s position on which
    plots qualify as SBCH.
40. The Council relies upon SBCH being specified in the description of development,
    but this alone is unlikely to be sufficient to ensure that homes are constructed in

6
  Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended by the Housing and Planning Act 2016 and the Levelling Up and the
Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023).
7
  The statement is for the period to 30 April 2026.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              7
Appeal Decision 6006950


       this manner. While the Council relies upon the use of planning conditions to secure
       SBCH, ensuring that a SBCH plot remains in the possession of the applicant
       requires controls that apply to the owner of the land, rather than the land itself.
       Accordingly, if the owner sells or leaves the property before any timeframe for
       occupation is complete, permission for the house would no longer exist. It is on
       this basis that such a condition would not pass the tests within Framework Policy
       DM6. A legal agreement is therefore the most appropriate method of ensuring that
       development permissions remain SBCH rather than becoming market housing.
       The evidence before me indicates that, to date, the Council has generally relied on
       other mechanisms rather than legal agreements.
41. Taking all of the criteria together, there is a significant shortfall in the number of
    development permissions for SBCH plots. On the available evidence, the shortfall
    is likely to be much closer to the 121 plots referred to by the appellant than the
    deficit of 37 plots identified in the Position Statement. This is because the 2015 Act
    allows demand for SBCH to include unmet demand from earlier base periods. The
    proposal could be secured by a unilateral undertaking, so it would help the Council
    to meet its statutory duty.
42. As with the overall need for housing, Framework Policy HO7 is relevant to the
    need for SBCH, so the benefit of the proposal would be afforded substantial
    weight, which would make a meaningful contribution towards meeting the need
    required for SBCH plots in the district.
       Other Benefits
43. I have already referred above to the efficient use of land. Although the proposal
    would be exempt from statutory biodiversity net gain, it would voluntarily provide
    enhancements, including for bats. These would be environmental benefits of
    moderate weight that could not be secured without the development.
44. The integration of renewable and low carbon technologies, alongside the
    sustainable design and construction of the proposal would minimise energy
    consumption to accord with aspects of LP Policy ST33. A high-quality living
    environment would therefore be created for occupants. These would be moderate
    social and environmental benefits of the scheme.
45. There would be some short-term economic benefits associated with the
    construction phase, albeit I appreciate that SBCH provides greater benefits in this
    regard. The occupation of the dwelling would provide longer-term support for local
    services, facilities and supply chains. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the
    development means I am only able to afford these benefits moderate weight.
46. The measures to address flood risk, drainage and ecology, and the fact that the
    proposal would be acceptable in terms of heritage, highway safety, and living
    conditions, mean that there would be no harm in these respects. The removal of
    the barns could be a visual benefit, but similar improvements could be achieved by
    better upkeep of the land and buildings. Overall, these matters are neutral in this
    balance and do not count for or against the proposal.
       Whether the Benefits Substantially Outweigh the Harms
47. In line with the Framework, I must also assess the proposal against the national
    decision-making policies that are relevant to it:


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6006950


48. The Framework is clear at Policy DP3(3) that development proposals should be
    refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with any explicit design standards
    set out in the development plan (including those in locally specific policies). In this
    case, the proposal conflicts with several LP policies because of its adverse effects
    on the character of the site and its rural setting. In the Framework’s terms, this
    amounts to harm to the character of the countryside.
49. In addition, the harm in relation to the location of the proposal in the countryside,
    some distance from Gringley on the Hill would also be significant, as it would fail to
    promote sustainable patterns of movement. This is a principal aspect of the
    Framework’s overall approach to the location of development, notably Policy TR3.
50. The weight I have afforded the stated benefits above ranges from substantial down
    to moderate. Collectively, the adverse effects outlined in relation to the
    Framework’s development management policies would be of such magnitude and
    importance that they would substantially outweigh those benefits.
Conclusion on the Main Issue
51. There is some tension due to the requirements of LP Policy ST1 in terms of the
    site’s location regarding PDL, but it would satisfy the requirement of LP Policy ST2
    Part 2(d) which specifically relates to how PDL is used in relation to housing. I
    have also not found harm associated with the appearance of the proposal. Despite
    this, I conclude that the proposed development would not be consistent with
    development plan policies relating to housing in the countryside, including in
    relation to the provision of self-build and custom housing, regarding its accessibility
    to services and facilities, and the effect on the character and appearance of the
    site and its rural setting. Hence it would not accord with the aims outlined above in
    relation to LP Policies ST1, ST2, ST28, ST33, ST35, and ST53.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
52. I have already found that the proposal would not satisfy Framework Policy S5 and
    have set out the benefits of the scheme in balancing these against the identified
    harms. However, I now return to the final balancing of the benefits against the
    conflict with the development plan.
53. Annex A of the Framework states development plan policies (or parts of those
    policies) which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies in
    the Framework should be given very limited weight.
54. LP Policy ST1 refers to the overall approach to development in the district and is
    supportive of development outside of development boundaries or the built-up
    areas of settlements where it is consistent with other development plan or national
    policies. This enables proposals to be considered against the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development in Framework Policies S3 to S6. As Policies
    ST2 and ST28 also include the ability to accord with other policies of the
    development plan, the same link to the Framework applies.
55. Taken on its own, the reference to development outside settlements might appear
    not to match the more flexible and balanced approach in the Framework’s
    objectives. Furthermore, given the Council’s housing land supply position, some
    development beyond settlement boundaries will be needed to meet current and
    future housing needs. However, by facilitating development in accordance with the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6006950


         Framework’s policies, Policies ST1 and ST2 are fully consistent with the
         Framework and do not impose a more restrictive approach. Instead, they set out a
         locally defined strategy for housing development and provide enough flexibility for
         housing sites, including SBCH, to come forward across the plan area. Similarly,
         aspects relating to design and accessibility of Policy ST2 Part 2 are also consistent
         with the aims of Framework Policies DP3 and TR3. I therefore afford substantial
         weight to the conflict with Policies ST1 and ST2.
56. Notwithstanding the above, I am mindful of the conclusion I made in determining
    the appeal at Shrivenham8, where the mechanics of the development plan were
    not yielding the permissions required by the duty for SBCH. Policy ST28 is
    differentiated from the other policies on that basis, as it does not compel
    developments of 99 homes or fewer to include any SBCH plots. It also does not
    allocate plots, as required by the new Framework. This is materially inconsistent
    with the Framework. Thus, conflict with LP Policy ST28 is of very limited weight.
57. I afford substantial weight to the conflict with LP Policies ST33 and ST35, as they
    are policies that are consistent with the key principles for well-designed places in
    Framework Policy DP3; and LP Policy ST53, given its consistency with Framework
    Policy TR3 regarding limiting the need to travel, particularly by private car.
58. While there is a longer list of benefits, some of which have been afforded
    substantial weight, the proposal would conflict with the Council’s spatial strategy
    for the location and distribution of housing, including the site’s accessibility and the
    effect on the character of the site and its rural setting. Although the Council’s
    timetable for addressing the housing and SBCH shortfalls is uncertain, meeting the
    locational needs of SBCH should not come at the expense of these wider aims
    and objectives of the development plan. Consequently, the harms and conflicts
    with the development plan would be of greater significance in this appeal.
59. Consequently, the appeal scheme would not accord with the development plan,
    when considered as a whole, and the relevant material considerations, including
    the provisions of the Framework, do not indicate that the proposal should be
    determined otherwise than in accordance with the development plan. For the
    reasons given, I therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Paul Thompson
INSPECTOR




8
    Appeal Reference: APP/V3120/W/22/3297610 - Land east of Northford, Shrivenham.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               10
Appeal Decision 6006950


APPEARANCES

For the Appellant

Kris Baxter                            (Architect)
Rebecca Baxter                         (Town Planning Apprentice)
Sam Worthington-Leese                  (Appellant)

For the Council

Hafsah Naseem                          (Planning Officer)
Richard Riggs                          (Planning Development Manager)

Interested Parties

Bryan Jaggard-Smith                    Neighbour

DOCUMENTS HANDED UP AT THE HEARING

Hard copies of the planning documents requested prior to the event for planning
references: 23/00007/OUT, 23/07/00018/R, 24/00104/PDN, and 24/01480/FUL;
designated area and reasons for designation of the Chesterfield Canal SSSI; and email
from the Council’s Lead Ecologist.

DOCUMENTS RECEIVED FOLLOWING THE CLOSE OF THE HEARING

Updated list of agreed planning conditions; signed Unilateral Undertaking; and a
Statement of Common Ground regarding the revised Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           11
