Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 June 2026
by N Unwin BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006018
454-456 Blackpool Road, Preston, Lancashire PR2 1HX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Michael Patel against the decision of Preston City Council.
•    The application Ref is 06/2025/1192.
•    The development proposed is described as: proposed new build to accommodate 3No. retail units
     (Class E) at ground floor level and 6No. apartments (Class C3) at upper floor level.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The draft Central Lancashire Local Plan 2023 – 2041 was formally submitted to
       the Secretary of State for examination in June 2025. Given the early stage of
       preparation, limited weight is afforded to the emerging policies.
3.     The Council’s reason for refusal refers to residential amenity. However, is not
       specific about the precise effect that the proposal would have in this respect.
       However, their Statement of Case sets out that they are concerned about noise
       from day-to-day activities resulting from the intensification of the use of the site
       and the overlooking of neighbouring gardens from the proposed development. The
       appellant has had the opportunity to comment on the Council’s Statement of Case
       and therefore would not be prejudiced by my consideration of the proposal in this
       regard.
4.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
           •    the character and appearance of the area; and
           •    the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with specific regard to noise,
                outlook, and privacy.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006018


Reasons
Character and Appearance
6.     The appeal site occupies a prominent location at the junction of Blackpool Road
       and Parkfield Avenue. This section of Blackpool Road is characterised by two-
       storey properties with commercial ground floors and residential above. This
       commercial element results in a high pedestrian footfall along this section of
       highway and is consequently busy in nature. In contrast, Parkfield Avenue is
       residential in character with two-storey terraced and semi-detached properties
       flanking the highway, appearing far quieter and less travelled than Blackpool
       Road. Whilst there are examples of larger buildings with end gables on the corners
       of junctions within the area, these are not reflective of the modest character of the
       majority of buildings adjacent to junctions along this section of Blackpool Road.
7.     At the time of my site visit the building that previously occupied the site had been
       demolished. Based on the submissions, the building was set back from Park
       Avenue, reflecting the forward building line of the neighbouring row of dwellings.
       The use of a hipped roof mirrored that of the property on the opposite side of Park
       Avenue and served to reduce the bulk of the building, creating an open street
       scene and gradual transition to the residential character beyond. Planning
       permission 06/2024/0561 was for the extension of the building, however this
       retained the important setback from Park Avenue, maximum building height, and
       hipped roof, preserving the openness of the street scene and minimising the
       buildings visual bulk.
8.     The proposal would create a two-storey property with three commercial units at
       ground floor and six flats at first floor and within the roof space. It would be notably
       taller than the previous building which occupied the site (including planning
       permission 06/2024/0561), and taller than the adjacent properties on both
       Blackpool Road and Parkfield Avenue. The proposed building would have a
       gabled, pitched roof with rear dormers. The result would be a substantial end
       gable flank facing Parkfield Avenue which would only be broken by a small window
       at first floor level and a corner return window at ground floor level.
9.     Although the eaves height would be the same as the previous building on the site,
       overall the building would be higher, which in combination with the introduction of a
       gabled roof would appear overly bulky in this location. As such, the proposal would
       appear as a dominant addition, narrowing the street scene, exacerbated by its
       location at the back of the pavement on a prominent corner plot, creating an abrupt
       transition to the residential character beyond.
10. Framework Policy L2 d. gives substantial weight to creating additional homes or
    floorspace within settlements through sensitive redevelopment or additional
    development within existing plots, including the introduction of higher buildings at
    street corners. Nevertheless, these are required to be consistent with the overall
    street scene, other than where it is appropriate to have larger buildings such as at
    street corners. Given the above identified harm to the character and appearance of
    the area, the proposal is not consistent with the overall street scene and it is not
    appropriate to have higher buildings at this corner plot. Therefore, the proposal
    does not benefit from this part of Policy L2.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006018


11. The proposal would maintain the existing level of the eaves of the previous
    building on its Blackpool Road elevation, and would utilise a traditional design and
    materials. Nevertheless, this would not offset the harm identified above.
12. For the above reasons, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the character
    and appearance of the area. It would therefore conflict with the relevant provisions
    of Policy AD1(a) of the Preston Local Plan 2012-26 (2015) (the Local Plan), which
    requires development to be of a scale sensitive to, and in keeping with, both the
    character and appearance of the area.
Living Conditions
13. The busy nature of Blackpool Road results in a level of background noise
    commensurate with the intensity of its use as a busy thoroughfare and shopping
    street, which is notably different to streets leading from it such as Parkfield
    Avenue. The two-storey scale of the dwellings along Parkfield Avenue and close
    relationship of the surrounding built environment results in a moderate level of
    mutual overlooking of the rear garden areas from rear windows.
14. Despite its increased height, the proposal would be set back further from the
    boundary with the dwellings along this side of Parkfield Avenue. Given this
    distance, the rear windows including the dormers, would result in some
    overlooking of the rear gardens of the properties along Parkfield Avenue.
    However, this would be limited and not meaningfully exacerbate the
    aforementioned existing mutual overlooking from rear windows of surrounding
    properties.
15. Whilst the proposal would result in two additional flats and replace the single café/
    bar with three commercial units, the noise generated would be commensurate with
    the existing intensity observed along Blackpool Road, including levels generated
    from refuse collection. Therefore, any additional noise generated by the proposal
    would be limited given existing levels. Further, a condition could be imposed to
    limit hours of operation and deliveries to non-antisocial hours, were I minded to
    allow the appeal.
16. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would not cause unacceptable harm to
    the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with specific regard to noise,
    outlook, and privacy. It would therefore not conflict with the relevant provisions of
    Policy AD1(a) of the Local Plan in relation to this main issue, which requires
    development to not have an adverse impact on residential living conditions,
    particularly by reason of noise, general disturbance, and loss of privacy.
Other Matters
17. I acknowledge that the appellant sought pre-application advice, working with the
    Council and amending the proposal. Nonetheless, these do not outweigh the
    above identified harm to the character and appearance of the area.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
18. Policy S4 of the Framework states that Development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in this Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006018


19. The proposal would create two additional retail units and two additional dwellings
    on previously developed land. The Framework gives substantial weight to the
    economic benefits of proposals for commercial development and supporting the
    overall vitality and viability of town centres, and making better use of vacant and
    underutilised land and buildings. Nevertheless, given the low number of additional
    retail units and dwellings provided, these benefits would be substantially
    outweighed by the harm to the character and appearance of the area.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
