Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by B Phillips BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006266
The Stables, Adsdean Park Road, Funtington PO18 9DN
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Jess Liney against the decision of South Downs National Park Authority.
•      The application Ref is SDNP/25/03763/LIS.
•      The works proposed are the conversion of 1 no. stable block (part ground floor) and reconfiguration
       of apartment (part ground floor and first floor) into 1 no. dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of development above is taken from the decision notice. This is in
   the interest of clarity.
3. The Council’s statement of case makes reference to full planning application
   SDNP/25/03762/FUL but this is not a matter for the appeal before me.
4. ‘The Stables of Adsdean House to the North West of the House’ is Grade II listed.
   In reaching my decision, I have considered the statutory duty under section 16(2) of
   the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act, 1990 (the Act).
5. The Government published in August 2026 a revised version of the National
   Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The Council and the appellant have
   had opportunity to comment on this and I have taken into account any
   representations received.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the proposed works would preserve the listed building,
   or any features of special architectural or historic interest that it possesses, in
   addition to whether the proposal would preserve the setting of the adjacent listed
   building Adsdean House.
Reasons
7.       The appeal building is a Grade II listed1 former stable block associated with
         Adsdean House (listed in its own right2). The property is part of a courtyard
         comprising of converted properties, and is comprised of two distinct parts, the
         former stables themselves and the adjoining former staff accommodation.

1
    List Entry Number: 1026171
2
    List Entry Number: 1234531

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006266


8.     The property is believed to have been constructed in approximately 1850 as an
       outbuilding for Adsdean House. The building was separated and sold off from the
       main house in the 1960s.
9.     The building was listed in 1986 and consist of two storeys, of coursed flints with
       long and short stone dressings and quoins, sprocket eaves and a slate roof. There
       is a clock turret at the west end and a louvred turret at the east end. There are
       casement windows to the frontage. Whilst the rear of the building is not a principal
       or publicly experienced façade and does not contribute to its special interest to the
       same extent as the frontage, this is a conscious functional design factor and is
       intrinsic to its previous use and original and retained equestrian character.
       Although the rear is not included in the list description therefore, this does not
       indicate a lack of special interest or significance.
10. The existing rear elevation has high level windows. Based on the information
    before me, these are part of the original design and, given their height, reflect the
    simple equestrian character of the building.
11. Given the above, I find that the special interest and significance of the listed
    building to be primarily associated with its historic and architectural interests as a
    good illustration of mid-19th century vernacular ancillary domestic equestrian
    architecture. Important contributors in these regards which are pertinent to the
    appeal are its are its traditional construction and materials, surviving historic fabric
    and detailing and legible retained functional architectural style.
12. As indicated by its naming, physical arrangement and proximity, the stables
    building is located within the setting of Adsdean House. As set out above, this
    substantial country house is separately Grade II listed, constructed in about 1850
    and altered and enlarged by Norman Shaw in 1877, with later internal alteration by
    Ernest George. I find that the special interest and significance of the listed building
    to be primarily associated with its Gothic architectural composition and evolution.
    Important contributors in this regard are its flint elevations with stone dressings,
    slate roof, mullioned and transomed windows, garden front and entrance front.
13. Its setting is principally the large grounds around the property, alluding to its
    country house estate nature. As et out above, the majority of the service buildings
    are now separate independent residential properties and significant works have
    been undertaken in domesticating the other elements of courtyard. The
    relationship between them has therefore evolved over time. However, these
    original outbuildings, comprising of the courtyard service buildings that includes
    the appeal site, also inform the original character of Adsdean House through
    complementary design and materiality with some original character remaining.
    They reflect the status of Adsdean House and help ensure that this is appreciated.
    Therefore, this listed building’s immediate setting also, in part, supports and
    contributes in a positive way to its special interest and significance.
14. The proposed works entail the extension of the existing 1 bed unit into the former
    stables structure in order to create a 3 bed unit. This would entail the moving of the
    existing staircase and insertion of mezzanine floor. Existing stud walls would be
    removed and new ones installed. New windows and an external door to the rear
    elevation would be inserted.
15. The internal work, namely the removal/insertion of stud walls, the moving of the
    staircase and insertion/extension of the mezzanine floor, by being a standalone

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006266


        structure not requiring joists and unnecessary damage to the walls, would not lead
        to a loss of historic fabric nor compromising of the original character of the
        building.
16. A new window into the rear projection, serving the living room, would be inserted
    into a cement rendered element, apart from the main characterful element of the
    building. Little historic fabric such as stone quoins would be lost, and this would
    have no harmful effect on the character of the building. Moreover3, it is noted that
    these woks have previously been granted permission.
17. The insertion of three windows and a doorway would however lead to fenestration
    on two levels on the rear elevation of the main part of the stables building. The
    consequential level of fenestration on two levels and doorway would domesticate
    the existing rear elevation and complicate its previous simple character.
18. This amount of fenestration would result in the rear elevation having the
    appearance of a dwelling. This would diminish the equestrian character of the
    building and compromise any understanding of its original use. Moreover, whilst
    not effecting rare or highly decorative fabric, these insertions, directly into the
    original stone, in addition to the new windows serving bedroom 3 and the first floor
    bathroom, would also lead to a loss of historic fabric. This would also be the case
    for the proposed insertion of a doorway in between the proposed pantry/utility area
    and new en-suite.
19. I conclude that the proposed works would fail to preserve the special architectural
    and historic interest of the Grade II listed building, The Stables of Adsdean House
    to the North West of the House, and, in accordance with the Framework, result in
    harm to its significance.
20. This domestication and harm to the original character of the building would also
    undermine the connection between the service buildings and Adsdean House.
    Whilst, as set out above, significant domestication is already evident through
    additions to the buildings as a group, the proposed works would further weaken
    the original character of the service buildings and their contribution to the way
    Adsdean House is experienced. In this respect therefore I find that the proposed
    development would not preserve the setting of this listed building. In accordance
    with the Framework, it would therefore amount to harm to the significance of this
    designated heritage asset.
21. Given the existing works to the service buildings and fairly localised nature of the
    works relative to the building and setting of Adsdean House, I find the harm to both
    heritage assets to be, individually and cumulatively, at a low level of harm but
    nevertheless is of considerable importance and weight.
22. There would be some economic benefits brought about through the investment
    into the property and the construction phase. Also, social benefits would be gained
    through improvements to the local housing stock and standard of accommodation.
23. There is evidently no prospect of utilizing the building for its original purpose,
    however it is not demonstrated that windows on both front and rear are required
    nor the only way to provide minimum standards of daylight, ventilation and safe
    residential use. A direct access to the rear would be useful, but the existing

3
    SDNP/22/01141/FUL & SDNP/22/01283/LIS


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6006266


         dwelling has no such access, and I observed that the existing path around the side
         to the rear is not excessively inconvenient. Whilst it is evident that the stable bock
         is in some need of repair and refurbishment, it is not demonstrated that this
         conversion scheme is the only way to secure the long-term reuse of the
         vacant/underused building nor enable energy efficiency and low carbon heating
         measures to be employed.
24. The Framework indicates that, when considering the impact on the significance of
    a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation. This is irrespective of whether any potential harm amounts to
    positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. On balance,
    in giving considerable importance and weight to the harm to the significance of this
    designated heritage asset, I find that this would not be outweighed by the public
    benefits that the proposal would generate.
25. Consequently, the harm identified to the significance of the designated heritage
    assets has not been supported by clear and convincing justification. The works
    therefore would conflict with the statutory presumptions set out in section 16(2) of
    the Act and fail to satisfy the historic environment conservation and enhancement
    policies of the Framework. To the extent that they are a material consideration,
    there is also conflict with Policies SD5, SD12 and SD13 of the South Downs
    National Park Local Plan 2014-33 (2019) (LP) insofar as these collectively require
    high quality design that conserves or enhances the historic environment including
    the significance of listed buildings.
26. LP Policy SD25 is a strategic policy relating to development within and outside
    settlements, and as such is not determinative in this matter.
27. LP Policy SD1 refers to development proposals and planning applications and as
    such, it is not determinative to this listed building consent application.
    Nevertheless, as the relevant authority I must seek to further the purposes of the
    National Park. One of its statuary purposes is to conserve or enhance the cultural
    heritage of the South Downs National Park. The Together Now for Nature, Climate
    and People Partnership Management Plan 2026-31 includes listed buildings as
    part of the cultural heritage of the National Park.
28. Given my findings above, the proposal would not conserve nor enhance the
    cultural heritage of the National Park, and as such would not accord with the
    Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 in this regard.
Other Matters
29. The site is within the 12 km zone of influence (ZoI) of the Singleton and Cocking
    Tunnels Special Area of Conservation (SAC). The qualifying features of the SAC
    include Barbastelle and Bechstein’s bats, so the ZoI takes into account matters
    including important flight lines and functionally linked habitats for commuting and
    foraging.
30. Mitigation measures have been put forward as part of the proposals4. As I am
    dismissing the appeal for other reasons, I am not pursuing this matter further
    because it could not lead me to a different decision.


4
    Set out in section 6 of the submitted Bat Emergence Survey Report by Lizard Landscape Design & Ecology August 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 4
Appeal Decision 6006266


31. I note the procedural matters raised by the appellant; however, these are matters
    for local government accountability. Even if the pre-application advice provided
    was based upon the similar scheme, this is an informal view and I have found
    harm based upon my observations and the proposal before me.
Conclusion
32. For the above reasons and having regard to all other matters raised I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

B Phillips
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
