Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006181
Rose-in-the-vale, Road From Junction West Of Rose In The Vale To Trevean,
Kestle Mill, Newquay, Cornwall TR8 4PT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Nicholas Senior against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/04038.
•    The development proposed is to convert a redundant stable block into a 3 bedroomed annexe to
     serve the existing dwelling house.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to convert a redundant
       stable block into a 3 bedroomed annexe to serve the existing dwelling house at
       Rose-in-the-vale, Road From Junction West Of Rose In The Vale To Trevean,
       Kestle Mill, Newquay, Cornwall TR8 4PT in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref PA25/04038, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Nicholas Senior against Cornwall
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (Framework) was published. The main parties have had the opportunity to
       comment on the implications of this change, and no parties will have been
       prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
Background and Main Issues
4.     The Council’s second reason for refusal related to a lack of mitigation for adverse
       effects to the integrity of the Penhale Dunes Special Area of Conservation (SAC).
       However, following the determination of the application, the Council have stated
       that the Council will no longer require mitigation measures in respect of the SAC
       for this type of proposal as Natural England have concluded that contributions
       secured to date will provide sufficient mitigation.
5.     As such, the Council no longer seek to defend the second reason for refusal. On
       the evidence before me including the Council’s European Sites Mitigation
       Supplementary Planning Document 2021 and noting that if the proposal relates to
       annexe accommodation to serve the existing dwelling house it does not result in
       an additional housing unit, I see no reason to disagree.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006181


6.     Consequently, the main issues are:
           •    whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposal, having
                particular regard to the local development strategy; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
Reasons
Location
7.     The proposal is described on the application form as an annexe. However, the
       Council contends that, due to the scale and nature of the proposed
       accommodation, it is tantamount to a new dwelling.
8.     The local development strategy is set out in Policy 2 of the Cornwall Local Plan
       Strategic Policies 2010-2030 (LP). It seeks to maintain the dispersed development
       pattern of Cornwall, providing homes and jobs based on the role and function of
       each place.
9.     LP Policy 3 sets out a hierarchical strategy for the delivery of new housing based
       on the role and function of places, directing housing to settlements. LP Policy 7
       supports housing proposals within the countryside where it is shown that there are
       certain defined special circumstances.
10. The appeal site consists of the main house, known as Rose-in-the-vale, and a
    separate building which is a disused stable block and the subject of the proposal.
    This building is stated by the appellant to be 26m from the main house. The
    proposal would result in a structure which includes a kitchen/living space, 3
    bedrooms and bathrooms so would have all the facilities required for day-to-day
    private domestic existence. It would, therefore, have the distinctive characteristics
    of a dwellinghouse. The appeal site is in the open countryside where new,
    independent dwellings would not be permitted. A proposal for a new independent
    dwelling would result, subject to certain circumstances, in conflict with LP Policies
    2, 3, and 7.
11. However, a self-contained annexe does not necessarily result in a separate
    planning unit from the main dwelling. It is the manner of occupation and the degree
    of functional interdependence that is determinative.
12. The development proposed is an ‘annexe to serve the existing dwelling house’.
    Nevertheless, the description ‘annexe’ alone would be insufficient to prevent use of
    the proposal as a separate dwellinghouse. However, a planning condition could be
    imposed to control the use to one that was part and parcel of the main house.
    Given that this is how the use is described by the appellant, with a functional
    relationship providing care and multi-generational family support between the
    occupiers of the annexe and the main house, such a condition would be
    reasonable.
13. My attention has not been drawn to any particular development plan policies
    relating to the provision of annexe accommodation. However, it has been drawn to
    the Council’s Annexe Guidance Note (AGN) which sets out a number of differing
    considerations for annexe development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006181


14. I have carefully considered the submissions in respect of the specific needs of the
    appellant’s family, and I recognise the importance that the proposal plays in
    meeting these needs. The proposal would provide long-term, multi-generational
    living accommodation on a single level. I am told, and have no reason to disagree,
    that the proposal would provide a secure, stable and dignified living environment
    that allows the family to stay together whilst maintaining a level of necessary
    privacy.
15. As such, whilst the proposed annexe would be self-contained, the household will
    operate as a single unit, with shared meals, support and maintenance, shared
    utilities and interdependence and is within the same ownership. Moreover, the
    particular reasons for requiring the annexe accommodation may not be
    permanent. However, future owners of the house may be attracted to the property
    because they have similar needs. In the meantime, it would remain available to the
    current owners for accommodation purposes associated with the main dwelling.
16. I observed that the appeal building is in close sight and well related to the host
    dwelling with easy access and no intervening boundary treatments. While minimal
    substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate why the desired
    accommodation could not be provided by an extension to the house, the
    conversion of an existing building, albeit it would be substantially enlarged, is a
    reasonable solution which utilises an existing building. Moreover, the proposal
    would be of a scale subservient to the main dwelling and despite proposed
    planting, would not result in formal sub-division of garden areas.
17. The AGN also indicates that annexe proposals that include more than one
    bedroom will normally be refused, unless there is compelling reason for a second
    bedroom. A reasonable need for 3 bedrooms has been outlined by the appellant,
    based on their specific family dynamic, clinical condition and the future
    requirement for live-in care.
18. However, the proposal has an existing vehicular access separate to the main
    dwelling, and appears outside, although nearby the domestic curtilage.
    Nevertheless, even if not all of the criteria of the AGN is met, the status of the AGN
    is unclear and, other than discussion about the subdivision of dwellings and
    energy requirements, it does not appear to relate to or explain any particular
    development plan policy. Lack of meeting all AGN criteria does not therefore
    demonstrate how a proposal would result in a conflict with the development plan.
19. The main house has already been recently extended to incorporate an annexe.
    The approved plans show this annexe to have 2 bedrooms, a study and a
    bathroom on the ground floor, with living, dining and kitchen on the first floor.
    Nevertheless, I have no reason to doubt that level single storey accommodation as
    proposed is a medical necessity as is put to me. Moreover, given the family needs
    put to me, I see no reason why the existence of an existing annexe would reduce a
    need for the proposal itself.
20. Consequently, in the particular circumstance of this case, the proposal would
    result in annexe accommodation in use as part of the main dwelling and not a new
    dwelling. The appeal site is therefore a suitable location for the proposal, having
    particular regard to the local development strategy. There would be no conflict with
    LP Policies 1, 2, 3 or 7, the purposes of which I have previously outlined. The
    proposal would also accord with Policy C1 of the Climate Development Plan


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006181


       Document 2023 (CDPD) which seeks, amongst other things to limit new dwellings
       in the countryside.
Character and appearance
21. The appeal building is a simple utilitarian stable structure, which is not uncommon
    within the countryside. Whilst it is experienced as part of the rural character of the
    area, it has a reasonably close spatial and visual relationship with the main
    dwelling. As such and given the lack of intervening boundary to the existing
    domestic curtilage, basic appearance, and use of the stables which I am told has
    served a domestic/equestrian function for over 25years with associated domestic
    paraphernalia, the building and appeal site does not strongly contribute to the rural
    character of the area.
22. Despite the proposed extension of the building and increased scale, the proposal
    would introduce new high quality facing materials to the building which are
    appropriate to the rural area, and it would remain visually subservient to the host
    dwelling. Whilst the proposal would result in a building of more domestic
    residential appearance, this would not appear as an entirely unexpected or
    incompatible element in the landscape given the proximity of Rose-in-the-vale.
23. An appropriate landscaping scheme to reflect the rural character of the area and
    indigenous planting would, in this location, successfully assimilate the proposal
    into the rural character of the surrounding area. Therefore, it would not appear out
    of place or as an incongruous urbanisation of the countryside.
24. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would not harm the character and
    appearance of the area and would accord with LP Policies 12, 23 and CEDPD
    Policy C1. These policies seek, amongst other things, to achieve high quality,
    sustainable and inclusive design that maintains the natural character of the area.
Conditions
25. The Main Parties have provided a list of suggested conditions in the event of the
    appeal being allowed, which I have assessed and, where necessary, amended
    wording with regard to the advice provided in the Framework and Planning
    Practice Guidance.
26. Aside from the standard commencement condition, a condition outlining the
    approved plans is necessary in the interests of certainty.
27. A condition is also necessary to ensure that an appropriate landscaping scheme is
    provided and implemented in the interests of the character and appearance of the
    area. This condition is required to be pre-commencement to ensure landscaping is
    provided at the earliest opportunity. The condition suggested by the Council
    includes detailed information requirements. However, I have omitted these so that
    the parties can agree the precise requirements based upon relevant guidance and
    site circumstances at the time that the details are agreed.
28. A condition is necessary to ensure appropriate external materials are utilised prior
    to their installation in the interests of the character and appearance of the area. A
    condition is also necessary to ensure that appropriate foul and surface water
    drainage is provided prior to occupation in the interests of the environment and
    flood risk.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006181


29. In the interests of biodiversity, a condition is necessary to ensure that proposed
    biodiversity enhancements are undertaken in accordance with the relevant
    elements of the Biodiversity Enhancement Plan.
30. A condition is necessary to ensure that an independent dwelling is not created.
    However, it is not necessary or reasonable to refer to ownership, or indeed shared
    access and curtilage as an occupancy condition would suffice to ensure that an
    independent dwelling is not created.
31. Moreover, given the proposal relates to occupation by a single family, the
    requirement to maintain a register of names is also not reasonable. In view of their
    powers of investigation under the Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as
    amended) the Council have the ability to enforce occupancy conditions and issue
    a Planning Contravention Notice under s171C if required.
32. Policy DM62(B) of the Framework outlines that national permitted development
    rights should not be restricted unless there is clear justification to do so. In this
    case, whilst the proposal is in a rural location, given my findings on its effect on
    character and appearance, I find no such justification to remove permitted
    development rights.
Conclusion
33. For the reasons given I have found that the proposal accords with the
    development plan, read as a whole. No material considerations indicate that a
    decision should be taken otherwise than in accordance with the development plan.
    Therefore, the appeal is allowed.




S Harrington
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006181


Schedule

Conditions


    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
       date of this decision.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out, excluding any
       references to landscaping, in accordance with the following plans: location Plan
       PP-14055858v1; Proposed Site Plan TQRQM25149131852783; NAS01 001
       REV A; NAS01 002 REV A.

    3) No development shall commence until full details of hard and soft landscape
       works have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
       authority. These works shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
       details prior to the occupation of the annexe hereby permitted.

         All planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the approved scheme of landscaping
         shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding seasons following the
         occupation of the building or the completion of the development, whichever is
         the sooner.

         Any trees or plants which within a period of five years from the completion of the
         development die, are removed or become seriously damaged or diseased shall
         be replaced in the next planting season with others of a similar size and species
         as those originally planted.

         Notice shall be given to the local planning authority when the approved scheme
         has been completed.

    4) Prior to their installation, details of the materials to be used on the external
       surfaces (doors/windows/lintels/sills/rendering/cladding, roof covering) of the
       annexe hereby permitted shall have been submitted to and approved in writing
       by the local planning authority. The development shall be carried out in
       accordance with the approved details and retained as such thereafter.

    5) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the installation of
       a system to serve the development for the disposal of foul and surface water
       drainage has been completed in accordance with details which shall first have
       been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
       details shall include a programme for maintaining the system if required. The
       system shall be retained and maintained thereafter in accordance with the
       approved details.

    6) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the biodiversity
       enhancements (namely bat tube, bird boxes, and bee bricks) as detailed within
       the Biodiversity Enhancement Plan dated March 2026 are installed in
       accordance with the Plan and retained thereafter in perpetuity.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006181


    7) The development hereby permitted shall only be occupied by members of the
       family or non-paying guests of the occupiers of the dwelling currently known as
       Rose-in-the-vale and shall not be used at any time as a separate residential unit
       of accommodation.




                                           **** End of conditions ****




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        7
