Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 June 2026
by Timothy Parton BA(Hons) MPLAN MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006636
42 Prince Drive, Oadby LE2 4SB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Hussein Essajee (Vexford Homes Limited) against the decision of Oadby and
     Wigston Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00301/COU.
•    The development is described on the application form as the ‘change of use from dwellinghouse
     Class C3 to Childrens Care Home Class C2’.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal in meeting local housing need; and
           •    whether the proposal would provide adequate living conditions for future
                occupiers with particular regard to internal space.
Reasons
Meeting an identified need
3.     Policy 11 of the Borough of Oadby and Wigston Local Plan 2011-2031 (adopted
       2019) (the Plan) states that all residential development must contribute towards
       delivering a mix of dwelling types, tenures and sizes that meet the identified needs
       (and / or demand) of the communities within the Borough. Furthermore, it states all
       new residential development proposals must demonstrate how they contribute to
       achieving the identified needs as set out within the Housing and Economic
       Development Needs Assessment (2017) (HEDNA). Policy 11 also states that the
       Council will support the development of specialist care accommodation that meets
       an identified need and is proposed in appropriate sustainable locations.
4.     Specialist care accommodation is included within Class C2 (residential institutions)
       of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended). The
       proposal is located within an established residential area, where there is good
       access to surrounding services and facilities by a variety of transport modes. The
       proposal is therefore in an appropriate sustainable location.
5.     I have been referred to recent appeal decisions which, notwithstanding their
       individual circumstances, have interpreted the requirements of Policy 11 in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006636


       differing ways. Appeal decision APP/L2440/W/24/3355109 found that Policy 11,
       when read as a whole, requires proposals for specialist accommodation to meet
       an identified need within the Borough. In contrast, decision
       APP/L2440/W/24/3336468 concluded that the policy does not specify that the
       identified need must be local.
6.     Having regard to those decisions, I find that Policy 11 must be read as a whole. On
       that basis, the requirement for all residential development to contribute towards the
       delivery of a mix of dwelling types to meet the identified needs of communities
       within the Borough is determinative in this case.
7.     The HEDNA makes no specific reference to Class C2 uses relating to the care of
       children. Consequently, other evidence is required to demonstrate a need for the
       proposal. In relation to local needs the appellant has submitted documents
       produced by the Council and Leicestershire County Council (LCC), including the
       ‘Community Health and Wellbeing Plan 2024–27’ (November 2024) which
       identifies current local concerns relating to child vulnerability and deprivation, and
       uses information from NHS England to seek to address health inequalities. This
       information recognises that looked-after children and care leavers are a priority
       group with higher support needs. The ‘Leicestershire Joint Strategic Needs
       Assessment 2022–2025: Demography’ (August 2024) notes that Oadby and
       Wigston has a comparatively high proportion of residents aged under 19.
8.     In relation to wider county needs, the appellant has submitted several LCC
       produced documents, including the ‘Children’s Social Care – Placement Market
       Position and Sufficiency Statement 2024-27’ (September 2024), the ‘Medium Term
       Financial Strategy (2026/27– 2029/30) for Children and Family Services’ (January
       2026), and a Leicester City Council report ‘Placement Sufficiency for Children
       Looked After and Care Leavers’ (8 April 2025). Collectively, these documents set
       out how LCC intend to accommodate countywide needs for children looked after
       and the challenges it faces, confirm that demand continues to increase for
       children’s care services, and state that, despite a preference that accommodation
       for looked after children should be provided within the local authority area, the use
       of out-of-area placements has increased.
9.     The appellant has also submitted the ‘Leicestershire and Rutland Safeguarding
       Children Partnership Annual Report 2023/24’, which provides further evidence
       regarding the number of children in care and the anticipated future demand for
       children's services across the county.
10. In relation to national needs, the appellant has submitted documents produced by
    the Department for Education. ‘Children looked after in England including
    adoptions’ (26 November 2025) demonstrates a continuing need to maintain and
    expand children's residential provision and reiterates a preference for
    accommodation to be located within the area where the need arises. Furthermore,
    the ‘Regional Care Co-operatives’ policy statement (4 February 2026) confirms
    that the children’s social care market continues to face longstanding sufficiency
    pressures.
11. Taken together, this evidence provides context regarding local, countywide and
    national demand for children's care services. It identifies existing and future
    pressures on placement provision and supports the need for additional children's
    residential accommodation at county and national levels, often highlighting a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006636


       preference for accommodation to be located within the area where the need
       arises. However, it does not identify a need for the proposed use specific to
       communities within Oadby and Wigston Borough.
12. The Council has submitted an email from the Service Manager within LCC’s
    Children and Family Services, dated April 2026, which confirms that there are
    currently no children from Oadby and Wigston Borough awaiting placement in a
    children’s residential home. This evidence relates directly to the Borough and
    represents the most up-to-date information before me.
13. Consequently, on the basis of all the evidence before me, the need for the
    proposed use within Oadby and Wigston Borough has not been identified. The
    proposal would therefore conflict with Policy 11 of the Plan which, amongst other
    things, seeks to ensure proposals such as the appeal scheme demonstrably meet
    the identified needs of communities within the Borough.
14. Although not included within the reason for refusal, the Council’s Statement of
    Case raises concerns regarding the loss of the existing bungalow from the
    Borough’s C3 housing stock. While the proposal would result in the loss of a Class
    C3 dwelling, Policy 2 of the Plan and evidence on local housing needs produced to
    date for the emerging Plan, identifies a significant need for additional housing
    within the Borough.
15. I note the parties disagree as to whether the property should be described as a
    bungalow. However, that matter is not determinative. The evidence before me
    demonstrates that no identified need exists within the Borough for the proposed
    Class C2 use, whereas there is a clear and significant need for all types of Class
    C3 housing.
16. Consequently, on the basis of the evidence before me, I find the proposal would
    not meet local housing need. It would therefore conflict with Policy 2 of the Plan
    which, amongst other things, seeks to meet the housing needs of the Borough.
Living conditions
17. The proposal would provide accommodation for three children, in addition to four
    staff during the day and two at night. The proposal would provide 3 children’s
    bedrooms, a kitchen, utility, garage, common area, learning area, games room, a
    separate toilet, two shower rooms and a bathroom, and staff quarters which
    includes a bedroom / office, dressing room, ensuite, and separate office.
18. Although no sections have been provided, from my site visit I observed that the
    pitched roof would result in only a negligible reduction in the usable floor area of
    the first-floor bedrooms. The proposed bedrooms would provide satisfactory levels
    of space and headroom and would comply with the Nationally Described Space
    Standards (NDSS). Accordingly, they would provide suitable living accommodation
    for the proposed future occupiers.
19. In respect of staff facilities, and having regard to both daytime and overnight
    staffing arrangements, I am satisfied that the accommodation and workspace
    provided would adequately meet the operational requirements of the proposed
    use.
20. More generally, the proposal would provide a substantial amount of internal space,
    including appropriately sized rooms, a functional layout, multiple toilet and washing

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006636


       facilities, and a range of dedicated living and activity spaces. Taken together,
       these features would provide a satisfactory standard of living conditions for future
       occupants and staff. Furthermore, apart from short periods during change overs,
       there would be at most seven people present at the property at any one time.
       Given the existing size and potential occupation of the property in its current use,
       this would not necessarily represent an intensification in the number of people
       using the property.
21. The proposal would therefore comply with Policy 6 of the Plan and the Residential
    Development Supplementary Planning Document (2019) (SPD) which, amongst
    other things and taken together, requires new development to provide high quality
    design, protect local amenity, and provide sufficient space for future occupiers to
    live comfortably and have adequate levels of amenity.
22. Furthermore, Policy 11 of the Plan and the SPD require proposals for change of
    use to take account of the Government’s Technical Housing Standards (2015),
    including the NDSS. The evidence before me demonstrates that the proposal
    would meet the relevant NDSS requirements. Consequently, the proposal would
    comply with Policy 11 of the Plan and the SPD in this regard.
23. The Council’s reason for refusal refers to Policy 44 of the Plan, which relates to
    conserving and enhancing the landscape and character of the area. As the
    proposal would not involve external alterations and no concerns have been raised
    regarding its effect on the character or appearance of the area, Policy 44 is not
    determinative of the matters before me.
Other Matters
24. I have had regard to Article 8 of the Human Rights Act (HRA) 1998, Article 3 of the
    United Nations (UN) Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 19 of the UN
    Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Public Sector
    Equality Duty (PSED) under the Equality Act 2010. Disability and age are relevant
    protected characteristics to which the PSED applies. These rights are engaged in
    reaching my decision. However, they are qualified rights and interference may be
    justified where in the public interest. The concept of proportionality is key.
25. The evidence before me demonstrates that there is no identified need for the
    proposal in a community in the Borough. The harm associated with the loss of the
    Class C3 dwelling would therefore outweigh the benefits in terms of eliminating
    discrimination against persons with the protected characteristics of disability and
    age, advancing equality of opportunity for those persons and fostering good
    relations between them and others.
Conclusion
26. Although there would be compliance with some aspects of the development plan, I
    give greater weight to the lack of identified need for the proposal in a community in
    the Borough and the loss of a C3 dwelling. For the reasons given above, I
    conclude that the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole
    and there are no material considerations that would outweigh that conflict.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006636



Timothy Parton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
