Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by A James BSc (Hons) MA MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006868
The Grange, Church Street, Hartfield, East Sussex TN7 4AG
•   The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
    1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr James Willis against the decision of Wealden District Council.
•   The application reference is WD/2024/2692/LBR.
•   The works proposed are described as ‘retention of existing ceiling height in ‘Attic Room B’ and
    reinstatement of lath and plaster ceiling. Removal of the existing plasterboard ceiling; trimming of
    original collars/ceiling joints to install along with new timbers to suit the raised ceiling level; and the
    re-construction the ceiling with lath and plaster.’


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. As the appeal relates to a listed building and the site lies within a conservation
   area, I have had special regard to sections 16(2) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
   Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
Main Issue
3. The main issue is whether the appeal scheme preserves a Grade II listed building,
   known as ‘The Grange’ (Ref: 1028297) and any features of special architectural or
   historic interest that it possesses.
Reasons
4. The Grange is a two storey, timber framed dwelling, with attic, which was formerly
   the rectory for the adjacent church. Although the listing description states that The
   Grange dates back to the 17th century, it appears from the evidence before me,
   which includes historic mapping, that the dwelling dates back to at least the end of
   the 16th century. The building has been subject to numerous alterations and
   additions over the centuries. This appeal relates to the eastern wing of the building,
   which was constructed in the 18th century. The eastern wing is two storeys high
   with attic and is faced with cement. The roof of the building has recently been re-
   tiled. There are three small dormer windows within the front-facing roof slope,
   which contain modern, timber casement windows.
5. Based on the evidence before me and my site visit, I find that the listed building’s
   special interest, insofar as is relevant to this appeal, is derived from its historic and
   architectural interests, as an illustration of domestic architecture from around the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006868


     16th century. The building’s surviving historic fabric, its timber frame and presence
     of traditional materials make important contributions in these regards.
6. This appeal relates to a room known as ‘Attic Room B’, which is located in the
   eastern wing of the building. It is believed to have been used as servant’s
   accommodation, prior to the floor being raised around the early-to-mid-19th century.
   The raising of the floor has reduced the available headroom in this room, which has
   affected the room’s useability and functionality.
7. This appeal seeks consent to raise the ceiling in Attic Room B, in order to provide
   additional headroom and improve the usability of this space. The appellant has
   removed the historic ceiling collars and inserted new ceiling collars at a higher
   level. However, the modern timber is different in colour to the historic timbers, it is
   also machine cut and lacks the irregularity, patina of age and evidential value of the
   historic timbers.
8. The appellant argues that the historic timbers were bowed, structurally unsound
   and beyond viable repair and that replacement was required on safety grounds.
   The historic timbers exhibit irregularities, which are consistent with their age. I also
   observed signs of woodworm damage and rot. However, there is no compelling
   evidence before me of an active woodworm infestation. There is also no
   substantive evidence why the historic timbers could not have been repaired or
   supported in order to address the structural and health and safety concerns.
   Accordingly, I find no clear and convincing justification for their removal.
9. The proposal description refers to the trimming of the historic timbers. However, the
   appellant advises in their Statement of Case that the historic timbers would be
   refitted at a higher height but would not be trimmed. Given the narrowing of the roof
   at a higher level, I am not convinced that the historic timbers could be reinstated at
   a higher level without being trimmed. Trimming the historic timbers would result in a
   small loss of historic fabric, which would harm the special interest of the listed
   building. Regardless of whether the timbers are trimmed or not, there are limited
   details before me of exactly where the historic timbers would be sited, how they
   would sit alongside the modern and existing fabric, methods of fixing and any repair
   work required. Moreover, the historic timbers would be reinstated in a different
   position, which would not be authentic and would affect the historic integrity and
   legibility of the listed building.
10. The appellant has removed the lath and plaster from the ceiling and internal dormer
    cheeks. While the appeal documents refer to the removal of the existing,
    unauthorised plasterboard ceiling, there was no ceiling in place at the time of my
    site visit. I observed on my site visit that the internal dormer cheeks and some of
    the walls within the room are currently finished with plasterboard. The appellant
    argues that the existing lath and plaster ceiling was sagging and in a poor condition
    and further compromised the available headroom in this room. While the previous
    lath and plaster ceiling appeared to be in need of some intervention, there is no
    clear and convincing justification before me why it was necessary to remove the
    ceiling in its entirety or the lath and plaster from the adjacent dormer cheeks and
    walls.
11. The proposed lath and plaster ceiling would utilise traditional materials and, in that
    respect, would be sympathetic to the character of the listed building. However, as it
    would be installed at a higher level, it would not accurately reinstate the former


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006868


     ceiling arrangement. While the proposed headroom would be similar to historic
     headroom levels before the floor was raised, the spatial characteristics and
     proportions of the room would be altered by changes to the positioning of the
     ceiling and would therefore not be historically accurate.
12. I have had regard to the appellant’s concern that reversing the works could cause
    further disturbance to the historic fabric. However, this is a consequence of the
    works having been carried out without listed building consent and does not, in itself,
    justify their retention. Although reinstatement may present practical difficulties, that
    does not overcome the absence of clear and convincing justification for the harmful
    works, nor does it demonstrate that the appeal scheme represents the least
    harmful or most appropriate conservation-led solution.
13. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal scheme fails to preserve
    the special interest of the listed building. Given the nature and extent of the works, I
    find the harm to the significance of the listed building to be ‘less than substantial’
    and at the lower end of the scale. However, this should not be equated with a less
    than substantial planning objection and is of considerable importance and weight.
    Paragraph 212 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
    advises that great weight should be given to an asset’s conservation. Paragraph
    215 states that any harm should be weighed against the public benefits of the
    proposal, including where appropriate, securing the asset’s optimum viable use.
14. The appeal scheme would result in investment into the property, which has a small
    economic benefit, which I give limited weight in my decision as a public benefit. The
    proposal would provide additional headroom for the attic room, which would
    improve the functionality and usability of this room. However, this is primarily a
    private benefit and I give this argument limited weight in my decision. For the
    reasons set out above, I do not find that the proposal restores the original
    proportions of the room and find no public benefit in this regard.
15. The appellant argues that the removal of the plasterboard is a significant benefit.
    However, the plasterboard on the ceiling has already been removed and there is no
    compelling evidence before me that other plasterboard within the room has consent
    and I therefore give this argument very limited weight in my decision. Furthermore,
    there is no substantive evidence before me that the optimum viable use of the
    asset as a dwelling would cease in the absence of the proposal. As a result, I do
    not find the proposal necessary to secure the viability or long-term conservation of
    the building.
16. Overall, I give the public benefits limited weight in my decision. Consequently, in
    attributing great weight to the harm that I have identified to the significance of the
    designated heritage asset, I find that there are insufficient public benefits arising
    from the appeal scheme to outweigh this harm.
17. Given the above, the proposal would fail to satisfy the requirements of the Act and
    the historic environment policies of the Framework. The proposal would also
    conflict with Policy SPO2 of the Wealden District Core Strategy Local Plan, adopted
    February 2013. This policy among other things requires that the intrinsic quality of
    the historic environment is protected.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006868


Other Matters
18. The appeal site lies within the Hartfield Conservation Area (CA) and forms part of
    the setting of a Grade I listed building, known as ‘The Parish Church of St Mary’
    (Ref: 1192522). Given that the appeal scheme relates to internal works only, it
    would have no effect on the significance of the CA or the setting of the adjacent
    listed building.
19. While I acknowledge the support for the proposal by the Parish Council, this does
    not alter my findings set out above.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.

A James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
