Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by K Lancaster BA (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006352
55 Bradford Crescent, Gilesgate, Durham DH1 1HL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Sugar Tree Limited against Durham County Council.
•    The application Ref is DM/26/00072/FPA.
•    The development proposed is the change of use from dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a flexible use
     permission as a HMO (Use Class C4) and a dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) under the provisions of
     Class V of Part 3 of the GPDO including single storey rear extension, cycle parking and bin storage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use
       from dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a flexible use permission as a HMO (Use
       Class C4) and a dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) under the provisions of Class V of
       Part 3 of the GPDO including single storey rear extension, cycle parking and bin
       storage at 55 Bradford Crescent, Durham, DH1 1HL in accordance with the terms
       of the application, Ref DM/26/00072/FPA, subject to the conditions in the attached
       schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
3.     The appeal was submitted following the Council’s failure to give notice of its
       decision within the prescribed period. The Council’s initial Statement of Case was
       ambiguous and so did not clearly indicate its position in relation to the appeal.
       Accordingly, pursuant to my powers under Regulation 8 of the Town and Country
       Planning (Appeals) (Written Representations Procedure) (England) Regulations
       2009, I invited further representations from the Council.
4.     The Council responded to confirm that the development would have been
       recommended for refusal, the reasons given being that it would result in
       inadequate parking provision, unacceptable impacts on neighbouring and future
       occupier amenity arising from the scale and design of the extension, and concerns
       regarding the safety of the internal layout and means of escape.
5.     The appellant has raised concerns that my request for further submissions
       resulted in procedural unfairness. However, following receipt of the Council's
       response, the appellant was afforded an opportunity to comment on the additional

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006352


       information before I reached my decision. I am therefore satisfied that both parties
       have had a reasonable and fair opportunity to present their respective cases. In
       these circumstances, I find that no material prejudice has arisen, and I have taken
       all submissions into account in determining the appeal.
6.     The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
       Order 2015 ordinarily permits the change of use of a dwellinghouse (Use Class
       C3) to a small House in Multiple Occupation (Use Class C4). However, the Council
       confirmed an Article 4 Direction, which came into effect on 17 September 2016,
       removing these permitted development rights. As such, express planning
       permission is required for the proposed use as a Class C4 HMO, and the proposal
       falls to be assessed against the relevant provisions of the development plan and
       other material considerations.
Main Issues
7.     The main issues are:
           •    The effect of the proposed development on highway safety, with particular
                regard to parking provision;
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
                neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to outlook and daylight; and
           •    Whether the proposed development would provide satisfactory living
                conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to fire safety.
Reasons
8.     The appeal site, 55 Bradford Crescent is a two-storey, end-terrace property. It
       currently has a kitchen, lounge/dining room and WC at ground floor level with three
       bedrooms and a bathroom to the first floor. The property is served by a large
       garden to the rear.
9.     The proposal seeks approval for the flexible use of the property as a
       dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) and small house in multiple occupation (HMO) (Use
       Class C4). The ground floor of the property will be reconfigured and extended to
       provide an open plan kitchen/living/dining room and two bedrooms. The first-floor
       layout will accommodate two bedrooms, a study and a bathroom. It also includes a
       single storey rear extension.
Highway Safety and Parking Provision
10. Policy 16(3)(d) of the County Durham Plan, adopted 2020 (the CDP) states that
    proposals for HMOs will only be permitted where the quantity of cycle and car
    parking provided has regard to the Council's adopted Parking and Accessibility
    Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).
11. The appeal property does not benefit from any off-street parking, and none is
    proposed as part of the development. Whilst this falls short of the parking
    standards set out in the SPD, it is not unusual in the context of Bradford Crescent,
    where many properties similarly rely upon on-street parking. The street is
    characterised by relatively wide carriageways and footways, and on-street parking
    is an established feature of the area. During my site visit, vehicles were parked on
    both sides of the street without apparent obstruction to the free flow of traffic or to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006352


         pedestrian movement. In addition, secure cycle parking would be provided within
         the rear garden, offering an alternative and sustainable mode of transport for
         future occupiers.
12. I have had regard to third-party concerns regarding existing parking pressures in
    the locality, together with the minutes of the County Council's Highways
    Committee meeting of 10 November 2025, which referred to concerns about
    vehicle speeds on Bradford Crescent and surrounding streets. However, the
    evidence before me does not demonstrate that the development would materially
    worsen those circumstances.
13. Whilst the proposal might generate additional parking demand compared with a
    single household, there is no substantive evidence that any increase in on-street
    parking would lead to conditions that would prejudice highway safety. Significantly,
    despite the proposal not meeting the parking standards contained within the SPD,
    the Highway Authority raised no objection. In reaching that position, it had regard
    to the availability of on-street parking, the provision of cycle storage and a recent
    appeal decision1 which have accepted departures from the SPD standards in
    comparable circumstances.
14. I have also had regard to Policy TR6 of the Framework, which indicates that
    development should only be prevented or refused on transport grounds where it
    would result in an unacceptable impact on highway safety, or a severe adverse
    impact on the transport network. Although the proposal would not provide the level
    of off-street parking anticipated by the SPD, the evidence indicates that sufficient
    on-street parking is available within the vicinity of the site and there is nothing
    before me to suggest that any additional parking demand would result in unsafe
    highway conditions, or other unacceptable effects on highway safety.
15. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would not have an unacceptable
    impact on highway safety, with particular regard to parking provision. Thus, it
    would accord with Policies 16 and 21 of the CDP which, taken together, seek to
    ensure that development provides appropriate parking provision and does not give
    rise to unacceptable impacts on highway safety, the road network or residential
    amenity.
Living Conditions – Neighbouring Occupiers
16. In addition to the proposed change of use, the development would involve the
    erection of a single-storey rear extension to the existing dwelling. The extension
    would project approximately 5 metres beyond the rear elevation and span the full
    width of the property. It would be located adjacent to the shared boundary with No.
    53 Bradford Crescent.
17. Policy 31 of the CDP requires development to avoid unacceptable impacts on
    living conditions, including those arising from overlooking, visual intrusion, visual
    dominance, loss of light, noise and loss of privacy, unless satisfactory mitigation
    measures can be demonstrated.
18. Although the extension would be positioned along the boundary with No. 53, it
    would replace an existing single-storey outbuilding that is attached to both
    properties. The proposed extension would project no further than the existing

1
    Appeal ref: APP/X1335/W/23/3334953


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006352


         structure and would be of a broadly comparable height and scale. Consequently,
         its effect on the occupants of No. 53, including in terms of outlook, sense of
         enclosure and access to daylight, would be little different from the existing
         situation. Furthermore, as no side-facing windows are proposed, the development
         would not result in any harmful overlooking or loss of privacy.
19. My attention has been drawn to a recent planning application2 relating to 72
    Bradford Crescent, which sought planning permission for a similar proposal,
    including a similar sized extension. The Council refused this application citing
    harm to the living conditions of the neighbouring occupier. However, whilst I
    acknowledge that there are similarities between the two proposals, based on the
    evidence before me, the proposed extension would not exceed the depth of the
    existing single-storey rear projection, such that it would retain a similar relationship
    to the neighbouring property.
20. Consequently, I find that the proposed extension would not cause any material
    harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers through loss of outlook,
    daylight or privacy. Accordingly, this element of the proposal would accord with
    Policies 6, 29 and 31 of the CDP, which seek, amongst other things, to safeguard
    the amenity of existing and future occupiers by ensuring that development does
    not give rise to unacceptable effects on living conditions.
Living Conditions - Future Occupiers
21. Policy 16(3)(g) of the CDP requires applicants to demonstrate that the security of
    the building and the safety of its occupants have been appropriately considered.
22. The Council has raised concerns regarding the absence of a direct escape route
    from the proposed ground-floor shower room, which would be accessed via the
    kitchen and would not contain a window or alternative means of escape. However,
    I have not been directed to any specific policy requirement, design standard or
    technical guidance which would indicate that such provision is necessary in these
    circumstances. Furthermore, the Council's HMO Team confirmed that, whilst the
    window serving Bedroom 2 should provide a means of escape, no equivalent
    requirement applies to the proposed shower room.
23. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would provide satisfactory living
    conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to fire safety. Accordingly, it
    would comply with Policies 16, 29 and 31 of the CDP which, taken together, seek
    to secure safe, well-designed development that provides a high standard of
    accommodation and amenity for future occupants.
Other Matters
24. Third-party representations have raised concerns regarding the concentration of
    HMOs and student accommodation within the area, the implications of the Article 4
    Direction, and the use of a flexible planning permission allowing occupation under
    both Use Classes C3 and C4.
25. Whilst I recognise concerns regarding the Article 4 Direction, its purpose is to
    remove permitted development rights and thereby require planning permission to
    be obtained. It does not preclude permission being granted for the proposed use


2
    Planning Application Ref: DM/26/00250/FPA


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
Appeal Decision 6006352


       where, having regard to the Development Plan and all other material
       considerations, the proposal is found to be acceptable.
26. In respect of the concentration of student accommodation, Policy 16(3) of the CDP
    is the relevant policy. It seeks to promote, create and preserve inclusive, mixed
    and balanced communities and sets out a number of criteria against which
    proposals will be assessed.
27. Policy 16(3)(a) of the CDP states that proposals will be resisted where, including
    the proposed development, more than 10% of residential properties within 100
    metres of the application site are exempt from Council Tax charges under Class N
    (student exemption). Policy 16(3)(b) states that proposals will be resisted where
    there are existing unimplemented permissions for HMOs within 100 metres of the
    application site which, when combined with the existing number of Class N
    student-exempt properties, would result in more than 10% of properties within that
    area being student exempt.
28. Policy 16(3)(c) of the CDP states that proposals will be resisted where less than
    10% of residential properties within 100 metres are exempt from Council Tax
    under Class N, but the application site is located within a residential area on a
    street that forms a primary access route between purpose-built student
    accommodation and the town centre or a university campus.
29. The most recent data provided by the Council indicates that 9.3% of properties
    within a 100-metre radius of the appeal site are exempt from Council Tax under
    Class N. Consequently, the proposal would accord with Policy 16(3)(a), (b) and (c)
    of the CDP and would therefore not undermine the objective of maintaining
    inclusive, mixed and balanced communities.
30. Third party concerns have been raised regarding the effect of the proposed
    development on their living conditions due to the increased occupancy and
    potential for noise and disturbance to occur, as well as the management of the
    shared access and use of external spaces. However, the Council has not raised
    any specific concerns in this regard. Based on the evidence before me, I see no
    reason to disagree with these conclusions.
31. With regard to the future management of the HMO, I note that the proposal would
    not exceed the Council's threshold for concentrations of student accommodation.
    In addition, a planning condition requiring the submission, approval and ongoing
    implementation of a Student Management Plan would provide appropriate
    safeguards. Accordingly, I find that the proposal would not result in unacceptable
    harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
32. Additional concerns have been raised regarding the quality of the accommodation
    proposed, including the size of the bedrooms and whether the scale of the
    openings serving the shared kitchen, dining and living areas would provide an
    adequate level of outlook and natural light for future occupiers.
33. Policy 31 of the CDP requires development to provide acceptable living conditions
    for existing and future occupants, whilst Policy 29 requires proposals to achieve a
    high standard of design and, where relevant, accord with the Nationally Described
    Space Standards (NDSS).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006352


34. The Nationally Described Space Standard (NDSS) specifies that a single-
    occupancy bedroom should have a minimum floor area of 7.5m² and a minimum
    width of 2.15 metres. The proposed development would provide four single-
    occupancy bedrooms ranging in size from approximately 9.5m² to 12m², all of
    which would exceed the minimum width requirement. Whilst I have had regard to
    third-party concerns regarding the adequacy of the accommodation, the evidence
    before me indicates that all bedrooms would meet the relevant NDSS
    requirements. As such, they would provide an acceptable standard of
    accommodation for future occupiers.
35. Whilst I have had regard to concerns relating to ventilation, this is principally a
    matter addressed through the Building Regulations. Moreover, the Council has not
    identified any specific concerns regarding the quality of the accommodation
    proposed. Based on the plans and evidence before me, I have no substantive
    reason to conclude that the development would fail to provide an acceptable
    standard of living accommodation for future occupiers.
Conditions
36. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council with reference to the
    Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. In addition to the standard time
    condition (1), it is necessary to impose a condition (2) listing the approved plans in
    the interests of certainty.
37. A condition (3) is necessary to require the submission and approval of a Student
    Management Plan. This is required to be a pre-commencement condition to
    ensure that the management arrangements need to be agreed before the
    development is brought into use to safeguard the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers by ensuring that appropriate management measures are in place from
    the outset and throughout the operation of the HMO.
38. Section 100ZA(5) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 sets out that if an
    Inspector is minded to grant planning permission subject to pre-commencement
    conditions, they may only do so with the written agreement of the appellant.
    Therefore, the written agreement of the appellant has been sought.
39. Further conditions (4) and (5) are necessary to require cycle storage and
    soundproofing to be provided prior to first occupation of the development in the
    interests of highway safety and to safeguard the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers.
40. I have considered whether a condition restricting construction working hours is
    necessary. However, the development comprises a relatively small-scale
    extension and internal alterations to an existing dwelling. Construction activity
    would be temporary in nature and there is no substantive evidence before me to
    indicate that it would give rise to exceptional impacts warranting additional
    controls. Any disturbance arising during the construction phase would be limited in
    duration. Consequently, I am satisfied that such a condition would fail to meet the
    tests for planning conditions and is therefore unnecessary.
41. I have also considered whether it would be necessary to impose a condition
    controlling the operation of the flexible use permitted under Class V of Part 3 of
    Schedule 2 to the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development)
    (England) Order 2015. However, the circumstances in which the property may

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006352


       change between Use Classes C3 and C4, together with the relevant notification
       requirements, are already governed by separate statutory provisions. A planning
       condition seeking to replicate those requirements would duplicate existing
       legislation and would therefore be unnecessary.
Conclusion
42. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

K Lancaster
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006352


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
                   •    1485-02A – Proposed Floor Plans and Elevations
                   •    1485-03 – Existing and Proposed Site Plans
     3)       Prior to the commencement of development, a detailed Student Management
              Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority.
              The approved Student Management Plan shall be implemented upon first
              occupation of the development and shall thereafter be adhered to and
              maintained in full for the duration of the use hereby permitted, unless
              otherwise agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
     4)       Prior to the first occupation of the property as a House in Multiple Occupation
              (Use Class C4), the cycle storage shown on Existing and Proposed Site
              Plans (Drawing No. 1485-03) shall be provided and made available for use.
              The cycle storage shall thereafter be retained and kept available for the
              secure parking of bicycles at all times while the property remains in Use
              Class C4.
     5)       Prior to the first occupation of the property as a House in Multiple Occupation
              (Use Class C4), the sound insulation measures shown on the Proposed
              Plans and Elevations (Drawing No. 1485-02A) shall be fully installed. The
              approved sound insulation measures shall thereafter be retained and
              maintained for so long as the premises remain in Use Class C4.

                                           End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     8
