Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by Robert Naylor BSc (Hons) MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6006749
Appeal B Ref: 6006750
151 Church Road, Basildon, SS14 1NH
•   The appeals are made under section 174 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the 1990 Act)
    as amended.
•   The appeals are made by Sophie Norris and Peter Cooper against an enforcement notice issued by
    Basildon Borough Council.
•   The notice was issued on 19 February 2026.
•   The breach of planning control as alleged in the notice is without planning permission, the erection of
    a fence in excess of one (1) metre in height adjacent to a highway (as shown approximately marked
    in blue on the attached notice plan).
•   The requirements of the notice are:
    (i) Remove the fence in its entirety as shown approximately by the blue line on the attached Notice
    Plan.
    (ii) Remove from the Land all resultant waste and debris from works done in compliance with
    requirement (i)
•   The period for compliance with the requirements is nine (9) months after this notice takes effect.
•   The appeal is proceeding on the grounds set out in section 174(2)(f) of the 1990 Act (as amended).

Formal Decisions
1. Appeal A and B are dismissed, and the enforcement notice is upheld.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published by
   the Government on 17 August 2026. Those parts of the Framework most relevant
   to this appeal have not been significantly amended. As a result, I consider that
   there is no requirement for me to seek further submissions and I am satisfied that
   no party’s interests have been prejudiced by my taking this approach. I will refer to
   the new Framework policies where necessary in this appeal.
3. There is no deemed planning application following an appeal having been made on
   ground (a) and the relevant fee has not been paid. Therefore, planning merits
   considerations are not before me in this appeal.
4. Since the appeal proceeds solely on ground (f) of section 174(2) of the 1990 Act
   (as amended), it is not always necessary for a site visit to take place, nevertheless
   in this instance I thought it prudent to undertake an unaccompanied visit on the
   date above.
Appeals A and B under ground (f)
5. An appeal on ground (f) is made on the basis that the requirements of the notice
   exceed what is necessary. Section 173(4) of the 1990 Act (as amended) sets out
   the purposes which an enforcement notice may seek to achieve. They are either (a)
   remedying of the breach of planning control or (b) remedying any injury to amenity
   which has been caused by the breach.
https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006749, 6006750


6. The notice requires the fence to be removed. This is as opposed to requiring the
   structure to be modified by, for example, reducing it in size. Removing the fence
   would restore the land to its condition before the breach took place. Therefore, from
   the requirements of the enforcement notice, it is clear that the purpose of the notice
   is to remedy the breach of planning control.
7. The appellants maintain that parts of the boundary fence are not adjacent to the
   highway and therefore would benefit as ‘permitted development’ (PD) under Article
   3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 2, Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (the GPDO). From the information
   before me, the works undertaken to erect the fence were constructed as a single
   operation rather than as separate developments. Thus, taken as a whole the works
   do not benefit from planning permission. This draws parallels with caselaw1 which
   established if a development exceeds PD limits, the whole development is
   unauthorised.
8. Furthermore, Article 3(5)(a) of the GDPO states permission granted by Schedule 2
   does not apply if in the case of permission granted in connection with an existing
   building, the building operations involved in the construction of that building are
   unlawful. Neither party disputes that the fence is existing. Nor that planning
   permission has not been granted for the existing fence, although I note that the
   Council has recently refused planning permission2 to retain the fence in situ,
   however this scheme is not before me. As such, given its existing and unlawful
   status the fence could not benefit as PD.
9. I appreciate that a reduction in the height of the fence could be more appropriate to
   maintain privacy and security for the appellant. However, it is likely that an
   enclosure height of more than one metre would still be required along the current
   boundary, which would require planning permission, nonetheless. Since any
   reduction of the height of the fence would mean that parts of the development in
   the notice would remain in situ, the breach of planning control would not be
   remedied. This would not achieve the purpose of the notice as the property would
   not be restored to its condition before the breach took place.
10. As a result, there are no lesser steps which provide an obvious alternative to the
    notice requirements. No other alternatives to those requirements was advanced
    and to my mind, none would remedy the breach. Therefore, the steps set out in the
    notice are not excessive; they are proportionate and commensurate to the breach
    of planning control, being the minimum that is required to restore the property to its
    condition prior to the breach taking place.
11. As a consequence, the ground (f) appeals fail.

Overall Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeals should not succeed. I
    shall uphold the enforcement notice.

Robert Naylor
INSPECTOR

1
    Garland v MHLG [1968] 20 P&CR 93
2
    Basildon Borough Council Planning Ref: 25/01603/FULL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
