Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 June 2026
by S Simms BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006985
39 Chalkwell Esplanade, Westcliff-on-Sea, Southend-on-Sea SS0 8JQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by King of SC Purple S.A against the decision of Southend-on-Sea.
•    The application reference is 25/00621/FUL.
•    The development proposed is to erect a 3-storey building to form 3no. self-contained flats and layout
     parking to the rear, amenity areas and landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the
       latest Housing Delivery Test results were published on 17 August 2026. I invited
       the main parties to comment on any implications of these for their cases and took
       their responses into account in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the area.
Reasons
4.     The vacant appeal site is on a seafront of mainly detached two- or three-storey
       houses with forward-facing hipped roofs, wide front balconies, consistent setbacks,
       similar widths, front or side parking and rear gardens. Exceptions include a three-
       storey flat-roofed block of flats on the neighbouring corner plot and a much wider,
       bulkier four-storey block with raised basement several plots the other away.
5.     Permission remains extant for the demolition of the house previously on the site
       and the erection of a three-storey building with a hipped roof containing two flats.
       Its ridge and eaves would be higher than those of the neighbouring house, but its
       eaves would be lower than the neighbouring flats. It would have front balconies
       and a side element overhanging the driveway to the first and second floors.
6.     In contrast, the appeal proposal would have a flat roof, which would be taller than
       the eaves but lower than the ridge of the neighbouring house and slightly lower
       than the roof of the neighbouring flats. It too would have front balconies but no side
       element. It would be in coastal stone with chalk white render to the lower floors
       and standing-seam vertical metal cladding to the top floor.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006985


7.     The effect would be to reflect the height and form of the flats to one side and the
       width of the houses to the other, and to omit the side overhang of the extant
       permission. However, the form and materials would further depart from the pitched
       and hipped roofs of most of the seafront, none of which nearby use coastal stone,
       and create greater massing than already permitted.
8.     Whilst I accept that there is some horizontality to existing buildings on this section
       of the seafront, much of it derives from newer buildings or alterations, which tend
       to detract from, rather than maintain, the established seafront architectural style. I
       do not have copies of earlier policies or full details of recent appeal proposals but
       accept that current policy tends now to discourage this.
9.     Overall, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the area,
       contrary to Policies KP2 and CP4 of the Southend-on-Sea Core Strategy 2007,
       Policies DM1, DM3 and DM6 of the Southend-on-Sea Development Management
       Document 2015 and the advice in the Design and Townscape Guide 2009
       Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).
10. Whilst these require the effective use of land, they also require infill development
    to respect the character and grain of sites and areas. Policy DM6 seeks to ensure
    that the architectural style and form of Seafront Character Zone 4, in which the site
    is located, are maintained. Whilst the SPD does not require uniform, traditional or
    replicative approaches to infill, it does refer to materials and rooflines.
Other Matters
11. Benefits of the proposal include the provision of three dwellings (one additional
    dwelling compared to the extant permission), efficient re-use of vacant, previously
    developed land in a sustainable urban location, and support for the local economy
    during construction and for local services on an ongoing basis.
12. The appeal site is within the zone of influence of habitats sites to which the Essex
    Coast Recreational Disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy relates, and
    which residents of the proposal would be likely to visit, increasing recreational
    pressure and leading to likely significant effect on the integrity of these sites.
13. However, given my conclusions on the main issue, it is not necessary for me to
    consider this matter further as the proposal would not take place and would not
    affect the protected sites. Moreover, if I were to find suitable mitigation had been
    appropriately secured, then a lack of harm would only be a neutral factor.
Planning Balance
14. The Council accepts that there is only 3.48 years’ worth of housing land supply
    and that the latest Housing Delivery Test result demonstrates under-delivery of
    housing within the city. In fact, with a 20% buffer, the Council’s evidence shows
    that there is 2.90 years’ worth of housing land supply and, as the appellant points
    out, delivery is only 20% of the requirement over the last three years.
15. Policy S4 of the Framework states that the benefits of approving development are
    likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects in situations where the
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006985


16. Policy DP3 of the Framework states that proposals should be refused if they fail to
    respond to their context, conflict with relevant principles for creating well-designed
    places or conflict with any explicit design standards in the development plan. It
    requires substantial weight to be given to compliance with such standards.
17. I have found that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the
    area, contrary to design standards in the development plan. I attach substantial
    weight to this conflict, which in turn substantially outweighs the benefits of the
    proposal, despite the housing land shortfall and significant under-delivery.
18. Therefore, the proposal would fail to comply both with the development plan and
    with national decision-making policies for achieving well-designed places.
Conclusion
19. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Consequently, having had regard to all matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



S Simms
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
