Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by D R Kay BA Dip.Arch RIBA(Retired)
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006053
Cowleas, Spickett's Lane, Cuddington, Buckinghamshire, HP18 0AY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•   The appeal is made by Andrew Hughes against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref 25/01948/APP was approved on 20 October 2025, and planning permission was
    granted subject to conditions.
•   The development permitted is the demolition of existing residential dwelling and erection of detached
    dwelling, including provision of on-site parking, a detached garage, and associated external works.
•   The conditions in dispute are Nos 5, 12, 13, 14 & 15 which state that:
    No 5 - The garage building hereby approved shall only be used in connection with the dwelling on
    site (currently known as Cowleas, Spicketts Lane, Cuddington, Buckinghamshire HP18 0AY) and
    shall at no time be occupied as an independent dwelling or rented out as overnight accommodation;
    and
    No 12 - Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
    Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended), or any Order revoking or re-enacting that Order
    with or without modification, no development falling within Classes A, B and E of Part 1 of Schedule
    2 of the Order shall be undertaken at the dwellinghouse hereby permitted; and
    No 13 - The replacement dwelling hereby approved shall be constructed and fitted out to comply with
    the Building Regulations 2010 (as amended) optional requirement M4(2) 'accessible and adaptable'
    as a minimum prior to first occupation. Such provision shall be maintained for the lifetime of the
    development; and
    No 14 - Prior to the first occupation of the replacement dwelling hereby approved or the substantial
    completion of the development hereby approved whichever is the sooner, full details of both hard
    and soft landscape works shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
    Authority. For hard landscape works, these details shall include: hard surfacing materials. The hard
    surfacing materials shall be made of porous materials or provision made to direct run-off water from
    the hard surface to a permeable or porous area or surface within the curtilage of the dwelling to be
    shown on a plan. For soft landscape works, these details shall include new trees showing their
    species, spread and maturity, planting plans; written specifications (including cultivation and other
    operations associated with plant and grass establishment); schedules of plants, noting species, plant
    sizes and proposed numbers/densities. The landscaping works shall be carried out as approved prior
    to the first occupation of the replacement dwelling hereby permitted in so far as hard landscaping is
    concerned and for soft landscaping, within the first planting season following the first occupation of
    the replacement dwelling or the substantial completion of the development whichever is the sooner;
    and
    No 15 - Any tree or shrub which forms part of the approved landscaping scheme approved under
    condition 14 which within a period of five years from the date of planting fails to become established,
    becomes seriously damaged or diseased, dies of for any reason is removed shall be replaced in the
    next planting season by a tree or shrub of a similar species, size and maturity.
•   The reasons given for the conditions are:
    No 5 - The use of the outbuilding for purposes that are not connected with the residential occupation
    of the dwelling may result in impacts which could be harmful to the character of the area and the
    amenities of residential neighbours and which have not been assessed under the current proposals
    and may be contrary to Policies S1, S2, S3, BE1, BE2, BE3, T1, T6, NE5 of the Vale of Aylesbury
    Local Plan (2021); and
    No 12 - The dwelling as permitted is accepted in view of the extensions that could be made to the
    existing dwelling by virtue of deemed and express planning permissions. Restrictions to its future


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006053


    alteration and/or enlargement are considered justified in the interests of protecting the character of
    the site and rural location within the setting of the Cuddington Conservation Area, in accordance with
    Policies H4, BE1, BE2, NE4, and NE8 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan (Adopted September
    2021), Policy CND05 of the Cuddington Neighbourhood Plan (2022) and Sections 5, 12 and 15 of
    the NPPF; and
    No 13 - To ensure the adequate provision of accessible and adaptable dwellings in accordance with
    policy H6c of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan (2021) and the National Planning Policy Framework
    (2024); and
    No 14 - To ensure a satisfactory appearance to the development, in accordance with Policies BE2
    and NE4 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan (2021), Policy CDN 05 of the Cuddington
    Neighbourhood Plan (2022) and the National Planning Policy Framework; and
    No 15 - To ensure a satisfactory appearance to the development in accordance with Policies BE2
    and NE4 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan (2021), Policy CDN 05 of the Cuddington
    Neighbourhood Plan (2022) and the National Planning Policy Framework.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref 25/01948/APP for the
   demolition of the existing residential dwelling and erection of a new 5-bedroom
   detached dwelling, including provision of on-site parking, a detached garage, and
   associated external works, at Cowleas, Spickett's Lane, Buckinghamshire, HP18
   0AY granted on 20 October 2025 by Buckinghamshire Council, is varied by deleting
   conditions 5 and 12.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. Whilst this made certain revisions to aspects of national planning
   policy, having examined the revised Framework in respect of the matters relied on
   by the main parties, I find these are unchanged. I have therefore determined the
   appeal in accordance with the revised Framework.
3. At my visit it was apparent that the dwelling which previously occupied the site had
   been completely demolished. I have therefore determined the appeal on that basis.
Background and Main Issues
4. Planning permission was granted for a replacement dwelling which included 15
   conditions. These included conditions restricting the use of the garage, removing
   certain permitted development rights, requiring compliance with accessibility
   standards, and for submission of hard and soft landscaping details together with
   replacement requirements for failure of certain soft landscaping features within a
   specified time limit.
5. The Council consider the conditions are necessary to prevent the garage being
   converted and used other than for purposes incidental to the main dwelling; to
   prevent harm to the character of the surrounding area having regard to the
   proximity of the designated heritage assets; to ensure adequate provision of
   accessible and adaptable dwellings; to ensure satisfactory appearance to the
   development and that such satisfactory appearance is ensured should planting fail
   within the specified timescale. The appellant considers that these conditions are
   neither reasonable nor necessary and seeks their removal.
6. The main issues, therefore, are whether the conditions are reasonable and
   necessary having regard to their specified reasons for being applied to the
   permission.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6006053


Reasons
Condition 5
7. The approved drawings indicate, both on the site plan (drawing P.CC.DP.01) and
   the proposed garage plans and elevations (drawing P.CC.DP.08), that the
   approved detached building would be used as a double garage and covered car
   port. It would be situated within the red line boundary defined in the application,
   which also forms the residential curtilage of the appeal site.
8. The permission confers approval for the use of the detached building as a garage
   in incidental use to the main dwelling, as part of a single planning unit. This is
   further controlled by Condition 2, which requires the development approved to be
   carried out in accordance with the plans submitted. This would control the use of
   the garage building to that approved, along with the operative description of
   development both on the application form and on the grant of permission notice
   issued.
9. The Council’s concern centres around the potential for the garage to be converted
   to residential or other accommodation, subsequently being occupied independent
   of the main dwelling. They state it would be inconsistent to allow development
   permitted under express planning permission, to have any less control than that
   which would be allowable under the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the GPDO).
10. Having examined the evidence before me, I find that any conversion of the garage
    to either residential or other accommodation, whether for use incidental to the main
    dwelling or otherwise, would require express planning permission. Even were
    justification sought for alteration of the garage to incidental residential use, through
    the exercising of permitted development rights under Class E of Schedule 2; Part 1
    of the GPDO. I find that as the garage would be sited forward of a wall forming the
    principal elevation of the original dwellinghouse, whether that be defined as either
    the north-west or south-west facing elevations of the main dwelling, then its
    conversion would not be permitted by the GPDO by reason of its conflict with
    paragraph E.1(c) of Class E of Schedule 2; Part 1.
11. Any conversion of the garage to residential or other accommodation, without
    receiving express planning permission would therefore represent a breach of the
    original permission1, the GPDO and planning law. This would be fully enforceable
    by the Council, without the need for separate control by condition.
12. I therefore conclude that disputed condition 5 is neither reasonable nor necessary
    to control the use of the approved garage other than for that for which it was
    approved. I shall therefore allow the appeal and vary the original permission by
    deleting the disputed condition 5.
Condition 12
13. The appeal site lies outside of the Cuddington Conservation Area (the CA), but its
    western boundary is shared with that of the south-eastern boundary of the CA. The
    Council applied condition 12 which restricts the permitted development rights
    associated with Class A, B and E of the GPDO, for the reason of protecting the
    setting and significance of the CA and the listed buildings contained therein.
1
    25/01948/APP


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006053


14. Having examined the proposal, the proximity to the CA and the separating
    boundary condition, the Council’s heritage officer had advised that the proposal
    would have a neutral impact on the CA. The officers report further acknowledges
    that the proposal would not have a harmful effect on the setting or significance of
    the listed buildings located within the CA, due to the separation distance, the
    mature boundary hedge and tree belt, and the intervening development.
15. Classes A, B and E of Schedule 2; Part 1 of the GPDO control the alteration and
    extension of a dwellinghouse; the enlargement of a dwellinghouse consisting of an
    addition or alteration to its roof; and the provision of a building or domestic heating
    storage container within its curtilage respectively.
16. The permitted dwelling is located close to the northern corner of the site, such that
    the distance from the dwelling to the north-west or north-east boundaries are
    restricted. Given this location, there would already be restriction on the amount of
    development that would be possible, having regard to the design of the permitted
    dwelling, whilst complying with the restrictions on permitted development and
    conditions placed on Class A of the GPDO.
17. Further, As the permitted dwelling already uses the roof-space for accommodation
    to the majority of the footprint of the two-storey portion of the dwelling, there would
    be little development that could be enacted under Class B of the GPDO. With
    regards to development under Class E of the GPDO, whilst this would allow further
    development within the residential curtilage of the appeal site, the extent, height,
    use and location of the development relative to the permitted dwelling is restricted
    under this class of the GPDO.
18. For the above reasons, I find that the extent of development that would be likely to
    be allowable under classes A, B and E of the GPDO, would be somewhat limited,
    owing partly to the location of the permitted dwelling within the appeal site, and the
    restrictions and condition placed on these classes within the GPDO. Any permitted
    development would therefore be likely to be either single storey in nature or located
    to the rear of the permitted dwelling. It would, therefore, be unlikely to have any
    significant impact on the setting or significance of the CA or the listed buildings
    situated therein.
19. The Framework is also a material planning consideration. Policy DM6(2)(c) of the
    Framework states that conditions should not be used to restrict national permitted
    development rights unless there is clear justification to do so. The Planning
    Practice Guidance2 (the PPG) also advises that conditions of this nature will rarely
    pass the test of necessity and should only be used in exceptional circumstances.
    For the reasons given, I find that the relevant tests in the framework and PPG have
    not been met in this case.
20. I therefore conclude that disputed condition 12 is neither reasonable nor necessary
    to restrict the permitted development rights of the approved dwelling, in the
    interests of protecting the character of the site or its impact on the CA. I shall
    therefore allow the appeal and vary the original permission by deleting the disputed
    condition 12.




2
    Paragraph: 017 Reference ID: 21a-017-20190723


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decision 6006053


Condition 13
21. Policy H6c – Accessibility, of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan 2021, requires all
    development to meet and maintain high standards of accessibility so all users can
    use them safely and easily. This is secured via condition requiring compliance with
    Approved Document Part M4(2) of the Building Regulations 2010.
22. The appellant considers compliance with this condition would cause substantial and
    prohibitive costs affecting the viability of the project. They further state the project
    has been designed to ensure the property retains its existing design and footprint, a
    house that is 100 years old and therefore difficult to conform to M4(2). Whilst the
    floor plans of the original dwelling are not before me, it is clear from other evidence
    that the proposal does not follow the same design and layout of the original. It is a
    newly designed dwelling, which would be capable of incorporating the requirements
    of Part M4(2) during its construction.
23. Having examined the layout of the permitted dwelling, due to its extensive use of
    double doors and the spaciousness of its ground level accommodation, it would
    provide levels of accessibility which would meet the requirements of Part M4(2).
    The ground floor sanitary accommodation is spacious and would allow future
    compliance for integration of shower facilities. The requirements for walls to the
    ground floor WC to provide for future fitting of grab rails would only require these
    walls to be constructed from masonry, or ply lining behind plasterboard finishes on
    studwork walls to provide sufficient strength, with minimal cost implications.
24. The statutory requirements of compliance with Approved Document M4(1) of the
    Building Regulations 2010, would place requirements for level access to the
    principal entrance, together with positioning of lighting and heating control switches
    and power sockets within accessible zones for wheelchair users throughout the
    dwelling. This is common with Part M4(2) and so would have no extra cost
    implications. The design of the staircase within the approved dwelling is sufficient to
    provide compliance with Part M4(2), as its width is such that future installation of a
    chairlift would be possible.
25. The approved site layout utilises a portion of the existing driveway. However, it also
    identifies areas of landscaping and pathways from the driveway to the principal
    entrance. This element could easily be designed to provide level access to the
    principal entrance. Indeed, mandatory compliance with Part M4(1) of the Building
    Regulations 2010 will require this. I therefore find the appellants arguments
    regarding the need to re-lay and raise the level of the existing driveway to provide
    level access to be totally unsubstantiated.
26. Whilst the appellant has referred to a dwelling opposite the appeal site which they
    state was not subject to the same condition, the details of this are not before me
    and so I have given this limited wight in my determination.
27. For the above reasons, I find the application of condition 13 to be both reasonable
    and necessary in the interest of providing accessibility and adaptability for future
    occupiers of the appeal property. I therefore dismiss this part of the appeal and
    retain disputed condition 13 on the original permission.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006053


Condition 14 and 15
28. Given that condition 15 relates to the replacement of any soft landscaping shrub or
    tree, planted as part of the approved landscaping scheme, which dies or becomes
    damaged or diseased, within five years of planting, I have dealt with conditions 14
    and 15 together as they are interrelated.
29. The site plan submitted with the application for the approved dwelling (P.CC.DP.01)
    identifies several areas of driveway, parking apron, footpaths and patio areas within
    the immediate vicinity of the replacement dwelling. These areas are extensive and
    elements will require completion in a manner and material which provides for
    accessibility in accordance with Approved Document M4(1) and M4(2) of the
    Building Regulations 2010. The approved site plan does not identify the materials
    proposed to be used, nor are their materials identified in the application form.
30. Accordingly, I find condition 14 in relation to hard landscaping features, would be
    necessary and reasonable, to ensure that the hard landscaping materials to be
    used are complimentary to the materials in the dwelling, and are consistent with the
    requirements for permeable or porous surfaces, and to ensure they direct run-off of
    surface water in an appropriate manner.
31. Turning to the soft landscaping element of condition 14, the location and footprint of
    the approved dwelling does not reflect that of the original. This will require
    landscaping of areas of divergence in footprints, and around footpath and patio
    areas. As the site is regarded as a transition between the residential nature of the
    village of Cuddington to the wider open countryside, the nature and extent of soft
    landscaping should be commensurate with that location. The condition does not
    mandatorily require installation of significant soft landscaping, it merely seeks to
    ensure that any soft landscaping proposals are submitted to the Council for their
    approval, prior to their implementation, to ensure proposals are appropriate and to
    avoid any potential harmful effects.
32. With regards to condition 15, I find that it would be required to ensure that the soft
    landscaping proposed and approved establishes itself, so that it can satisfactorily
    perform the function of integrating the new dwelling into the surrounding landscape.
33. For the above reasons, I find the application of both conditions 14 and 15 to be
    both reasonable and necessary in the interest of ensuring a satisfactory
    appearance to the development in the interest of the landscape character and
    appearance of the surrounding area. I therefore dismiss this part of the appeal and
    retain disputed conditions 14 and 15 on the original permission.



David Kay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
