Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 May 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006890
147 Eastcote Lane, Harrow, HA2 8RR
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Marlpark 71 HA4 Ltd against the decision of the Council of the London
       Borough of Harrow.
•      The application Ref is PL/2018/25.
•      The development proposed is application for outline planning consent (access reserved) for the
       demolition of garage to the rear of 147 Eastcote Lane and the erection of a new 2 storey house. All
       matters reserved save for scale, layout, appearance and landscaping.

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.      An application for costs was made by Marlpark 71 HA4 Ltd against the Council of
        the London Borough of Harrow. This application is the subject of a separate
        decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.      The planning application is submitted in outline with all matters reserved for a
        subsequent reserved matters application save for scale, layout, appearance and
        landscaping. The proposed development is shown on the Proposed Site Plan.
        However, matters relating to access are not before me and I have determined the
        appeal accordingly.
4.      There are two other appeals on this site relating to different schemes1. I am the
        Inspector appointed to determine all three appeals.
5.      The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
        Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. There have been significant
        amendments made against the 2024 version, and the parties have had the
        opportunity to comment on the changes in relation to this appeal.
6.      Planning Law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
        accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
        otherwise. The decision notice cites policies contained within the Harrow Core
        Strategy, 2012 (CS) and the Harrow Development Management Policies Local
        Plan, 2013. During the determination of this appeal, the London Borough of
        Harrow Local Plan 2021-2041, 2026 (LP) has been adopted and thus has

1
    6005188 and 6004526.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006890


         superseded the policies contained within the CS and Development Management
         Policies Local Plan. I have been provided with the relevant policies and
         determined this appeal accordingly.
Main Issues
7.       The main issues are:
             •    The effect of the proposed development on biodiversity; and
             •    Whether residential development would be suitably located having regard to
                  the development plan policies governing such proposals.
Reasons
Biodiversity
8.       The appeal site is located on the southern side of Eastcote Lane, adjacent to the
         crossroads with Alexandra Avenue and comprises a two-storey detached property,
         with a garage at the rear. To the west is 149 Eastcote Lane, which comprises a
         detached dwelling. To the east, the site adjoins public land running along
         Alexandra Avenue. The appeal site effectively comprises two parcels of land which
         are now under the same ownership. The first being the existing detached dwelling,
         garden and detached garage and the second being a former grassed strip of land
         which, at my site visit, was covered in gravel with planting along its boundary.
9.       In England, Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is required under a statutory framework
         introduced by Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (inserted
         by the Environment Act 2021) (the Act). Development must deliver at least a 10%
         increase in biodiversity value relative to the pre-development biodiversity value of
         the onsite habitat. This increase can be achieved through onsite biodiversity gains,
         registered offsite biodiversity gains or statutory biodiversity credits. In summary,
         this requires development to result in more, or better-quality, natural habitat than
         there was before development.
10. The proposed development would be located partially on the footprint of the
    existing garage and partially on the grassed area of the rear garden. The appellant
    claims that the proposal falls below the 25 square metre de minimis threshold, but
    this is disputed by the Council. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)2 explains that
    when providing reasons for the de minimis exemption, an applicant should provide
    sufficient evidence to support their justification. The plans before me do not clearly
    identify the area of onsite habitat to be affected by the proposals. Given this
    uncertainty, I cannot be confident of the calculations.
11. The appellant explains that the existing garage and sealed hardstanding extend
    approximately 8 metres from the rear boundary into the site. The proposed
    dwelling would be positioned with its rear elevation 5 metres from the rear
    boundary. The proposed dwelling has a depth of 6.85 metres and accordingly, the
    building extends to 11.85 metres from the rear boundary. It is claimed that the
    extent of encroachment beyond the existing developed area (8 metres) would
    therefore be 3.85 metres. Multiplied by the building width (7.65 metres), this would
    produce an affected area of 29.45 square metres.


2
    Paragraph: 004 Reference ID: 74-004-20240214


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6006890


12. Even if I were to accept the appellant’s calculations, the affected area would still
    be above the 25 square metres de minimis threshold. The statutory BNG
    requirements are therefore engaged. I note the appellant’s argument regarding
    restoring the same grassland habitat type to the area presently occupied by the
    structure to be demolished. However, the de minimis exemption applies strictly to
    the total area of habitat impacted by the development. It does not look at the net
    outcome or how much habitat is intended to be restored. In light of this, the
    proposed development would require at least 10% BNG. There is a lack of detail
    submitted to establish the pre-development biodiversity value of the site or to show
    how a measurable net gain would be delivered.
13. The appellant suggests a planning condition to be imposed securing BNG
    compliance and that the Council has formulated a condition in relation to a
    different scheme for the site under consideration. Such a condition requires
    submission and approval of a Biodiversity Gain Plan in accordance with the
    DEFRA template, including baseline and post-development biodiversity values,
    and any off-site provision or biodiversity credits.
14. The PPG3 explains that when determining a planning application, BNG will often
    be a material consideration, and local planning authorities will want to consider,
    where relevant, whether the biodiversity gain condition is capable of being
    discharged successfully through the imposition of conditions and agreement of
    section 106 planning obligations to secure significant onsite biodiversity gains and
    registered offsite biodiversity gains. The aims specified in the suggested condition
    would therefore be met by the biodiversity gain condition, which the development
    would be subject to.
15. In such circumstances, PPG4 explains that the application must be accompanied
    by the minimum information set out in Article 7 of The Town and Country Planning
    (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015. Amongst others,
    this includes the pre-development biodiversity value(s) and the completed metric
    calculation tool showing the calculations of the pre-development biodiversity value
    of the onsite habitat. Based on the evidence before me, I cannot be confident of
    the pre-development biodiversity value of the site or how a measurable net gain
    would be delivered. Consequently, I am not sufficiently satisfied that the
    biodiversity gain condition is capable of being successfully discharged.
16. I am aware that the Council has recently granted planning permission for the
    erection of two detached single storey dwellings on the former grassed strip of
    land5. The appellant claims that matters relating to BNG were able to be controlled
    by condition and thus the same should apply to this appeal. I understand that the
    information submitted for that scheme was sufficient to enable officers to assess
    the BNG baseline to ascertain that 10% uplift could be provided and controlled via
    planning condition. In contrast, this scheme fails to provide such information.
17. For the above reasons, I conclude on this issue that the proposed development
    fails to demonstrate how it would achieve the statutory minimum 10% BNG, as
    required by the Act. In the absence of this information, I cannot be satisfied that
    the proposed development would not result in a net loss of biodiversity or that it
    would deliver the required net gain. The proposed development would therefore be

3
  Paragraph: 002 Reference ID: 74-002-20240214
4
  Paragraph: 011 Reference ID: 74-011-20240214
5
  PL/0427/26


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision 6006890


       contrary to Policy G6 of the London Plan, 2021 and Policy GI3 of the LP. Together,
       amongst other matters, such policies seek to manage impacts on biodiversity and
       aim to secure net biodiversity gain. For the same reasons, the proposed
       development would also be contrary with Policy N2 of the Framework relating to
       improving the natural environment.
Location
18. Policy GR10 of the LP explains that proposals on Infill, backland sites, non-
    designated open space, garden land and garage sites will be supported subject to
    two criteria. Criteria (a) relates to the design of such proposals, but no such conflict
    has been identified by the Council, so it is not determinative in this appeal. Criteria
    (b) requires that the development makes a comprehensive use of land, taking into
    account the potential for redevelopment on surrounding parcels. It clarifies that
    housing on garden land on individual plots will not generally be considered to be
    comprehensive.
19. The supporting text to Policy GR10 explains that residential gardens are a strong
    element of suburban character and are an important component of the quality of
    life enjoyed by many Harrow residents. It explains that residential properties with
    individual rear gardens are a predominant characteristic, where any built
    development is of a single storey and ancillary in use to the main residential
    dwelling on the site. Individually, new development that exceeds this height and /
    or is independent to the principal residential use of the site, has a detrimental
    impact on the use of the property and the character of the area. The Council
    discourages ad hoc planning applications to individual rear gardens, which can
    lead to the incremental erosion of suburban character.
20. The supporting text also explains that where site assembly has been secured and
    a number of rear gardens propose a comprehensive development, subject to
    compliance with any subsequent Small Sites Design Code / SPD and this policy,
    they may be supported. What constitutes a comprehensive development in terms
    of the number of sites, will be determined on a case-by-case basis. This will be
    assessed by the scale of development (number of units) and the overall site size,
    as these factors determine the impact that a development is likely to have on the
    wider area, and the planning benefits it would deliver.
21. The policy does not define what constitutes garden land development, but the
    Council’s Supplementary Planning Document: Garden Land Development, 2013
    (SPD) provides further interpretation of this. It defines garden land as any land
    within the curtilage of a building, the principal use of which is residential.
22. The definition includes gardens of houses and any hardstandings, outbuildings
    and other structures located on the garden land. No distinction is made between
    front, side and rear gardens. Paragraph 3.5 of the SPD explains that garden land
    development means any development on garden land that results in the formation
    of one or more new dwellings (houses or flats).
23. Paragraph 2.3 of the SPD explains that there is a presumption against garden land
    development to ensure that the borough’s housing growth is delivered in
    accordance with the spatial strategy, set out in the CS by preventing incremental
    residential growth on (greenfield) garden land leading to a harmful degree of
    dispersal. Although the CS has been superseded, I am not persuaded that the
    SPD’s definition of garden land development should not now be applied to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006890


        relevant policies of the new LP. Moreover, it remains generally consistent with
        Policy GR10 given that there is still a presumption against garden land
        development unless certain criteria are met.
24. The SPD does not form part of the Council’s statutory development plan, but it
    remains relevant to the interpretation of garden land development and application
    of policy. It is therefore a material consideration applicable to this case.
25. The proposed development does not fall into any of the categories outlined at
    paragraph 3.6 of the SPD and therefore does not benefit from the exceptions
    outlined at paragraph 3.7 given that these specifically relate to the conversion or
    redevelopment of the existing home.
26. As set out, the proposed dwelling would be situated partially on the footprint of the
    existing garage and within the existing garden of 147 Eastcote Lane (No 147). The
    new dwelling would also marginally extend into the adjoining former grassed strip
    of land to provide parking spaces. The proposed development would therefore fall
    within the definition of garden land development and would only be supported by
    Policy GR10 of the LP where it meets the relevant criteria set out above.
27. The small-scale nature of the proposals and its site size cannot reasonably be
    considered as making a comprehensive use of land. In my view, and based on the
    supporting text of the policy, comprehensive use of land ensures that individual
    parcels are not developed in isolation. Instead, it requires consideration of the
    entire area’s potential including site size and scale of development. This will
    determine the impact that a development is likely to have on the wider area, and
    the planning benefits it would deliver.
28. While the red line boundary encompasses parts of two plots, the majority of
    development is confined to the rear garden area of No 147 and thus would fall
    within the type of development not considered to be comprehensive. I do not
    dispute that the word ‘generally’ implies that a level of flexibility can be applied.
    However, based on the evidence before me, the proposals would not make a
    comprehensive use of land as required in order to be supported by local policy.
29. The proposed development would result in garden land development which would,
    by its nature, result in incremental residential growth on garden land. This would
    lead to a harmful degree of dispersal and the erosion of suburban character that
    Policy GR10 and the SPD seek to resist. It would therefore be contrary to Policy
    GR10 of the LP and the SPD.
30. My findings are consistent with those of a previous Inspector who dismissed a
    detached dwelling at the rear of the site in 20236. There remains a presumption
    against garden land development unless certain criteria are met. While the effect
    of the appeal proposal alone would be modest, such individual and small-scale
    proposals could contribute to more cumulative effects, if repeated. I consider this
    could prejudice the aims against unmanaged, incremental growth at odds with the
    LP and SPD.




6
    APP/M5450/W/22/3307386


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006890


31. The appeal site has an extensive planning history, and I note the large number of
    planning appeals7 cited by the appellant as well as the appellant’s claims that the
    SPD was applied more flexibly elsewhere. While I have considered such matters, I
    find that the other schemes on the land would have been subject to different
    considerations and overall assessment particularly given their nature and location
    within the site. They would be read differently to that of the appeal scheme, and
    some would indeed be ancillary to the main property unlike the appeal scheme.
    Further, and while the proposed development would preclude some of the extant
    permissions from coming forward due to their positioning within the site, I am not
    satisfied that this development would preclude all other permissions and I have no
    mechanism/guarantee to suggest otherwise. I am not therefore convinced that the
    scheme would consolidate development into a single building.
32. The planning history would not be a precedent to allow development on garden
    land nor justify the identified conflict with the LP in relation to a standalone building
    for a two-storey house within the rear garden of No 147, where no such permission
    exists. While the proposal may amount to a smaller increase in footprint than
    alterations approved for No 147, this does not qualify as a replacement dwelling
    and enlargement under paragraph 3.6 of the SPD, or a reasonable enlargement of
    a dwelling under paragraph 3.7. It would therefore not benefit from these
    exceptions.
33. The planning appeals cited are also different to the one before me. They appear to
    have largely been assessed as either conversion or redevelopment of the existing
    home. Those schemes fall within paragraph 3.6 and subsequently 3.7 of the SPD,
    which relate to what is not garden land development and thus are subject to a
    different overall assessment. The scheme before me does not relate to the existing
    home and those decisions do not alter my findings that paragraphs 3.6 and 3.7 are
    not applicable in this case. Further, the cited appeals are not in the same location
    or context, do not relate to this scheme and also pre-date Policy GR10 of the LP.
    Their overall considerations and assessments are therefore different, so are not
    directly comparable to the scheme before me, which I have assessed based on its
    own merits.
34. When considering development on the site directly opposite the appeal site at
    143–145 Eastcote Lane and 172A Alexandra Avenue, those proposals were
    subject to a detailed assessment against the methodology contained within the
    SPD relating to redevelopment and enlargement. This is indeed different to the
    scheme before me. An element of judgement is necessary when applying the SPD
    aims and the development plan must be read as a whole. However, I find that, as
    the proposal relates to garden land development, it would result in incremental
    residential growth of the type Policy GR10 and the SPD seek to resist.
35. I have considered Policy H2 of the London Plan, 2021 which relates to small sites,
    but do not find there to be a conflict with this policy and the SPD because they
    target different types of small sites and operate under distinct qualifying criteria.
    Policy H2 supports small sites below 0.25 hectares to boost housing, but it does
    not grant a universal right to build on residential back gardens. The SPD seeks to
    clarify local plan policies in relation to garden land development. Policy HO3 of the
    LP supports the use of small housing sites but the supporting text specifically
7
 APP/M5450/W/22/3303368; APP/M5450/W/22/3313970; APP/M5450/W/18/3213211; APP/M5450/W/20/3263725;
APP/M5450/W/20/3265811; APP/M5450/W/21/3289022; APP/M5450/W/19/3224655; APP/M5450/W/19/3243513;
APP/M5450/W/24/3346145; APP/M5450/W/24/3340807


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       6
Appeal Decision 6006890


       explains that proposals will need to demonstrate consideration of Policy GR10 of
       the LP.
36. As set out earlier, there have been significant amendments made to the
    Framework against the 2024 version which I have had due regard to. Chapter 12
    of the Framework relates to making effective use of land where the objective is to
    promote the effective use of land in meeting the need for homes and other uses,
    while safeguarding and improving the environment and ensuring safe and healthy
    living conditions.
37. Policy L2 of the Framework explains that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits where a development proposal would achieve amongst others, creating
    additional homes or floorspace within settlements through additional development
    within existing plots (including, but not limited to, additional units within residential
    curtilages). The Framework sets out some compliance criteria for such proposals
    and requires amongst others, that where the development would involve the use of
    residential curtilages, it would not occupy more than twice the footprint of all the
    existing buildings on the site, and, following development, would retain at least
    50% of the non-developed area within the curtilage of the existing buildings. Based
    on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the proposed development would
    comply with this criterion. The other criteria are either not in dispute or subject to
    the subsequent reserved matters application and thus is not for consideration at
    this stage. The proposed development can however be reasonably considered as
    being broadly capable of meeting Policy L2 criteria.
38. It is clear that the Framework supports the delivery of additional housing within
    settlements, including through the development of existing residential plots subject
    to meeting certain criteria. Parts of the criteria are different to those set out in
    Policy GR10 of the LP and can be reasonably described as less restrictive. Criteria
    (b) of Policy GR10 only supports development on garden land where development
    makes a comprehensive use of land, taking into account the potential for
    redevelopment on surrounding parcels. This part of the policy is therefore
    materially inconsistent with the Framework’s national decision-making policies.
39. Annex A of the Framework makes clear that development plan policies, or parts of
    those policies, that are materially inconsistent with national policy should be given
    very limited weight. Consequently, very limited weight should be attached to
    criteria (b) of Policy GR10 and the associated SPD relating to garden land
    development.
40. While the proposal is technically in conflict with criteria (b) of Policy GR10 of the
    LP and the SPD, that conflict carries very limited weight because the policies are
    not aligned with the Framework. In contrast, substantial weight should be given to
    the Framework’s support for the effective use of land and the delivery of new
    homes within residential curtilages. Taking these considerations into account as
    well as its broad compliance with Policy L2 of the Framework, the proposed
    development would be suitably located and would accord with the objectives of the
    Framework. The location of the proposed development would therefore attract
    substantial support in principle.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
41. Policy S3 of the Framework explains that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006890


       explains that development proposals within settlements should be approved
       unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
       effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
       Framework.
42. The provision of residential development would be a benefit, and I acknowledge
    local and national policies relating to housing supply, small sites and effective use
    of land. To this end, the proposed development would create an additional unit
    within the residential curtilage of No 147. In accordance with the Framework, I
    attribute substantial weight to the benefits of the scheme.
43. Whilst I have found that the proposed development would be suitably located and
    would accord with the objectives of the Framework in this regard, I have found that
    the proposed development fails to demonstrate how it would achieve the statutory
    minimum 10% BNG, as required by the Act. This is a legal mandate and if the
    minimum statutory requirements are not met, then I do not have the legal authority
    to grant permission. This failure constitutes a severe environmental harm which is
    of such overriding importance that it substantially outweighs the benefits of the
    scheme when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework.
44. Other matters not in dispute do not weigh in favour of the scheme and are neutral
    factors in my overall decision.
45. Bringing everything together, the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan when considered as a whole. The material considerations do
    not, either individually or in combination, indicate that the appeal should be
    determined otherwise than in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly,
    I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
