Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 May 2026
by Laura Bartle BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7TH September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006049
308 Stockport Road, Tameside, Hyde SK14 5RU
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Home Residential Ltd against the decision of Tameside Metropolitan Borough
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/00913/FUL.
•      The development proposed is change of use from existing residential dwellinghouse (use class C3)
       to large-scale House in Multiple Occupation (7-bedroom, 8 occupants) (use class Sui Generis)
       together with external works including rear dormer extension and new window.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Homes Residential Limited against Tameside
   Metropolitan Borough Council. This application is the subject of a separate
   decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. The appellant submits that the appeal could be determined on the basis of either of
   two revised layout plans submitted to the Council before it reached its decision. The
   layouts differ materially in the nature and distribution of communal accommodation.
   These differences affect the way in which the House in Multiple Occupation (HMO)
   would function and the communal facilities available to occupiers. In my judgment,
   drawing 308SR/304/PL Rev 3 is not a minor amendment to the scheme determined
   by the Council but an alternative proposal.
4. The Procedural Guide for Planning Appeals1 is clear that the appeal process
   should not be used to evolve a scheme. Thus, to avoid prejudice to any party I
   have determined the appeal on the basis of the plans considered by the Council in
   determining the planning application.
5. During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given an
   opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the
   appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching my decision.
   References to the Framework in my decision are to the August 2026 version.



1
    Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England. For appeals relating to applications dated on or before 31 March 2026. - GOV.UK

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006049


Main Issues
6. The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for future
                occupiers, with regard to the provision of internal and external spaces;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
                neighbouring occupiers at 310 Stockport Road with regard to noise and
                disturbance;
           •    whether adequate refuse and recycling storage would be provided; and,
           •    the effect of the proposed development on parking provision in the
                surrounding area and highway safety.
Reasons
Living conditions – future occupiers
7. The appeal relates to a semi-detached dwelling that currently provides
   accommodation over three floors. The proposal seeks to extend and convert the
   property into a seven-bedroom HMO that would accommodate up to eight
   residents.
8. There is no dispute that each of the proposed bedrooms would satisfy the Council's
   minimum room size guidance set out within its Landlords' Guide to Houses in
   Multiple Occupation. I have also had regard to the comparison drawn with the
   Nationally Described Space Standards, although I acknowledge that these are
   primarily intended for self-contained dwellings rather than shared accommodation.
   Nevertheless, compliance with bedroom size standards does not, in itself,
   determine whether acceptable living conditions would be provided for future
   occupiers. I have therefore considered the proposal as a whole, including the
   quality and functionality of the communal accommodation and external amenity
   space.
9. I am satisfied that the quantity and distribution of the proposed kitchen and dining
   facilities would be capable of meeting the day-to-day needs of the intended number
   of occupants. However, the communal spaces would not provide sufficient
   opportunity for residents to sit, relax and socialise comfortably away from the food
   preparation and dining areas.
10. Whilst communal accommodation would be provided at both ground and first-floor
    levels, the configuration and limited size of these rooms would restrict their
    effectiveness as shared living space. Consequently, residents would have limited
    opportunities for communal recreation within the shared parts of the property and
    would be likely to rely to a greater extent on their bedrooms for such activities.
11. Turning to the provision of external amenity spaces, I am satisfied that these would
    be acceptable in quantitative terms and would accord with the requirements of
    Policy RD11 of the Council's Residential Design and Parking Supplementary
    Planning Document (SPD) insofar as the spaces would be enclosed. However, the
    principal area usable for sitting, relaxing and social interaction would be located
    immediately outside the ground-floor window to bedroom 3 at the front of the
    property. As a result, both the occupant of bedroom 3 and users of the external


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006049


     amenity area would experience an appreciably reduced level of privacy and
     comfort. These effects would be particularly acute when the bedroom window is
     open.
12. Although the attractiveness of this space may be diminished, the restrictions I have
    identified in respect of the internal communal accommodation are such that the
    outdoor amenity area would likely be used regularly for sitting, relaxing and social
    interaction when weather permits. Whilst a similar physical relationship may exist
    at present, it is unlikely that this ground-floor room would ordinarily function as a
    principal bedroom within a family dwelling. In any event, the effects on privacy and
    living conditions would be materially different between members of a single
    household and unrelated occupants sharing HMO accommodation.
13. The appellant has referred to appeal decisions relating to HMOs where smaller
    areas of garden space, or no garden space at all, were found to be acceptable.
    However, the full details of those cases are not before me and, in any event, my
    concerns do not relate principally to the quantity of outdoor space provided. Rather,
    they arise from the relationship between the proposed internal communal areas
    and the external amenity space, and the extent to which those facilities would
    adequately serve the day-to-day living needs of future occupiers. The associated
    potential harmful effects that I have identified would not be sufficiently mitigated
    through property management arrangements.
14. The Council has also expressed concern regarding the potential for future
    occupiers to experience noise and disturbance arising from adjoining rooms and
    circulation areas. However, I am satisfied that such matters could be appropriately
    addressed through sound insulation measures that are controlled through Building
    Regulations. Consequently, this issue does not weigh against the proposal.
15. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposal would fail to provide an
    acceptable standard of living accommodation for future occupiers. The proposal
    therefore conflicts with Policy H10 of the Tameside Unitary Development Plan
    (UDP) which requires development to meet the needs of the potential occupiers. It
    is also contrary to the Framework's objective of securing high quality, well-designed
    development, including Policy DP3, which requires development proposals to
    promote social interaction, and Policy P3, which seeks to secure healthy living
    conditions for occupiers.
Living conditions – neighbouring occupiers
16. The appellant contends that the existing three-bed property could theoretically
    accommodate a large family household of a similar overall occupancy to that
    proposed. Whilst that may be so, a HMO would typically exhibit a different pattern
    of occupation to a single household, with occupants living more independently of
    one another and making greater use of shared facilities throughout the day.
    Accordingly, the proposal would be likely to result in a more intensive use of the
    property, characterised by more frequent comings and goings and a greater level of
    activity than would arise from its existing use as a dwellinghouse.
17. I have identified above that this more intensive activity would extend to the use of
    the front garden as communal outdoor space. The amenity area would be located
    in close proximity to the ground-floor window serving the adjoining property at No.
    310 Stockport Road. As a consequence, activity associated with the use of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006049


     outdoor space, including conversation and social gatherings, would be experienced
     at close quarters by the occupiers of that neighbouring property.
18. The noise and general disturbance resulting from the use of the front garden
    combined with that arising from the day-to-day comings and goings would
    materially erode the living conditions currently enjoyed by the neighbouring
    occupiers, even accounting for the existing levels of background traffic noise
    associated with activity on Stockport Road.
19. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would result in unacceptable harm to
    the living conditions of the occupiers of 310 Stockport Road, with particular regard
    to noise and disturbance. The proposal therefore conflicts with Policy H10 of the
    UDP, which seeks, amongst other things, to ensure that development does not
    have an unacceptable impact upon the amenity of neighbouring occupiers. It is also
    in conflict with Policy P3 of the Framework and its requirement for development
    proposals to be appropriate for their location, taking into account likely cumulative
    effects on off-site living conditions.
Waste
20. Refuse and recycling storage would be located within the rear outdoor area.
    However, the evidence before me does not clearly identify the type, size or number
    of bins required to serve an HMO accommodating up to 8 residents. Nor does it
    demonstrate that sufficient space would remain available to accommodate the
    required refuse and recycling facilities alongside the proposed cycle storage
    provision.
21. As a consequence, I am unable to be satisfied that adequate refuse and recycling
    storage could be provided without compromising the functionality and usability of
    the external amenity space. Whilst a condition could secure details of the future
    management and collection of waste, including arrangements for presenting bins
    for collection, such a condition would not overcome the fundamental uncertainty
    regarding whether sufficient space exists within the site to accommodate the
    necessary storage facilities in the first place.
22. The Framework makes clear that planning conditions should only be imposed
    where they are necessary, relevant and enforceable. In this case, the absence of
    sufficient information means that a condition requiring the subsequent submission
    of refuse storage details would be used to resolve a matter that goes to the
    acceptability of the development itself.
23. In the absence of sufficient information demonstrating that appropriate storage
    could be accommodated on the site, I cannot be satisfied that the proposal would
    provide adequate refuse and recycling facilities. The development would therefore
    not accord with Policy JP-P1 of Places for Everyone, which seeks, amongst other
    things, to ensure that development responds appropriately to infrastructure and
    operational requirements, including refuse collection and storage.
Car parking and highway safety
24. My attention has not been drawn to any specific development plan parking
    standard applicable to HMOs. However, the Council's Residential Design and
    Parking SPD identifies an advisory requirement of three parking spaces for
    dwellings with more than four bedrooms in this location. The appellant's evidence


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006049


     does not dispute that figure, but contends that actual demand would likely be lower
     because occupiers of HMOs typically exhibit lower levels of car ownership than the
     wider population.
25. No off-street parking is proposed and any vehicles associated with the
    development would therefore be accommodated on the surrounding highway
    network. This reflects the existing situation at the property.
26. The appeal site occupies a highly accessible location on Stockport Road, which is
    served by public transport and benefits from access to a range of services and
    facilities. Although Stockport Road appears to experience a high volume of
    vehicular traffic, including bus movements, there is no substantive evidence before
    me to indicate that either the road itself or the adjoining residential streets
    experience severe parking pressures or operate in a constrained manner.
    Furthermore, on-street parking within the surrounding area is not controlled by a
    residents parking scheme.
27. Whilst the proposal would intensify the use of the site, the likely increase in parking
    demand would be relatively modest. In that regard, the advisory SPD requirement
    equates to approximately one additional space above that which might reasonably
    be expected from the existing three-bedroom dwelling. Although the appellant's
    intention to market the accommodation as car-free could not be secured through a
    planning condition, the site's accessibility by sustainable modes of transport is such
    that future occupiers would not be heavily dependent on private vehicles for day-to-
    day travel.
28. Taking these matters together, and in the absence of compelling evidence
    demonstrating existing parking stress or highway capacity issues in the locality, I
    am not persuaded that the modest increase in parking demand likely to arise from
    the development would result in harmful on-street parking conditions or
    unacceptable effects on highway safety.
29. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would not result in unacceptable impacts
    on parking provision in the surrounding area or highway safety. The development
    would therefore accord with Policy T1 of the UDP and with Policies JP-C6 and JP-
    C8 of Places for Everyone. These policies, amongst other things, seek to ensure
    developments make adequate provision for car parking and support a higher
    proportion of journeys made by walking and cycling. I also find the proposal to be
    consistent with Policy TR4 of the Framework and the requirement for parking space
    provision to reflect the location and nature of the development.
Other Matters
30. I note the appellant's concerns that the Council did not adequately raise the
    absence of a separate living room during the determination of the application.
    However, the manner in which the application was handled by the Council is not a
    matter for me in determining this appeal. For the avoidance of doubt, my
    conclusions are based on my assessment of the appeal proposal and the evidence
    before me. In reaching my findings, I have considered the overall quality and
    functionality of the communal accommodation rather than the absence of a
    separate living room in isolation.
Planning Balance


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006049


31. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
32. The proposal would make more efficient use of an existing residential property and
    would contribute to the supply of housing by providing additional shared
    accommodation in a sustainable location with good access to services, facilities
    and public transport. The development would also provide a form of housing that
    may be more affordable and accessible to certain groups within the community
    than self-contained market housing. I afford these benefits moderate weight.
33. Against this, I have identified conflict with the Framework arising from the failure of
    the proposal to provide satisfactory living conditions for future occupiers and
    unacceptable harms to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. In addition,
    it has not been demonstrated that adequate refuse and recycling storage facilities
    would be provided. I afford these conflicts significant weight.
34. The proposal's acceptable effects in respect of car parking and highway safety
    attract neutral weight in the planning balance.
35. Taking all matters into account, I find that the adverse effects of the proposal
    substantially outweigh its benefits. Accordingly, the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development established by Policy S3 of the Framework does not
    apply to this appeal.
Conclusion
36. The proposal conflicts with the development plan when considered as a whole and
    there are no material considerations that indicate a decision should be made
    otherwise than in accordance with the development plan.
37. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Laura Bartle
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
