Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by Jane Smith MA MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6006761
 Land at Blunts Farm, Coopersale Lane, Theydon Bois, Epping, Essex CM16 7NT
 •      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •      The appeal is made by Theydon Farm Units Ltd against the decision of Epping Forest District
        Council.
 •      The application Ref is EPF/1406/22.
 •      The development proposed is change of use from agricultural to B8 storage and associated
        development.

 Decision
 1.       The appeal is dismissed.
 Preliminary Matters
 2.       A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on
          17 August 2026 and is a material consideration in this appeal. Both main parties
          have had the opportunity to comment on its implications for their cases, and I have
          taken comments received into account.
 3.       The Procedural Guide1 explains that video evidence cannot be accepted in the
          appeal process, as it is not possible to be sure that everyone involved is able to
          view the same evidence. I have accordingly not had access to, or taken into
          account, any evidence in the representations from interested parties which was
          submitted in that format. However, I have had regard to the still image files which
          were provided to convey the same evidence in an alternative form.
 4.       It became apparent while the appeal was in progress that one of the letters of
          representation received by the Council had not initially been forwarded with the
          appeal questionnaire. However, a copy has been provided, and the appellant has
          had the opportunity to comment on it.
 5.       The appellant’s final comments included some points which had not previously
          been made. The Council was given an opportunity to respond to that additional
          evidence but chose not to do so. I have taken the evidence in final comments into
          account and am satisfied that no procedural unfairness arises as a result.
 6.       I have noted evidence provided by all parties about the planning history of the site,
          including the enforcement notice (EN) served in 2022, shortly after which this
          planning application was made. I have also noted that the 2024 appeal decision
          which quashed the EN referred to an existing storage and distribution use of the
          site at that time, alongside other uses, and that interested parties allege that non-
 1
     Procedural Guide: Planning Appeals - England

 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006761


       agricultural uses persist. For the avoidance of doubt, while I have had regard to
       the planning history to the extent that it is relevant to the issues before me, it is not
       the function of this appeal to determine what use, if any, is currently being made of
       the site. I have considered the appeal on the basis of the proposal as detailed in
       the planning application, which was for change of use of agricultural buildings to a
       B8 use, defined in the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as
       amended) as ‘use for storage or as a distribution centre’.
Main Issues
7.     The Council concluded that the proposal would not be inappropriate development
       in the Green Belt, since it would involve the re-use of existing buildings in
       accordance with paragraph 154(h)(iv) of the 2024 Framework. In the revised
       Framework, the wording of the equivalent policy GB7 differs, but it continues to
       allow in principle for re-use of existing buildings in the Green Belt, provided they
       are of permanent and substantial construction.
8.     The buildings were apparently described as dilapidated in an earlier appeal
       decision, but that decision was made some considerable time ago. The buildings
       have apparently been renovated since then. There is no substantive evidence
       before me to suggest that those renovations were unlawful, and it does not appear
       that any such allegation was made in the enforcement notice, which dates from
       around the same time. When I visited the site, the buildings appeared to be of
       permanent and substantial construction. As such, based on the evidence before
       me, I have no reason to disagree with the Council’s conclusion that their reuse is
       not inappropriate development in the Green Belt. That being the case, it is not
       necessary to consider whether the proposed use would have any adverse impact
       on the openness of the Green Belt.
9.     Against that background, based on the reasons for refusal, the main issues are:
         •     the effect of the development on highway safety, and
         •     whether the proposed development would be acceptably located having
               regard to its accessibility by means of sustainable transport modes.
Reasons
Highway safety
10. The appeal site contains a range of former agricultural buildings of various size,
    with areas of hardstanding, in a typical farmyard layout. It is set back from
    Coopersale Lane, behind neighbouring dwellings. Access is by means of a private
    track, which also serves other commercial premises outside the appeal site.
11. At the junction with Coopersale Lane, the access provides for two-way vehicle
    movement, and there are turning radii at the corners. On the west side, there is a
    post and rail fence around the corner. A soft verge continues along the edge of
    Coopersale Lane, in front of the fence. The verge includes a drainage ditch and
    there is a hedgerow behind that. At the time of my site visit, the hedgerow was
    largely set back behind more open sections of verge, but there was some
    vegetation further forward, and stumps indicating where growth had been cut back.
12. The Glossary in Annex B of the Framework includes B8 storage and distribution
    uses within a wider category of ‘freight and logistics’ uses. In comparison with

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006761


       some such uses, the site would be of a modest scale. Nevertheless, the premises
       would not be insignificant in extent, amounting to just under 2000sqm of floorspace
       across five buildings, divided into 30 units. The May 2022 Ardent Transport
       Statement predicts around 170 daily trips and that is not disputed in the Highways
       Authority’s evidence for this appeal.
13. Although the access is already in use, and carries some commercial traffic
    associated with the adjacent site, the existing use of the appeal site in planning
    terms is for agricultural purposes. Therefore, for purposes of this appeal, that is the
    baseline for considering whether vehicular use of the access would increase.
    Agriculture encompasses a wide range of activities, with different servicing
    requirements, so the associated traffic movements can vary. Indeed, the
    comparability of the single agricultural site referenced in the Ardent EFSAC
    Technical Note has been questioned in representations. Nevertheless, even if
    those figures are taken at face value, there would be a significant increase in use
    of the existing access, amounting to more than the modest level of intensification
    acknowledged by the appellant.
14. The access is on the inside of a gentle bend, where the encroachment of
    vegetation could impair visibility. That introduces a risk of conflict between vehicles
    making turning movements at the access and those proceeding along the lane. As
    such, unless suitable visibility can be secured, more intensive use of the access
    would be prejudicial to highway safety. While the accident records presented do
    not point to an existing safety concern along the lane, that does not mean that its
    safety is secured for future, more intensive use.
15. There is no dispute that visibility splays of 2.4m by 78m are required to the west or
    that the appellant does not directly control the land required to provide that
    standard of visibility. The disagreement hinges on whether the visibility splays
    could be secured within land controlled by the Highways Authority. It is evident
    from their first consultation response that the Highways Authority initially accepted
    the appellant’s evidence that the visibility splays could be secured on highway
    land. Against that background, it appears that a recommendation was initially
    drafted to grant planning permission. However, that recommendation was
    withdrawn following a site visit and receipt of further Highways evidence. Based on
    that most recent evidence, the extent of the highway land is disputed.
16. The Council’s position is supported by an email dated 31 October 2025 from the
    Essex Highways Records Team, which states that the highway extends only to the
    roadside brow of the ditch. The only mapped evidence provided in support is
    acknowledged by the author to be in crude form, amounting to hand annotation of
    an extract from the appellant’s survey drawing. However, the explanatory email
    clearly states that the ditch is part of the adjacent private property, irrespective of
    the red line boundary shown on Land Registry title plans or Ordnance Survey base
    maps. It also indicates that the exclusion of ditches from the highway would have
    been given as a proviso when the highway plan was originally provided, although
    no documentary evidence has been provided to that effect.
17. There is no clear evidence that similar advice on the extent of the highway was
    available when previous applications or appeals were considered. As such, even if
    similar highways issues were not raised then, that is of limited relevance in light of
    the current highways evidence.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006761


18. The appellant does not accept the Highways Authority’s evidence on the exclusion
    of the ditch from the highway and that is the crux of the issue before me. It is also,
    however, evident from the drawings that the 2.4 x 78m visibility splay would rely on
    land which includes the ditch and the section of verge immediately behind it.
    Although that land is outside what appears to be a boundary fence and hedge
    defining the extent of the adjacent private property, there is no guarantee that
    those features are in fact on the edge of the highway. The amount of land alleged
    to be outside the highway is not insignificant and if it is in private hands, that would
    be prejudicial to providing and maintaining the visibility splay.
19. While I acknowledge that the evidence from both parties is contradictory, it is clear
    that the visibility splay could only be adequately secured, and maintained for the
    duration of the proposed use, through co-operation with the Highways Authority.
    Based on the evidence before me at this point, they do not accept ownership of all
    the required land and therefore that co-operation cannot be relied upon. That
    being the case, a condition to secure the visibility splay would not be enforceable
    by the local planning authority, which would be contrary to one of the tests for
    planning conditions in Planning Practice Guidance (PPG), as incorporated into
    Policy DM6 of the Framework.
20. The condition would also fall outside the powers granted by s72(1) of the Town
    and Country Planning Act 1990, which allows for conditions to regulate
    development or require the carrying out of works only on land under the control of
    the applicant. It would not accord with guidance in the PPG for use of Grampian
    conditions since, based on the evidence before me, there is no prospect of the
    vegetation within the disputed section of the visibility splay being kept cut back, if it
    belongs to an adjoining private landowner.
21. For the above reasons, based on the evidence before me, I conclude that the
    development would have an unacceptably harmful effect on highway safety, which
    cannot be addressed by planning conditions. That would be contrary to Policy T1
    of the Epping Forest District Local Plan 2023 (the Local Plan) which articulates the
    Council’s policy to promote a safe transport system and requires in part E that it is
    demonstrated that development proposals would not compromise highway safety.
    The proposal would also conflict with Policy TR6 of the Framework which states
    amongst other things that development proposals should be refused if they would
    have an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
22. Policy DM9 of the Local Plan is also referred to in the reason for refusal but is less
    clearly relevant. While the design requirements in that policy include maximising
    connectivity and safe pedestrian and cycling routes, they do not explicitly
    reference vehicular highway safety. Nevertheless, the conflict with Policy T1 is
    sufficient to bring the proposal into conflict with the development plan as a whole.
Suitability of location
23. The appeal site is located in countryside approximately 1km outside the nearest
    settlement of Theydon Bois, in an area shown as having poor connectivity on the
    Essex Parking Connectivity Map. There is an underground station on the near
    edge of Theydon Bois and there is also a bus route along Abridge Road. But
    although neither is a great distance away, they could only be reached via
    Coopersale Lane, which is enclosed by hedgerows and lacks dedicated footpaths
    or street lighting. It is therefore highly unlikely that the site would routinely be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006761


         accessed on foot, and that in turn greatly reduces any prospects of the public
         transport options being used.
24. The public rights of way to the north are on the other side of a tract of open land,
    where they also appear highly unlikely to be used as a walking route by employees
    or others needing to access the site for reasons related to its B8 use. Cycling from
    Theydon Bois might be practicable for a competent and confident cyclist, given the
    relatively short distance, making that a possible option for travel to and from work.
    Nevertheless, it can reasonably be anticipated that the vast majority of trips to and
    from the site would be by private motor vehicle.
25. In the Framework, Policy TR3 includes that development which could generate a
    significant amount of movement, in the context of the area within which it would be
    situated, should be in locations that are, or can be made sustainable. That is,
    where the need to travel by car is limited and a genuine choice of transport modes
    is available. While the proposed use would be relatively modest by the standard of
    freight and logistics uses, it would generate a significant amount of movement
    compared to the former agricultural use of the site. The transport evidence
    indicates that can be accommodated within the rural road network, and the Council
    has not alleged otherwise. Nevertheless, there would be frequent and regular
    vehicle movements to and from the site, as that is operationally characteristic of a
    storage or distribution use.
26. Drawing on the TRICS database, the Ardent Highways Technical Note for this
    appeal includes evidence that B8 uses do not typically attract trips by cycle, public
    transport or on foot. However, that does not mean that the nature of the
    development makes travel by those means inherently impractical. While the use is
    operationally reliant on use of motor vehicles, including vans and lorries,
    employees could travel to and from work by other means, where those options
    exist. Furthermore, Policy E3 of the Framework requires that development
    proposals for freight and logistics uses have good access to transport networks
    appropriate to the type of development, including via sustainable transport modes
    where possible. Since the availability of sustainable transport modes is described
    in the Framework as being relevant to B8 uses, the lack of realistic alternative
    travel options weighs against the suitability of the location.
27. At the same time, Framework Policy E4 is supportive of conversion of existing
    buildings to support the sustainable growth of businesses in rural areas. Policy E4
    also recognises that development to meet business needs in rural areas may need
    to be located outside settlements and in locations that are not well served by
    public transport. There is little specific evidence of how this proposal would support
    the growth of any existing rural business, since no specific occupier is detailed.
    Nor would it clearly support farm diversification, since the previous agricultural use
    appears to have ceased. Nevertheless, it would generate some employment and
    support economic activity in the rural area more generally, so it gains some
    support from Policy E4.
28. The buildings are suited to a B8 use, according to the Strettons report2 included
    with the Planning Statement, which also details local demand for B8 uses,
    outstripping supply. The Strettons report is now a few years old, and the other
    economic evidence attached to the Planning Statement is even older. A new Local

2
    Strettons Ltd letter dated 26 May 2022


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     5
Appeal Decision 6006761


       Plan has been adopted since then, and the evidence before me does not go on to
       consider the extent to which any unmet need for B8 uses is or is not now being
       addressed at a strategic level. Nevertheless, Policy E2 of the Framework requires
       that economic benefits derived from improvements in freight and logistics are
       given substantial weight. While the site may not be ideally located for the use, that
       is a further factor in favour of the development.
29. Taking those particular circumstances into consideration, I conclude that the
    proposed development would be acceptably located having regard to its
    accessibility by sustainable transport modes. It would conflict with Policy T1 of the
    Local Plan, since the location would not minimise the need to travel or promote
    opportunities for sustainable transport modes. There would also be some conflict
    with Policies TR3 and E3 of the Framework, for the same reason. However, that
    would be mitigated by the positive approach taken in Policies E2 and E4 of the
    Framework towards improvements to freight and logistics and rural business uses
    respectively. When considered against the most relevant national decision-making
    policies taken together, the location would be acceptable, albeit not ideal.
Other Considerations
30. The alterations to the buildings would broadly maintain their existing character.
    Parking would be accommodated on the existing hardstandings, without any
    apparent need to extend into the surrounding countryside. The proposed
    landscaping, including a new hedge at the rear, would help to contain the use and
    an existing security cabin would be removed. There may be some minor visual
    benefit from resurfacing of the access road, although the current surface is not
    untypical of a rural farm or business use. Overall, those proposed measures would
    provide some limited visual benefits, but largely only from the public rights of way
    some way to the north.
31. Some minor ecological enhancements are proposed, but the proposal would be
    exempt from the statutory requirement for biodiversity net gain, as the application
    was made before that regime was introduced.
32. Evidence has been provided of how environmental issues such as air quality, dust,
    noise, land contamination, drainage and ecological impacts could be addressed,
    using planning conditions where necessary. Those are, however, neutral
    considerations not weighing in favour of the development.
Planning Balance
33. In the context of the presumption in favour of sustainable development, Policy S5
    of the Framework is applicable. Where development is proposed in the Green Belt,
    that directs the decision-maker initially to Framework Policies GB6, GB7 and GB8
    as appropriate. However, in this case, for the reasons given above, the proposal
    would not be inappropriate development when assessed against Policy GB7. That
    being so, part 2 of Policy S5 is applicable. That states that, in applying Policy S5,
    the circumstances in which the benefits of approving development proposals are
    likely to be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects include, but are not
    restricted to, situations where the development proposal would fail to comply with
    one of the national decision-making policies which state that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006761


34. In principle, development providing improvements in freight and logistics should be
    given substantial positive weight in accordance with Policy E2 of the Framework.
    However, in this case the site is less than ideally located, when the conflict with
    national decision-making Policies TR3 and E3 is also taken into account. It would
    also be of a relatively modest scale in the context of the freight and logistics
    sector, and the evidence cited regarding unmet demand for such uses is dated.
    Nevertheless, the economic benefits, including any support for the rural economy,
    are the most significant factor in favour of the proposal, along with the other, more
    limited benefits.
35. Having considered the contradictory evidence from both parties, I have concluded
    based on the evidence before me that there would be a conflict with Policy TR6 of
    the Framework. The proposal would be more specifically contrary to Policy TR6
    part 4, which is amongst the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. In this case,
    those circumstances are the unacceptable impact on highway safety, in the
    absence of clear evidence that the required visibility can be properly secured.
36. Having regard to the conflict with Policy TR6, in my judgement the economic and
    other benefits of this particular proposal would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effect on highway safety. Consequently, the proposal does not benefit
    from the presumption in favour of sustainable development as articulated in
    Policies S3 and S5 of the Framework.
Other Matters
37. A variety of other concerns have been raised in representations, including the
    effect of commercial use on living conditions within neighbouring dwellings. The
    site is also within a Zone of Influence of the Epping Forest Special Area of
    Conservation, where mitigation would be required for likely significant effects on
    the qualifying features of this Habitats Site. However, those matters are not
    contested between the main parties, subject to use of suitable planning conditions.
    Since I am dismissing the appeal for the reasons given above, any other matters
    raised could not have a bearing on the outcome, so there is no need for me to
    consider them further.
Conclusion
38. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.



Jane Smith
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
