 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 20 July 2026
 by Martin Andrews MA(Planning) BSc(Econ) DipTP & DipTP(Dist) MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 22 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6006002
 28 Carew Road, Eastbourne, East Sussex BN21 2JG
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Mark Perkins (MAP Property (S.E.) LLP) against Eastbourne Borough
      Council.
 •    The application Ref. is 250410.
 •    The development proposed is a part retrospective change of use of the lower ground floor garden
      room / store area of the apartment block and the L-shaped outbuilding to the rear of the site to create
      two new dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for a change of use of
   the lower ground floor garden room / store area of the apartment block and the L-
   shaped outbuilding to the rear of the site to create two new dwellings at 28 Carew
   Road, Eastbourne, East Sussex BN21 2JG in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref. 250410 and the plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in
   the attached Schedule.
Application for Costs
2. An application for an award of costs was made by Mr Mark Perkins against
   Eastbourne Borough Council. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are (i) the effect on the character and appearance of the area of
   the proposed change of use of the L-shaped outbuilding (Unit 5) to a dwelling; (ii)
   the adequacy of living conditions for occupiers of the main building and Unit 5 as
   regards privacy, and (iii) the status of the dwellings in terms of whether they should
   be regarded as self-build or open market for the purpose of their occupation. In this
   context there is the further matter of the appropriateness of the provision of
   Biodiversity Net Gain (‘BNG’).
Reasons
Character and Appearance
4. The Council’s objection on this issue is that the smaller scale of the proposed Unit
   5 dwelling and of its curtilage would be at odds with the wider streetscene of Carew
   Road which is ‘characterised by large / wide properties on large plots’. As such, it is
   considered that the development would fail to preserve and respect the character of
   the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref. No. 6006002


5. However, because of the steep fall of the land away from Carew Road and its
   position adjoining the rear boundary of the overall site there would be little if any
   view of the proposed dwelling from the public realm and therefore no impact on the
   street scene. Furthermore, the approved altered main building with its steeply
   sloping roof pitch and heavily gabled front elevation comprises a radically different
   design and appearance compared to that of the run of buildings on either side and
   has a resulting individuality that draws the eye. I consider that this has a much
   greater impact than the proposed change of use. As regards the backland siting of
   Unit 5, the Council has already approved the construction of the outbuilding to be
   converted into the proposed dwelling and given its discreet siting the residential
   occupancy would not present any obvious change to the character of the area.
6. This leaves the issue rather more one of the principle of a residential use in a
   rearward position separate from its surroundings of flats in large frontage buildings
   along Carew Road including No. 28 the donor property. For the appellant, it is
   argued that there are already local examples at Nos. 15, 15A and 15B Carew Road
   and the Highland Lodge development on the opposite side of the road. At my visit I
   was unable to observe the rear of Nos. 15, 15A and 15B, but it was evident that
   Highland Lodge is an example of a large-scale residential development that
   occupies the full depth of its site.
7. The built form of Highland Lodge is very different in scale and layout to the appeal
   site, but this example and indeed other rearward development in nearby Mill Gap
   Road does serve to illustrate the varied character of the area. And given this variety
   I am unable to concur with the Council’s view that the proposed dwelling would
   cause actual or perceived harm to the visual amenity and character of an area
   which for the most part is characterised by flats, including those that have been
   purpose built and conversions of the original large houses.
8. On this issue I therefore find that there would be no harmful conflict with Policies
   C11 & D10a of the Eastbourne Core Strategy Local Plan 2006-2027; Policies
   UHT1, UHT4 and UHT15 of the Eastbourne Local Plan 2003, or with Government
   policy in Section 14: ‘Achieving Well-Designed Places’ of the National Planning
   Policy Framework August 2026 (‘the Framework’).
Living Conditions
9. On this issue the Council considers that the change of use of the rear outbuilding to
   a dwelling would result in an outdoor amenity space that would be significantly
   overlooked by the rear windows of flats in the main building. Similarly, there would
   be overlooking of the rear garden of these flats from the front facing first floor
   window of the new dwelling. In both cases the effect on the privacy of occupants is
   considered to be unacceptable and in conflict with local and national policy.
10. However, Unit 5, although in the form of a freestanding dwelling, is nonetheless to
    all intents and purposes part and parcel of a larger flats development with shared
    vehicular access and facilities and where, as with almost all blocks of flats, there is
    mutual overlooking of the communal garden area by the occupiers. In my view,
    although the new dwelling would have a separate garden, its siting within the larger
    area of land that also provides the amenity area for the flat occupiers in the original
    building would be clearly understood by any prospective occupant. Accordingly,
    they would be able to exercise their personal judgement as to its acceptability or
    otherwise.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision Ref. No. 6006002


11. Furthermore, the effect on the privacy of occupants of both Unit 5 and the flats in
    the main building would be mitigated by the differential height arising from the
    sloping land, further accentuated by the garden area of the proposed dwelling
    being at lower ground floor level. Ostensibly this is counter-intuitive but because of
    the slope and the levels, views out of the first-floor window of the new dwelling
    would be somewhat foreshortened and views from the flats in the main building
    would tend over-sail the lower garden and site level.
12. These points are to some degree acknowledged in paragraph 4.7 of the Council’s
    appeal statement, but I give them greater weight in this appeal. I am also mindful
    that a 20m gap between the existing flats and the proposed dwelling is a widely
    used benchmark used by LPAs for protecting privacy and avoiding overlooking.
13. On this issue, I conclude that living conditions as regards privacy for all existing and
    future residents at 28 Carew Road would be adequate and that there would be no
    conflict with either Policy B2 of the Eastbourne Core Strategy 2006-2027; Policy
    HO20 of the Eastbourne Borough Local Plan 2003 or the policies in section 17 of
    the Framework.
Self-build or Open Market and BNG
14. There is a dispute between the parties as to whether the initial approval given by
    the Council under application reference 230229 for (amongst other details) a
    change of use from Class C4 (HMO) to Class C3 (Dwellinghouse) and an additional
    flat was for self-build purposes, which would then warrant an exception being made
    to compliance with BNG regulations. There is some evidence in this appeal, albeit
    limited, that the accommodation was referred to by the appellant as being for family
    purposes, but more importantly neither the application description nor the
    conditions attached to the permission referred to self-build. The current application
    which is the subject of this appeal is for the two additional dwellings for disposal on
    the open market and I consider this to be appropriate.
15. The appellant argues that the development is exempt from BNG as it will not impact
    a priority habitat and impacts less than 25sqm of on-site habitat and 5m of on-site
    linear habitat. Furthermore, the current application which is essentially confined to a
    change of use of the existing lower ground floor of the main building and the rear
    outbuilding does not increase the built form on the site.
16. There is no detailed evidence in this appeal relating to habitats on the site and as a
    more general point the first application was approved before the BNG requirements
    became mandatory. I am also aware that following recent amendments, any new
    application on the lines of the proposed development would also be exempt on the
    combined basis that it is not a priority habitat and with a site are of 0.15ha it is
    below the 0.2m threshold for BNG provision. Whilst the latter does not technically
    apply to the current appeal it nonetheless supports the principle of exemption at
    No. 28 Carew Road.
Other Matters
17. Local residents have made representations on the proposal and I have considered
    these. They include agreement with the Council that the proposed change of use,
    in particular the outbuilding, would have an adverse effect on the character of the
    area. However, I have appraised this issue in the reasons for my decision above


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
 Appeal Decision Ref. No. 6006002


     and do not share that view. Objections in respect of insufficient parking are not
     supported by the Local Highway Authority.
18. The occupier of a property to the rear of the site has complained as to the proximity
    of the proposed separate dwelling to their boundary. I am sympathetic to this view,
    but the building was approved under the previous application, and I do not consider
    that its now proposed use as a dwelling would in itself cause unacceptable harm.
Conclusion and Conditions
19. On the main issues, I am of the view that the proposed change of use to create two
    extra dwellings at No. 28 Carew Road would have no adverse effect on the
    character and appearance of the area. Nor would there be unacceptable living
    conditions as regards privacy, and I see no need for the development to be
    restricted to self-build. Accordingly, as indicated in paragraphs 8, 13 and 16 above,
    there would be no harmful conflict with the Council’s policies and Government
    policy in the Framework, whilst BNG regulations are not applicable given the
    particular circumstances of the site and its planning history.
20. Furthermore, in weighing the planning balance on the main issues in this appeal, I
    consider that two additional dwellings in a sustainable location will make an
    incremental but valuable contribution to housing supply in the Borough and that this
    therefore supports the case in favour of a grant of permission.
21. The appeal is therefore allowed subject to the conditions suggested by the Council.
    However, this excludes the condition limiting the accommodation to the applicant’s
    family, which because of the initial permission under reference 230229 does not
    meet the requirement in the Government’s online Planning Practice Guidance for
    conditions to be necessary, relevant to the development to be permitted and
    reasonable in all other respects. Such a condition would also be likely to adversely
    affect the scheme’s viability and thereby delay the much-needed completion of the
    development with an end to its current negative impact on neighbouring properties
    and the street scene.
22. A condition requiring the development to be carried out in accordance with the
    approved plans is needed for the avoidance of doubt and is in the interests of
    proper planning. Conditions requiring the Council’s prior approval of the details of
    all external finishes and ground surfaces will safeguard amenity and minimise
    surface water run-off. A condition requiring cycle storage will provide alternative
    travel options to the use of the car and is in accordance with local and national
    sustainable transport policies. Finally, conditions withdrawing permitted
    development rights for the converted outbuilding are necessary in this particular
    case to prevent detriment to the amenities of nearby occupiers and harm being
    caused to the character and appearance of the site and it surroundings.

Martin Andrews
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
 Appeal Decision Ref. No. 6006002


     Schedule of Conditions
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
             the date of this Decision;
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans: Drawing No. Series M256: Plan Nos. 01 Rev D;
             10 Rev G; 11 Rev E; 12 Rev G; 13 Rev F; 14 Rev D; 15 Rev F; 16 Rev F; 17
             Rev F; 18 Rev G; 19; 20 Rev G; 22 Rev G; 24 Rev F; 30 Rev F; 31 Rev E; 32
             Rev E; 33 Rev E; 34 Rev E; 35 Rev E; 40 Rev A; 41 Rev A; 43 Rev A; 44
             Rev A; 50; 51; 52; 53; 60; 61; 62; 63;
     3)      The external finishes of the development hereby permitted shall be as stated
             on the approved drawings and within the submitted application form. No
             exterior finishes or surfacing shall be installed until a full specification of all
             external finishes and surfaces has been submitted to and approved by the
             Local Planning Authority. This shall include permeable surfacing for all hard
             surfaced areas where practicable.
     4)      Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, secure cycle
             parking shall be provided within the site in accordance with the approved
             plans. Thereafter the facilities shall be retained solely for the parking of
             cycles in accordance with the approved plans for the lifetime of the
             development;
     5)      All ground surfaces of the development, hereby approved, shall be
             constructed in porous materials or discharge surface water onto porous
             areas within the application site and shall remain as such for the lifetime of
             the development. No surface water shall be discharged onto the public
             highway or adjoining land;
     6)      Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
             Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-
             enacting that Order with or without modification) no extension to the building
             (Unit 5) hereby approved shall be erected, and no window, dormer window,
             rooflight or door shall be constructed within the elevations or the roof of the
             new dwelling other than those expressly authorised by this permission;
     7)      Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
             Permitted Development) (England)Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-
             enacting that Order with or without modification) no outbuildings, raised
             platforms or hard surfacing shall be erected within the curtilage of the
             dwelling (Unit 5) hereby approved other than that expressly authorised by
             this permission shall be carried out without planning permission first being
             obtained from the Local Planning Authority.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        5
