 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6006657
 24 Nutcombe Crescent, Rochford, Essex, SS4 1RT
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Harper against the decision of Rochford District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25/00273/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is a single storey rear extension and proposed loft conversion, flat roof
      front dormer and flat roof rear dormer with associated internal alterations.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue in this case is the effect of the front dormer on the character and
   appearance of the bungalow and the streetscene generally.
Reasons
3. The appeal site is a semi-detached bungalow, with an existing rear conservatory
   and a single storey rear extension, within in a residential area. The surrounding
   area consists predominantly of semi-detached bungalows of a generally uniform
   character. Extensions to roofs with front and rear dormers are present within the
   wider streetscene. Although the application form described the proposal to include
   a pitched roofed front dormer, the submitted plans and supporting material make
   clear that, at the front, it is a flat roofed box dormer that is proposed.
4. The council’s Supplementary Planning Document 2 (SPD2) requires that
   extensions should be harmonious in character, scale and form with the existing
   dwelling to ensure that any additions are of a scale and appearance which are
   proportionate, and which do not appear to be out of character within the
   streetscene. Paragraph 8.2 of the SPD2 states, among other matters, that dormer
   windows to the front and side elevations shall have pitched roofs. Paragraph 139 of
   the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) states that development that is not
   well designed should be refused, especially where it fails to reflect local design
   policies and government guidance on design.
5. The front dormer window would be set in from the gable and up from the eaves of
   the dwelling, but its overall bulk and cumbersome flat roofed design would result in
   a prominent and incongruous addition to the front roof slope of the dwelling. This
   would be out of character with the immediate neighbouring properties, where
   pitched roofed dormers are present. Whilst there are flat roofed front dormers within


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6006657



     the wider streetscene, the majority of these are historic in nature and do not
     amount to good design. Front dormers in the immediate streetscene with more
     recent planning permission, as I am told - post 2008, are seen at the neighbouring
     properties, Nos.22, 26 and 34, consisting of two pitched roofed dormers.
6. I appreciate that No.26 has a substantially larger footprint than No. 24, both in width
   and depth, and as a result, its front roof plane is significantly larger and capable of
   accommodating two pitched‐roof dormers while still delivering the internal
   accommodation required for that particular house type. No.24 is smaller and of a
   different house type, and cannot reasonably provide the same level of
   accommodation without disproportionate or visually harmful alterations.
7. That is unfortunate, but does not justify a development that would result in a
   prominent and incongruous addition to the front roof slope of the dwelling. It would
   be out of character with the immediate neighbouring properties, where pitched
   roofed dormers are present. It would be in conflict with the council’s Housing
   Design SPD2 and have an unacceptable visual impact on the streetscene.
8. I have noted and observed the examples of flat-roof front dormers that can be
   found within Nutcombe Crescent. These do not justify the grant of permission for a
   development that would continue unfortunate historical examples that demonstrate
   the reason for the current policy approach. For these reasons the appeal will be
   dismissed.

Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
