Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 9 June 2026
Site visit made on 9 June 2026
by G Dring BA (Hons) MA MRTPI MAUDE
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006581
Longdene House Hedgehog Lane, Haslemere GU27 2PH
(Land coordinates 489444 132452)
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Monkhill Ltd and Transform Housing & Support against the decision of
     Waverley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is WA/2025/01986.
•    The development proposed is phased development of site to provide 14 residential dwellings
     comprising up to 8 affordable dwellings and 6 (affordable) detached self/custom build homes
     together with internal access road, amenity space and landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Monkhill Ltd against Waverley Borough
       Council. That application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Different versions of the site address are provided on the application form, appeal
       form and the Council’s decision notice. I have taken the site address above from
       the application form. Whilst the Council changed the description of development
       from that provided on the application form, the appellants have confirmed that
       there was no agreement to that amended wording. I have therefore taken the
       description of development from the application form, removing wording that does
       not form an act of development. I have removed reference to bedroom numbers as
       the appellants have specifically agreed to this change in the Statement of
       Common Ground.
4.     The application was made in outline with only access submitted for consideration.
       Therefore, any details or information provided in relation to any of the other
       reserved matters are treated as illustrative only in my consideration of the appeal.
5.     National Landscapes were previously known as Areas of Outstanding Natural
       Beauty (AONB). I will refer to them as National Landscapes or NL throughout my
       decision in the interests of consistency, except where a document refers to the
       AONB.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006581


6.     The site has been the subject of previous appeal decisions. An appeal decision1 in
       2017 relating to a scheme that included residential development was quashed and
       redetermined in 2019. A more recent appeal decision2 in 2023 also considered a
       scheme for residential development. I refer to these previous decisions where
       relevant in my decision.
7.     An executed Unilateral Undertaking (UU) dated 30 June 2026 has been submitted.
       It sets out matters relating to the provision of self-build and custom build plots
       (SBCB) and affordable housing. The Council had the opportunity to, but made no
       comments on it. I have taken the UU into account in my consideration of the
       appeal.
8.     Since the hearing, a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published in August 2026. This replaces the previous version of the
       Framework. Both main parties have had the opportunity to comment on the new
       Framework, and I will take it into consideration in my decision along with any
       comments made in this regard.
Main Issues
9.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on landscape character including the effect upon
                the Surrey Hills National Landscape (NL) and Area of Great Landscape
                Value (AGLV);
           •    whether the proposed development would make adequate provision for
                affordable housing; and
           •    other considerations, including whether the SBCB plots would constitute
                affordable housing.
Reasons
The effect upon landscape character
10. Approximately 70% of the site is located within the NL with the remainder located
    within the AGLV. Consequently, I have applied the duty in section 85 of the
    Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (the Act) as amended by section 245 of
    the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 to seek to further the purpose of
    conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the NL whilst recognising that it
    does not prohibit development in such areas, as demonstrated in the cited appeal
    decision3 at Copythorne Road, Brixham. The site is also located within a
    designated Green Finger as defined under the Haslemere Neighbourhood Plan:
    2013-2032 (NP) adopted November 2021.
11. Policy RE3 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 1: Strategic Policies and
    Sites February 2018 (LPP1) requires the protection and enhancement of the NL in
    accordance with national planning policies together with the Surrey Hills AONB
    Management Plan4, applying the same principles to the AGLV, whilst recognising


1
  APP/R3650/W/16/3165974
2
  APP/R3650/W/22/3295573
3
  APP/X1165/W/24/3354507
4
  Now the Surrey Hills National Landscape Management Plan (2025-2030)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
Appeal Decision 6006581


       its status as a local landscape designation. Policy H11 of the NP seeks to respect
       the undeveloped, open character of the Green Fingers.
12. Based on the evidence before me, the discussion at the hearing and my site visit,
    the proposal would not constitute major development with regard to landscape
    matters, having regard to Policy N4:2 and Footnote 59 of the Framework. This is
    due to the limited nature and scale of the proposal along with its likely impact on
    the purposes of the NL designation. This accords with the views of the main
    parties and that of the previous Inspector in the 2019 appeal decision (which
    related to a larger residential scheme).
13. Consequently, Policies N4:1 and N4:4 of the Framework are relevant in this case.
    Policy N4:1 states that development proposals within Protected Landscapes, such
    as the NL, should be limited in scale and extent and sensitively located and
    designed to avoid harm to the statutory purposes and special qualities of the NL. It
    goes on to state that substantial weight should be placed on the importance of
    conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas. In respect of the part
    of the site outside of the NL, Policy N4:4 identifies that development within the
    setting of Protected Landscapes should be sensitively located and designed to
    avoid or minimise adverse impacts on the designated areas.
14. Whilst there is dispute between the parties as to whether the remaining 30% of the
    site that sits outside of the NL represents a significant proportion or not, given its
    relationship with the remainder of the site, it forms part of the setting of the NL and
    therefore sensitive consideration of the whole site is required.
15. The Surrey Hills National Landscape Management Plan (2025-2030) (MP) is not
    part of the development plan but does form a material consideration. It sets out the
    significance of the NL as a mosaic of farmland, woodland, heaths, downs and
    commons which has inspired some of the country’s greatest artists, writers and
    architects over the centuries. The special qualities include the presence of
    woodlands, ancient trees and boundary hedgerows, a patchwork of farmland areas
    with different features and identities, built heritage and the settlement pattern,
    tranquillity and darker skies. An overarching aim of the MP is that great weight
    should be attached to any adverse impact upon the landscape of the NL and that
    proposals should seek to contribute to the conservation and enhancement of it.
16. The appellant’s Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) sets out an
    assessment of the landscape and visual effects of the proposal. The site is located
    within National Character Area 120 Wealden Greensand (NCA) and the Hindhead
    Wooded Greensand Hills (GW5) as identified within the Surrey Landscape
    Character Assessment (LCA). Both the NCA and LCA include small scale fields
    bounded by hedgerows and a peaceful landscape with a high sense of enclosure
    as part of the defining features of the area.
17. The site comprises a sloping grass field, enclosed by mature trees and hedgerows
    with two existing access points into the field from the private driveway which also
    serves Longdene House and the dwellings that surround it. Some of the trees are
    subject to Tree Preservation Orders. A small timber stable is located within the
    site. Although a temporary builder’s compound occupies part of the site, the
    evidence indicates that the land has historically been managed as grazing land.
18. The parties agree that the baseline for the assessment of landscape matters is
    that the site is managed grassland due to the time limited nature of the builder’s

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006581


       compound. I concur with this approach. Given its temporary nature, there is no
       evidence to suggest the current degradation caused by the compound would be
       permanent or that it would have long lasting effects.
19. The site lies beyond but close to the settlement edge of Haslemere, with existing
    residential development to the east and north. Alongside the northern boundary is
    a strip of green space where a public footpath runs from Hedgehog Lane to
    Grasslands Close. To the south and west are open areas of grassland which
    connect to other fields that surround a central area which contains Longdene
    House, The Lodge, Longdene Hall, the Pool House and four other dwellings
    currently under construction.
20. With the exception of the builder’s compound, the site is rural in its character,
    being largely undeveloped and bounded by vegetation, reflecting both the NCA
    and LCA characteristics. Whilst in proximity of the settlement edge, when within
    the site, the presence of nearby development is not overly discernible due to the
    significant vegetative boundaries. There is a distinct change in the landscape
    when leaving Hedgehog Lane, and heading along the private driveway, with a
    clear feeling of being in the countryside with a noticeable sense of peacefulness,
    rather than being within an urban edge environment. Consequently, the site makes
    a positive contribution to the rural character of the NL and its setting.
21. The proposal would result in built development on a largely undeveloped field.
    Whilst a relatively low density scheme could be built out, utilising the existing
    access points into the field, it would fundamentally alter the character of the site,
    with it becoming part of the urban townscape rather than the countryside. The
    outline of the field may still be discernible through the retention and enhancement
    of the existing vegetation. However, the development would permanently replace
    part of the pastoral landscape with residential form and associated domestic
    paraphernalia and activity. The appellants assert that the proposal would result in
    minor adverse effects on the site. However, the urbanisation proposed would lead
    to the substantial erosion of the site’s rural character, which in turn would result in
    considerable harm to landscape character.
22. A scheme could be brought forward that responds appropriately to the appearance
    of the area, taking into account the topography of the site and appropriate external
    lighting could be required by planning condition. Open space for future residents is
    also identified as being provided on site. However, these elements of the scheme
    would not outweigh the overarching harm to landscape character that would result
    through the urbanisation of the site and the permanent erosion of the open
    countryside. Furthermore, the introduction of residential development, along with
    the associated paraphernalia and activity that would inevitably result, would
    significantly diminish the level of peacefulness that is experienced within the site,
    taking into account the agreed landscape baseline position. Accordingly, the
    proposal would result in considerable harm to the landscape character of the site.
23. Beyond the site, views from Hedgehog Lane, the adjacent public footpath, and
    from nearby residential properties would be very limited due to the substantial
    boundary vegetation that surrounds the site and the private nature of the access.
    Visual effects would therefore be localised and limited. However, landscape effects
    extend beyond visual impact alone.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006581


24. Recent and ongoing residential development has altered the built environment that
    surrounds Longdene House. Nevertheless, more recent development and the four
    dwellings under construction are closely related to Longdene House and well
    contained within a central area. The site and other surrounding fields still wrap
    around that built development and provide a distinctly rural setting to Longdene
    House and the development that surrounds it. As a result, the site still contributes
    positively to the rural landscape that surrounds this group of buildings, whilst also
    providing a countryside setting to the settlement edge. For these reasons, the site
    does not appear as an isolated pocket of undeveloped land, but forms an
    important part of the pattern of the rural landscape in this location.
25. I visited Grasslands Close to the north of the site where around 135 dwellings
    have been constructed. That development has expanded the settlement edge in
    proximity of the site. However, the separation of Grasslands Close from the site by
    the intervening strip of green space, the extensive vegetative boundary and the
    noticeable change in levels means that there is little visual relationship between
    that part of the settlement edge and the site.
26. There would be no physical changes to land outside of the confines of the site
    itself. However, the proposal would harmfully diminish the network of open fields
    and interrupt the established rural landscape pattern, eroding the countryside
    setting of the development around Longdene House and at the edge of the
    settlement. Whilst the visual effects would remain localised, the impact on
    landscape character would be appreciably greater.
27. The appellants assert that whilst the site is partially within the NL and AGLV, it is
    considered to be at the lower end of the environmental scale within these
    designations. Nevertheless, part of the site is within the NL and the remainder is
    within its setting. The rural characteristics of the site do positively contribute to the
    NL and its setting in this location. The proposal would neither conserve nor
    enhance the NL or its setting and harm to it would not be avoided or minimised.
28. The 2019 appeal decision5 dismissed a scheme that involved residential
    development. The Inspector found that scheme would have an adverse effect of
    major significance on the landscape character of the area, not just on the site
    itself. However, that scheme involved a materially different proposal, including a
    greater number of dwellings and specific concerns about trees and a cul-de-sac
    arrangement. Therefore, given the significant differences in the scale of the
    proposal in that case, limited weight is attached to that decision in my
    consideration of this appeal.
29. In 2023, a scheme for 16 dwellings was dismissed on appeal6, with the Inspector
    finding that the impact of the development would be considerable in relation to
    character and appearance matters including the effect on the landscape and the
    NL. The proposal before me now is for two fewer dwellings. However, for the
    reasons given above, I have come to similar conclusions on landscape matters to
    that of my colleague in 2023, whilst taking into account the more recent
    development that has occurred around Longdene House.
30. Although the Grasslands Close development may have been on land within the
    NL, there is no substantive evidence before me on that scheme. Furthermore, I

5
    APP/R3650/W/16/3165974
6
    APP/R3650/W/22/3295573


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006581


       have limited information on the landscape character or context of that site prior to it
       being approved, or the policy context in which it was determined. Schemes at
       Dene End Farm and Sturt Farm Barn are relatively close to the site. However, the
       proposals and the site contexts, including the relationship with existing built form
       do not appear comparable to the appeal proposal. Therefore, they do not alter my
       findings.
31. I therefore conclude that the proposal would be harmful to the landscape character
    of the site. It would not conserve or enhance the NL or its setting and would result
    in considerable harm to it. As such, the proposal is contrary to Policy RE3 of LPP1,
    the aims of which are set out above. The proposal is also contrary to Policies DM1,
    DM4 and DM15 of Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 2: Site Allocations and
    Development Management Policies March 2023 (LPP2) and Policy H11 of the NP.
    These policies seek, amongst other things, that proposals do not harm
    environmental assets, that landscape character is reinforced by new developments
    and that the natural beauty and undeveloped character of the open countryside is
    recognised. The scheme would also conflict with Policies N4:1 and N4:4 of the
    Framework, as set out above.
32. Policy H1 of the NP is also referred to in the Council’s reason for refusal, but this
    relates to settlement boundaries. Whilst the explanatory text considers landscape
    matters, the policy itself does not. In any case part of the policy states that
    development outside the settlement boundaries will be strictly controlled and will
    only be supported where they otherwise conform with national and local planning
    policies. Given the Council has identified that the location outside the settlement
    boundary does not form a reason for refusal in this case, this policy is not directly
    relevant.
Affordable housing
33. The West Surrey Strategic Housing Market Assessment November 2015 identified
    an annual requirement of 314 affordable dwellings. The appellants assert that
    delivery has fallen below that requirement every year for ten years, resulting in a
    significant shortfall in provision. It is also identified that Waverley is an expensive
    area to live, with an affordability ratio of 13.42. Average house prices in the
    Borough are identified as £563,000 in July 2025. For first time buyers, the average
    price paid is stated as £404,000 and the average monthly rental cost identified as
    £1,504. The Council has not disputed any of these points.
34. Policy AHN1 of LPP1 requires a minimum provision of 30% affordable housing on
    all housing developments in non-designated rural areas where the development
    provides a net increase of 11 dwellings or more. LPP1 Policy AHN3 states the
    Council will support the provision of new housing to meet the needs of specific
    groups. Policy H5 of the NP identifies that new residential development should
    provide dwellings of the type and size needed in the area.
35. Taking account of the eight affordable dwellings that would be secured as social
    rented units through the UU, this element of the scheme would equate to 57% of
    the proposed housing being affordable, exceeding the requirement set out in
    Policy AHN1.
36. The Council accepts that there is a specific need for social rented units. The joint
    applicant, a registered provider, has set out clearly the need for this type of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006581


       development within Waverley, and identified that there is not sufficient provision
       currently. I have no evidence before me which suggests a contrary position.
37. The UU requires a scheme to be submitted to and approved by the Council in
    respect of the bedroom numbers for these units through the reserved matters
    application. The size of these dwellings would also be assessed at reserved
    matters stage. This allows some flexibility, should some other type of supported
    living need arise. Whilst it may be the Council’s preference to have the bedroom
    numbers and supported living element confirmed as part of the UU, this
    confirmation would not be necessary at this stage, given the Council can assess
    the evidence presented on this at the reserved matter stage.
38. I therefore find that the UU would secure the units as a social rented tenure and
    the nomination agreement requirement means that the Council can exercise its
    right to nominate prospective tenants for the units, based on occupancy criteria.
    The requirement for them not to be occupied until a nomination agreement is
    entered into by a registered provider and the Council would also be secured.
39. The UU sets out that no more than five of the SBCB plots can be disposed of until
    a registered provider is the owner of the social rent units and that they also must
    be practically completed and made ready for occupation prior to the disposition of
    the final SBCB plot. This provides a trigger point to ensure that this element of the
    scheme would be provided before completion of the remainder of the scheme.
40. I therefore conclude that sufficient provision for affordable housing would be
    secured and the proposal would comply with and go beyond the requirements of
    Policies AHN1 and AHN3 of LPP1 and Policy H5 of HNP, the aims of which are
    set out above. The proposal would also accord with the Framework which
    identifies the need for the provision of affordable homes.
Other Considerations
Self-build and custom build plots
41. Under the Self Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended) local
    authorities are required to both maintain a register of persons seeking to acquire
    serviced plots in the area for SBCB housebuilding and to give enough suitable
    development permissions to meet the identified demand. The Framework also
    supports the provision of this type of development with it being identified as one of
    the types of accommodation that is needed for different groups. The remaining six
    plots proposed would be secured through the UU as SBCB plots.
42. No specific information is before me on the number of individuals/households or
    groups listed on the Council’s Self Build Register, nor the amount of development
    permissions granted in this respect. However, the Council identified in its
    Committee Report that there is a substantial and currently unmet need in the
    borough. An interested party at the hearing identified that he had been on the Self
    Build Register in Waverley for a considerable number of years without yet being
    able to obtain a SBCB plot.
43. The Council identify that the indicative size of the proposed SBCB dwellings, being
    4 and 5 bedroom units would not adhere to the required housing mix for the area.
    However, there is a substantial shortfall in provision of this type of dwelling.
    Furthermore, the size of such houses are very much dependent on the self-builder


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006581


       who would want to design a dwelling that meets their needs. Additionally, the sizes
       are indicative. Accordingly, this indicatively larger size of the SBCB dwellings
       would not weigh against the scheme.
44. In conclusion, the UU would secure the six plots as SBCB development. This
    would provide a modest but nevertheless important contribution to the delivery of
    SBCB. In line with Framework Policy HO7, I attribute substantial weight to the
    benefit of the SBCB plots, which would contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community.
Whether the SBCB plots would also provide affordable housing
45. The appellants assert that the six proposed SBCB plots would also be affordable
    housing, meaning that the scheme would provide 100% affordable housing.
46. The main parties agree that the definition provided for ‘self-build and custom-build
    housing’ in the Framework Glossary specifically states that such housing can be
    either market or affordable housing. The principle of providing SBCB plots as
    affordable housing is therefore no longer disputed between the parties.
47. However, in order for this SBCB element of the scheme to comprise affordable
    housing, it is necessary to establish whether it would meet the definition of
    affordable housing set out in the Framework.
48. The Framework Glossary defines affordable housing as housing for sale or rent,
    for those whose needs are not met by the market (including housing that provides
    a subsidised route to home ownership and/or is for essential local workers or
    national military housing needs) and which complies with one or more of the
    criteria a) social rent, b) other affordable housing for rent, c) discounted market
    sales housing, d) other affordable routes to home ownership or e) military
    affordable housing.
49. The appellants assert that the proposal could meet the Framework Glossary
    definition of affordable housing, under criteria c) or d).
50. Under criterion c) the provision of discounted market sales housing that is sold at a
    discount of at least 20% below local market value can comprise affordable
    housing. It states that eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and
    local house prices and that provisions should be in place to ensure housing
    remains at a discount for future eligible households.
51. Criterion d) refers to other affordable routes to home ownership and includes
    housing that provides a route to ownership for those who could not achieve home
    ownership through the market, including other low cost homes for sale, at a price
    equivalent to at least 20% below local market value. It also states that where
    public grant funding is provided, there should be provisions for the homes to
    remain at an affordable price for future eligible households, or for any receipts to
    be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision, or refunded to
    Government or the relevant authority specified in the funding agreement.
52. The Waverley Borough Council Housing Affordability Study December 2021 (HAS)
    sets out analysis on the affordability of housing across the borough. It concludes
    that Waverley is an expensive area with average house prices significantly above
    the national average.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6006581


53. Whilst the planning application is outline with the matters of scale and layout not
    being considered at this stage, the appellants’ submission suggests the proposal
    would be for four or five bedroom properties with double garages and the
    proposed site plan, whilst illustrative only in respect of layout, suggests that they
    could be located on very spacious plots. The six plots are also illustrated as taking
    up a significant proportion of the overall site.
54. HAS Figure 6 sets out the price of dwellings needed to make affordable home
    ownership affordable for discounted market sale and/or first homes in Waverley.
    This data highlights that in the case of a 4+ bedroom dwelling, the estimated new
    build open market value would be £675,000 whereas an affordable price would be
    between £340,000 and £487,000 identifying the need for a discount of between
    28% and 50%.
55. Whilst this data is five years old and does not refer specifically to SBCB delivery, it
    does indicate the challenges around affordability for Waverley. There is no
    evidence before me to suggest that the position set out in HAS Figure 6 has
    significantly altered in recent years.
56. To overcome the lack of evidence about the provision of affordable SBCB
    developments, the appellants propose a discount against local market values,
    assessed against the prevailing market conditions at the time the plots were sold.
57. However, there is no evidence before me on the current open market value of the
    plots. There is no valuation provided, and no other information on what other
    similar sized plots have sold for on the open market recently. There is therefore no
    indication as to what a 20% or higher discount on the plot value might result in, in
    terms of a discounted price for the plot.
58. The discount would only relate to the purchase price of the plot. It is necessary to
    consider how much it would cost to deliver a dwelling in this area. No estimated
    build cost figures have been provided in order to determine what the anticipated
    cost of developing a SBCB dwelling in this location might be. This will be
    dependent on the design, size and scale of the dwelling proposed and will be
    subject to the input from the SBCB developer. The illustrative details suggest that
    the development could result in six large, detached dwellings on generous plots
    which may result in more significant construction costs. However, without any
    information on estimated potential build costs it is not clear what this element of
    the scheme might amount to.
59. It is asserted that the cost of building a SBCB dwelling can be less than building a
    conventional developer led dwelling, due to the removal of developer profit
    margins and costs associated with new build premiums and sales, marketing and
    overhead costs, exemptions from Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), the ability
    to reclaim VAT on labour and materials, the provision of government backed loans
    through the Home Builders Fund, and the management of the project being led by
    the SBCB developer, who can control costs and carry out some of the work
    themselves.
60. I am referred to an appeal decision at St Edmunds Lane, where the Inspector
    stated that the evidence in that case indicated that SBCB development can be
    20-55% cheaper than ordinary housing and even cheaper than new housing.
    However, I do not have any of the evidence before me that was presented in that
    case. That appeal was determined eleven years ago and I have not been provided

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6006581


       with any up to date information that sets out potential cost savings in terms of
       figures or percentages. Whilst there may be cost savings through the delivery of
       this type of dwelling, I cannot be sure how much those costs savings might be
       estimated at, based on the evidence before me.
61. The UU allows for a discount of 20% on the plot value compared with the current
    market value, or a higher discount if I should find that to be appropriate. However,
    due to the lack of evidence before me on the current market value of the plot, and
    estimated potential build costs, including any potential cost savings that might
    apply, it is not clear what discount would be necessary in order to make the SBCB
    plots genuinely affordable in line with the Framework Glossary definition, as
    opposed to providing a cheaper option that would not necessarily meet the needs
    of those whose needs are not being met by the market.
62. With regard to eligibility, as stated above, the Framework identifies that affordable
    housing should be for those whose needs are not met by the market. The UU
    defines a ‘Qualifying Person’ as a person or household which meets the Council’s
    requirements to be entered on the Self Build Register. In addition, if I were to find it
    necessary, the UU definition could also include that the person or household would
    be nominated by the Council to ensure eligibility under the definition of affordable
    housing.
63. There would need to be a way to establish that the individual or household
    purchasing the plot would be eligible under the definition of affordable housing,
    given that without that requirement, there would be no way of ensuring that the plot
    would be sold to someone whose needs are not being met by the market.
64. The Council’s Affordable Housing SPD identifies an £80,000 household income
    cap but this applies specifically to shared ownership housing products. There is no
    information on what would be an appropriate household income threshold that
    could inform eligibility criteria for SBCB developments.
65. I have concerns about how that nomination process identified in the UU would
    function. There is no evidence on what that nomination process would be
    measured against. It is not clear that the level of information provided by those on
    the Self Build Register would enable a clear way for the Council to establish that
    the individual or household would be eligible for affordable housing. Without
    evidence to the contrary, it appears likely that there would be a need for a
    separate process in which potential purchasers are able to demonstrate that their
    needs are not being met by the market.
66. There is no clear evidence before me on how this might be implemented or
    operated. As a result, the lack of a clear approach at the outset in this respect is
    likely to frustrate the marketing period, with the eligibility testing likely to be
    complex thereby causing delays and thwarting the progress of the sale of the
    plots.
67. Consequently, it has not been demonstrated that the six proposed SBCB dwellings
    would provide affordable housing in line with the definition set out in the
    Framework.
68. There was some discussion at the hearing and in the evidence about whether the
    SBCB plots could be secured as affordable housing in perpetuity. The UU is not
    clear in this respect. For instance, it does not plainly set out what happens once

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6006581


       the plot has been sold, and the SBCB dwelling has been delivered. A future
       purchaser, once the dwelling has been built could not meet the Qualifying Person
       definition, because they could not meet the SBCB requirements. However, given
       that it has not been demonstrated that the SBCB plots would be affordable
       housing, the matter of perpetuity is not determinative in my decision and therefore
       I have not considered this matter further.
69. Under the UU, if any of the SBCB plots were not sold during the marketing period,
    they would revert to being open market SBCB plots. Once sold, the UU requires a
    sum amounting to the equivalent of the discount that would have been applied to
    the market value if it had been sold as a discounted plot, to be paid to the Council
    to be used for the provision of affordable housing.
70. LPP1 Policy AHN1 allows for an alternative to on-site provision of affordable
    housing, but only in exceptional circumstances. This contribution would go above
    and beyond the requirements of the policy as eight units would be secured as
    affordable housing. However, without having any figures before me on the
    estimated market value of the plot, it is not clear what this additional contribution
    might equate to in terms of an amount.
71. The appeal decision at St Edmunds Lane has some similarities of approach.
    However, there is no analysis provided on whether that scheme resulted in the
    SBCB plots being sold as affordable housing and whether the approach was
    successful in this respect. That case was also in a different Council area, with a
    different policy context. This does not alter my findings.
72. Although the proposed six plots would be secured for the delivery of SBCB
    dwellings and the UU would ensure that the SBCB plots would be cheaper than
    market value, there is insufficient information for me to conclude that they would
    meet the needs of those whose needs are not being met by the market. Therefore,
    it has not been demonstrated that they would provide affordable housing.
73. Given that it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would provide a 100%
    affordable housing scheme, the proposal should not be treated as a rural
    exception site as suggested by the appellants.
Planning Balance
74. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires
    planning applications to be determined in accordance with the development plan
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
75. I have found above that the proposal would conflict with Policy RE3 of LPP1,
    Policies DM1, DM4 and DM15 of LPP2 and Policy H11 of the NP in respect of
    landscape matters and the effect on the NL and its setting. These policies are in
    general consistency with the aims of the Framework in seeking to avoid harm to
    the statutory purposes and special qualities of the NL, and that proposals should
    contribute positively to the natural environment through considering the
    environmental qualities of landscape character and the natural beauty of the
    countryside.
76. Framework Policy S3 sets out that decisions on development proposals should
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. For developments
    outside settlements, such as the appeal proposal, Policy S5 should be applied.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6006581


       Policy S5:1 identifies that outside settlements, only certain forms of development
       should be approved as set out under criteria a. – j., unless the benefits of doing so
       would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
       the national decision-making policies set out in the Framework. I am referred to
       criteria h. and j. set out under Framework Policy S5:1 as being relevant to the
       appeal proposal.
77. Criterion h. identifies residential development which would be within reasonable
    walking distance of a well-connected station, that is physically well-related to the
    station or the settlement within which the station is located, of a scale which can
    be accommodated taking into account existing and proposed infrastructure
    availability and that long term comprehensive development is not prejudiced.
78. There is no dispute between the parties that the site would be within reasonable
    walking distance of Haslemere train Station which is considered to be a well-
    connected station. The first part of criterion h. is therefore met.
79. The Council however contend that the site would not be physically well-related to
    the station or the settlement where the station is located. Notwithstanding that I
    have found harm in relation to landscape matters above, the site sits directly
    adjacent to the settlement, with access into the site already present from the
    adjacent built up area. I therefore find that in the context of criterion h., the site
    would be physically well-related to the settlement, in proximity and spatial
    connectivity terms.
80. There is no evidence before me that there would not be sufficient infrastructure for
    the scale of development proposed nor that any other long term development
    would be prejudiced. The proposal would therefore comply with the requirements
    of Framework Policy S5:1 h. Given my findings on Policy S5:1 h. I have not gone
    on to consider the appeal against Policy S5:1 j.
81. As the requirements under Framework Policy S5:1 h. would be met, it falls for me
    to undertake a balance of the benefits against the harms, considering whether the
    benefits would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies set out in the Framework.
82. The proposal would result in the provision of 14 dwellings. Whilst there is
    insufficient evidence to confirm that the SBCB plots would be affordable housing,
    the proposal would provide eight social rented units which would constitute
    affordable housing, which would amount to 57% of the scheme. This amount of
    affordable housing would exceed local requirements. The remaining six plots
    would be appropriately secured as SBCB through the UU.
83. Policy HO7 of the Framework directs that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs including homes for different groups, including affordable
    housing and SBCB provision.
84. The parties agree that the Council cannot demonstrate a sufficient housing land
    supply, with the figure identified as 1.28 years currently. Based on the evidence
    before me this shortfall is persistent. Given the significant shortfall in both housing
    land supply, affordable housing provision and the substantial shortfall in the
    provision of SBCB plots and that the affordable housing contribution would go


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6006581


        above and beyond the LP requirement, these benefits attract substantial weight in
        favour of the proposal.
85. There would also be economic benefits during the construction phase and after
    with future occupants spending in the local area. There would be social benefits
    from new households supporting services and facilities in the local community. I
    attribute moderate weight to these benefits, given the scale of the scheme.
86. There would be some environmental benefits through the provision of landscaping,
    the reinforcement of existing vegetated boundaries and the delivery of biodiversity
    net gain in excess of 10%. Given the scale of the scheme I attribute limited weight
    to these benefits.
87. Overall, the aforementioned economic, social and environmental benefits would
    comprise substantial benefits in the balance in this case.
88. I am referred to Framework Policy L3:2 c. which states that where residential
    developments are within reasonable walking distance of a well-connected station,
    such as the site, a density of at least 35 dwellings per hectare should be achieved.
    The proposal would result in a lower density than this Framework standard.
    However, that policy allows for exceptions where it is demonstrated that meeting
    the standard would be inappropriate or not possible. The Council has not objected
    to the proposal on density grounds, and given the location of the site, being within
    the NL and its setting, applying such a density requirement would be inappropriate
    in this case. Therefore, the proposed density is a neutral consideration that weighs
    neither for nor against the proposal.
89. With regard to the adverse effects, the proposal would result in considerable harm
    to the landscape character of the site with built development in this location
    fundamentally altering its landscape value, also resulting in harm to the AGLV. It
    would also lead to considerable harm to the NL and its setting, meaning that it
    would fail to avoid harm to the Protected Landscape and it would not conserve or
    enhance the natural beauty of the area, conflicting with Framework Policies N4:1
    and N4:4. It would also fail to further the purposes of conserving and enhancing
    the natural beauty of the NL, as required by the Act.
90. The permanence and irreversibility of the harm that would result to the NL as a
    Protected Landscape and to its setting, and the conflict with the Framework in this
    respect attracts substantial weight of such magnitude that it would substantially
    outweigh the substantial benefits that I have identified in this case.
Other Matters
91. I am referred to other appeal decisions where the sites were also subject to the NL
    designation. At land off Midhurst Road at Scotland Park7, a scheme for 112
    dwellings, community growing space and associated infrastructure, access
    alterations, car park, landscaping and drainage, a scout facility/nursery, an
    education facility and a Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace was allowed on
    appeal. In the appeal at Clock House Lane8 the scheme was for 2 dwellings.
    Neither appeal is directly comparable in scale and nature to the appeal before me.



7
    APP/R3650/W/23/3327643
8
    APP/R3650/W/25/3361061


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6006581


92. Interested parties made comments during the planning application, more than half
    of which were in support of the proposal. No objections were raised by the Town
    Council. I have considered the matters raised by those responses in support
    throughout my assessment of the appeal. However, they do not alter my
    conclusions.
93. The appeal site is within the 5km buffer of the Wealden Heaths I Special
    Protection Area (SPA) and the Wealden Heaths II SPA which are European sites
    protected by the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as
    amended). Given that I am dismissing the appeal on the main issues, I have not
    considered this matter further.
Conclusion
94. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are
    no other considerations, including the Framework, which indicate a decision other
    than in accordance with the development plan. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



G Dring
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6006581


APPEARANCES

       FOR THE APPELLANT:

       Andrew Cook                         Pegasus Group
       Charles Banner KC                   Keating Chambers
       Gary Stevens                        Planit Consulting
       Alfred Lawson                       Monkhill Ltd
       Ian Rhodes                          Monkhill Ltd
       Tim Johnson                         Solicitor – Peningtons Manches Cooper
       Suzanne Edwards                     Transform Housing & Support
       Natalie Murphy                      Transform Housing & Support
       Paul Quantrill                      Independent Architectural Designer
                                            & on the Self Build Register for Waverley


       FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:
       Joanne Hollingdale                  Development Management Team Leader MRTPI
       Clive Smith                         Surrey Hills National Landscape Advisor


       INTERESTED PARTIES:
       John Hutchinson                     Local Resident
       Guy Reynolds                        Local Resident
       David Pope                          Local Resident
       Peter Nicholson                     Ward Councillor




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       15
