Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 June 2026
by D Ellis MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006825
Land to rear of Pets Pantry, Lewance, The House and Rowly House, Guildford
Road, Cranleigh GU6 8PG
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Nick Stevens of Cranforld Development Ltd against the decision of Waverley
       Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is WA/2025/01415.
•      The development proposed is the erection of a detached residential dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
         August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
         2024. This latest version of the Framework has introduced plan-making and
         national decision-making policies and is effect from the day of publication. The
         appellant and the Council have had the opportunity to comment on the new
         Framework.
3.       The appellant has provided an Arboricultural Impact Assessment & Method
         Statement, a Tree Survey, a Tree Survey Plan and a Tree Protection Plan.
         However, these are not listed as appendices to the appellant’s Appeal Statement.
         In their Statement of Case, the Council asserts that it is unable to assess impacts
         on root protection areas, canopy spread or the potential for future pressure for
         pruning or removal as no such information or documents have been submitted. It
         is therefore unclear whether the Council has seen these new documents and
         plans. Notwithstanding this, these new documents represent fresh evidence that
         was not before the Council or interested parties at the time the application was
         decided. Consideration of these new documents in this appeal would, in my view,
         prejudice the Council and interested parties. I therefore shall not take the
         Arboricultural Impact Assessment & Method Statement, a Tree Survey, a Tree
         Survey Plan and a Tree Protection Plan into account in this appeal.
Background and Main Issues
4.       Planning permission was previously refused for two dwellings at the appeal site1. A
         subsequent appeal2 was dismissed on the grounds that the development would fail

1
    Planning application ref. WA/2023/00213
2
    Appeal ref. APP/R3650/W/24/3346675

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006825


       to respond positively to the existing character and appearance of the area, would
       have an unacceptably harmful effect upon the living conditions of the adjoining
       neighbour at Start Point with specific regard to overlooking and loss of privacy, and
       as the Inspector could not be satisfied that the scheme would not be harmful to
       highway safety with regard to access for emergency vehicles. The scheme has
       been amended in response to the previous dismissal, with one dwelling now
       proposed.
5.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of The
                Coppers, with particular regard to outlook and privacy;
           •    the effect of the proposal on trees;
           •    the effect of the proposal on biodiversity and ecology; and
           •    whether adequate surface water drainage would be provided.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     The appeal site consists of land to the rear of The New House Lewance and Rowly
       House. The area surrounding the site is predominantly characterised by a strong
       linear pattern of development with dwellings fronting the street. The dwellings also
       have deep rear gardens with a variety of outbuildings. The linear pattern of
       development and the lack of development behind the appeal site and the
       surrounding dwellings on Guildford Road and Restwell Avenue contributes
       positively to the character and appearance of the area.
7.     My attention has been drawn to dwellings situated behind other properties in
       Rowly Drive and Guildford Road. These dwellings are all set in large, spacious
       plots and are set well behind the respective properties along Rowly Drive and
       Guildford Road. Furthermore, the examples in Rowly Drive are a significant
       distance, and thus cannot be seen, from the appeal site. As such these examples
       do not alter the linear pattern of development or the character and appearance of
       the area.
8.     The proposed dwelling would be constructed to the rear of The New House
       Lewance and Rowly House and would not front the street. Accordingly, it would be
       out-of-keeping with the linear, street-fronting pattern of development, to the
       detriment of the character and appearance of the area. Furthermore, even if The
       New House Lewance and Rowly House comprise of flats above commercial
       premises and even though the proposed dwelling would have limited visibility from
       the street, its proximity to the adjacent properties and the modest size of the
       remaining plots for the appeal site, The New House Lewance and Rowly House
       would reduce the open qualities of the site.
9.     I note that there are modest-sized plots in the locality. However, the development
       in Strathavon Close is set behind Guildford Road and is separated to the appeal
       site by a large area of trees and open land, and it has been deliberately designed
       with several of the dwellings having relatively modest-sized gardens. As such the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6006825


       development in Strathavon Close has its own distinct character and appearance
       which does not alter that of the appeal site and its surroundings. The other
       examples given are few in number and do not reflect the predominant character
       derived from the larger, deeper plots.
10. The dwellings in the vicinity of the appeal site are a mix of detached, semi-
    detached and terraced properties with hipped or gable roofs. There properties are
    predominantly finished in brick, with other external materials including render,
    timber cladding and hung tiles. The proposed dwelling would have a hipped roof
    and would be finished with brick which, together with the variation is design of the
    surrounding properties, would ensure that the form and external appearance of the
    dwelling would reflect its surroundings.
11. However, for the reasons given above the proposed dwelling would cause harm to
    the character and appearance of the area as it would be out-of-keeping with the
    linear, street-fronting pattern of development. The proposal would therefore conflict
    with Policy TD1 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 1: Strategic Policies and
    Sites February 2018 (LPP1) and Policy DM4 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan
    Part 2: Site Allocations and Development Management Policies March 2023
    (LPP2), insofar as they require development to respond to the distinctive local
    character and context, including with regards to building plot sizes and established
    street patterns.
12. Paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the Framework requires development proposals to
    respond to their context, including the character and features of their site and its
    setting, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. The paragraph
    further states that this should not preclude change where appropriate, especially
    where an increased density is justified in accordance with Policies L2 (Making
    effective use of land) and L3 (Achieving appropriate densities).
13. For the reasons given above the proposal, as it would be out-of-keeping with the
    linear, street-fronting pattern of development, would fail to respond to its context,
    character and features of the site and its setting. As such, the proposal would not
    integrate with or enhance its surroundings. I am therefore not satisfied that the
    additional unit would constitute an effective use of land, even if the land is
    underutilised, or that the increase in density would be justified. This adverse effect
    is a matter of considerable importance to be taken into account in the planning
    balance.
14. The proposal would therefore fail to comply with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the
    Framework.
Living conditions of the occupiers of The Coppers
15. While the proposed dwelling would project alongside a considerable portion of the
    rear garden at The Coppers, it would be adjacent to the area of garden furthest
    from the house. Together with the separation between the proposed dwelling and
    the boundary, the proposal would not cause a harmful sense of enclosure or
    overbearing effect to the users of the garden at The Coppers.
16. However, the proposed windows for all four bedrooms would provide wide views of
    the rear garden at The Coppers. Whilst a degree of mutual overlooking is to be
    expected in a residential setting, the wide views provided by the four windows
    would amount to significant overlooking of the rear garden at The Coppers.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006825


17. Although the current trees on the boundary would provide some screening, not all
    of the boundary trees are within the control of the appellant and therefore there
    would be no guarantee that the trees would be maintained at a sufficient height to
    provide adequate screening.
18. Whilst first-floor windows in a terrace may provide views of neighbouring gardens,
    they would tend to be oblique views towards the rear of the neighbouring gardens
    whereas the appeal proposal would result in wide views across a garden.
19. The proposal would therefore cause harm to the living conditions of the occupiers
    of The Coppers through significant overlooking of the rear garden. The proposal
    would therefore conflict with LPP1 Policy TD1 and LPP2 Policy DM5, insofar as
    they require development to avoid harm to the amenity of existing occupants of
    nearby residences including with regards to overlooking.
20. Criterion (ii) of paragraph 1.d. of Policy L2 of the Framework requires development
    proposals to maintain acceptable living standards for neighbours including in terms
    of privacy.
21. For the reasons given above the proposal, would result in significant overlooking of
    the rear garden at The Coppers. As such, the proposal would not maintain
    acceptable living standards for neighbours. This adverse effect is a matter of
    considerable importance to be taken into account in the planning balance.
22. The proposal would therefore fail to comply with paragraph 1 of Policy L2 of the
    Framework.
Trees
23. There are several trees around the appeal site, which provide some amenity value
    given the large number of trees bordering the open areas to the north and south-
    east. The Council asserts that some of the trees are protected although no
    substantive evidence, such as Tree Protection Orders, have been provided.
24. LPP1 Policy NE2 seeks, where appropriate, to maintain and enhance existing
    trees, woodland and hedgerows. LPP2 Policy DM11 states, amongst other things,
    that development should adequately protect trees and hedgerows during all
    phases of development to avoid damage including activities causing soil
    compaction or severance of roots.
25. Paragraph 1.c. of Policy N3 of the Framework requires provision to be made for
    the long-term maintenance of existing trees which form part of the development.
26. The submitted drawings show that the car port and hardstanding for the driveway
    and vehicle parking would be constructed in close proximity to existing trees and
    hedges. However, no evidence that the development would adequately protect
    trees and hedgerows, such as a Tree Survey or Arboricultural Impact Assessment,
    was submitted during the application. As it has not been demonstrated that
    existing trees and hedgerows could be adequately protected and maintained, I am
    not satisfied that a condition to secure the submission of these documents would
    make the development acceptable in this matter.
27. For these reasons, the proposal therefore fails to accord with LPP1 Policy NE2
    and LPP2 Policy DM11. The proposal would also fail to accord with Policy N3 of
    the Framework.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006825


Biodiversity and ecology
28. LPP1 Policy NE1 seeks to conserve and enhance biodiversity and to ensure that
    any adverse impacts are avoided, or if unavoidable, are appropriately mitigated.
29. Policy N2 of the Framework requires, amongst other things, for development
    proposals to consider the environmental qualities of land proposed for
    development, including habitats, and identify opportunities for those qualities to be
    conserved or enhanced (including through requirements for biodiversity net gain
    where these apply). Policy N2 also requires any adverse impacts on biodiversity to
    be minimised and for features to be included which support priority or threatened
    species such as swifts, bats and hedgehogs.
30. The appellant accepts that the proposal would not achieve a biodiversity net gain
    of 10%. However, I have no mechanism, such as a planning obligation under
    Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended), before me
    to secure the appropriate mitigation.
31. The appellant suggests that a pre-commencement condition could be used to
    require the submission of a legal agreement, however neither the appellant nor the
    Council have suggested any wording for such a condition. In any case, the
    Planning Policy Guidance (PPG) explains that a negatively worded condition
    limiting the development that can take place until a planning obligation or other
    agreement has been entered into is unlikely to be appropriate in the majority of
    cases. There are not the exceptional circumstances in this case, in accordance
    with the PPG, which would justify such an approach.
32. Furthermore, an ecological survey with regards to protected species and habitats
    has not been submitted. I therefore have no substantive evidence before me to
    demonstrate that the proposal would not cause harm to protected species and
    habitats.
33. For these reasons, the proposal would fail to accord with LPP1 Policy NE1 and
    Policy N2 of the Framework.
34. The Council also cites a conflict with LPP1 Policy NE2 in the reason for refusal.
    This policy seeks, amongst other things, for development to make a positive
    contribution to biodiversity by creating or reinforcing habitat linkages between
    designated sites. I have no evidence before me to indicate that the site is between
    any designated sites, and therefore there would be no conflict with LPP1 Policy
    NE2 in this regard.
Drainage
35. Even if the appeal site is within flood zone 1, the proposal would involve the
    construction of a dwelling, car port and a large area of hardstanding for a
    driveway. Whilst most of the existing outbuildings would be removed, a much
    larger portion of the site, which is current mostly grassland, would be developed
    and, consequently, the risk of surface water flooding on the site would increase.
    However, no details how surface water will be controlled on site have been
    submitted.
36. As it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would not unacceptably
    increase the risk of surface water flooding or that an adequate drainage scheme


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006825


       could be implemented, I am not satisfied that a condition to secure the submission
       of these details would make the development acceptable in this matter.
37. For these reasons the proposal would conflict with LPP1 Policy CC1 and LPP2
    Policy DM1, insofar as they require development to avoid an increase in flood risk
    and provide built-in resilience to flood risk. The proposal would also fail to accord
    with Policy F8 of the Framework, insofar as it requires development proposals
    which could affect drainage to incorporate sustainable drainage systems.
38. The Council’s reason for refusal also cites a conflict with LPP1 Policy CC2. This
    policy has regard to Sustainable Construction and Design, however it does not
    expressly refer to flood risk or drainage. As such the proposal would not conflict
    with LPP1 Policy CC2 in this regard.
Other Matters
39. Surrey Fire and Rescue Service have raised concerns that access for firefighting
    purposes to the property will be unsatisfactory and sought clarification on matters
    including if there will be water provision within 100m of the new property, whether
    access for a pumping appliance could be provided to within 45m of all points inside
    the dwelling house, and whether adequate turning facilities would be provided.
    However, their consultation response was not before the Council at the time the
    application was decided. Nevertheless, as I am dismissing the appeal on other
    grounds this matter is not determinative in this case.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
40. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. For
    development within settlements, such as the appeal proposal, Policy S4 of the
    Framework states that development proposals should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
41. Paragraph 2 of Policy S4 lists circumstances where the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse impacts.
    Criterion C of paragraph 2 is where a proposal would fail to comply with one of the
    national decision-making policies which state that development proposals should
    be refused in specific circumstances.
42. The Council currently has a housing land supply of 1.28 years. There is, therefore,
    a significant shortfall in housing land. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that
    substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will
    contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community.
43. The provision of one additional unit would make a small but worthwhile difference
    to the existing supply. Economic advantages would also arise from the
    construction and occupation of a new house, although some of these would be
    temporary and limited by the scale of the scheme. The additional dwelling would
    be located in a fairly sustainable location where future occupants would have
    access to services and facilities without the need to rely on the private vehicle.
    Taken together and having regard to the lack of a five-year housing land supply,



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006825


       these benefits, because an additional dwelling would result, should be attributed
       substantial weight.
44. Paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 of the Framework states that development proposals
    should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of
    Policy DP3. As described above, the harm that would be caused to the character
    and appearance of the area would conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3, and
    there is no clear justification for this conflict. The proposal would also fail to comply
    with Framework policies L2, N2, N3 and F8. In the circumstances of this case, I
    conclude that the benefits of the scheme would not outweigh the harms that would
    be caused. Consequently, I am satisfied when having regard to paragraph 2.c. of
    Policy S4 of the Framework that the benefits of the scheme would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects.
45. I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan and that material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

D Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
