Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 June 2026 by J Reed MPlan MRTPI
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006054
393 Burnley Road, Cliviger B10 4SU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr A Higson against the decision of Burnley Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is FUL/2026/0003.
•   The development proposed is demolition of a building used for dog grooming and its replacement by
    a detached dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). It includes changes with respect to heritage matters
   with specific regard to the degrees of harm. That said, the actions of finding harm to
   a designated heritage asset is not materially different from the previous iteration of
   the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further
   consultation with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective
   cases would not be prejudiced.
4. Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   (the Act) requires that special regard shall be had to the desirability of preserving a
   listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic
   interest which it possesses. The Framework sets out that heritage assets are an
   irreplaceable resource and should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their
   significance. It further advises that substantial weight should be given to the
   conservation of designated assets, regardless of the level of harm. The more
   important the asset, the greater the weight that should be applied.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   local area bearing in mind the special attention that should be paid to the
   desirability of preserving the setting of the nearby Grade II listed buildings 395 and
   397 Burnley Road and the Ram Inn.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006054


Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal site is a parcel of land within the garden area of 393 Burnley Road and
   currently consists of a grassed area and a detached single storey building used for
   dog grooming. Flanking the appeal site is Bridleway BW1204117 which leads
   beyond the settlement to the open countryside to the south. To the north of the
   appeal site on the opposing side of the Bridleway are several listed buildings.
   Grade II listed 395 and 397 Burnley Road (Ref 1072670) are mentioned in the
   listing description as being a pair of mid-19th century semi-detached houses built in
   coursed squared sandstone with small quoins and a stone slate roof built in the
   symmetrical Jacobean Style. The Ram Inn, which is also Grade II listed (Ref
   1072671) also lies to the north of the appeal site and the listing description
   mentions that the building is a 18th Century Inn with an attached house constructed
   in coursed sandstone rubble with quoins and stone slate roof possessing a
   rectangular plan. Both listings form a group and area read in unison due to their
   plots backing onto the open countryside to the rear. Based on my observations,
   and the submitted information, for the purposes of this appeal, the significance of
   the designated heritage assets is derived from their age, historic fabric,
   architectural features and their historical and functional relationships.
7. The glossary of the Framework states that the significance of a heritage asset
   derives not only from the asset’s physical presence but also from its setting. It
   defines the setting of a heritage asset as the surroundings in which an asset is
   experienced. These are not fixed and may change over time. The Framework
   indicates that any harm to the significance of a heritage asset, or from development
   within its setting, should require clear and convincing justification. In relation to this
   appeal, the relationship of the buildings to each other and the land around them,
   including the rural and agricultural landscape, is an intrinsic part of their
   significance. The topography of the landscape contributes greatly to the area’s
   character and shapes attractive views into and out of this picturesque grouping.
8. The appeal dwelling would be situated on lower ground compared to the nearby
   listed buildings. However, I observed on my site visit that whilst that would be the
   case when approaching Holmes Chapel on Bridleway BW1204117 there would be
   a degree of intervisibility particularly between the proposed dwelling and 395 and
   397 Burnley Road. Glancing views can also be gained of the Ram Inn between the
   foliage. It is clear to me that the erection of a modern two storey detached dwelling
   would be harmful to the environment in which the listed buildings are experienced
   and appreciated, as a result of its complex design and siting which, as a result,
   would harm the significance of these listed buildings.
9. The proposed dwelling would be two storey and finished in zinc, larch plank
   boarding, natural stone and grey render. It would be situated deeper into the plot
   than the existing kennel building in a more recessed position. However, the
   dwelling would be significantly greater in height, scale and massing which would
   result in it appearing far more prominent from the bridleway in both distant and
   close-range views. In addition, the modern design and material choice of the
   dwelling would directly contrast with the traditional form and materials of the listed
   buildings in its backdrop.
10. I note the presence of the paraphernalia associated with the Ram Inn including
    garden furniture and play equipment that is seen as part of its setting. However,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006054


     these are lightweight removable structures whereas in contrast the appeal dwelling
     would be a permanent addition to the setting.
11. Even though the dwelling would be situated in a relatively large plot with
    established landscaping, the proposed scale and design of the dwelling would be
    wholly inappropriate and incongruous compared to the typically vernacular details
    of the houses nearby and their more traditional design. It would also be highly
    prominent in long range views from the area surrounding the village including views
    from Burnley Road.
12. I observed on my site visit that there are a variety of differently designed properties
    within Holme Chapel, and I note the appellant’s argument that the appeal dwelling
    would be read as part of this context. However, whilst properties possess some
    variety; key design features are shared such as either hipped or pitched roof forms
    as well as the use of either traditional stone construction or white/cream render. In
    contrast the appeal dwelling would utilise a flat roof design as well as contemporary
    materials and whilst I note the presence of the differently designed 393 Burnley
    Road this is an anomaly as opposed to a constant. This contrast is further
    exacerbated by the irregular fenestration pattern at the appeal dwelling.
13. The appellant has made reference to other approvals in the surrounding area for
    modern detached dwellings. However, in the absence of further details pertaining to
    these I cannot be sure they are sufficiently similar to the scheme before me.
14. I acknowledge that the dog grooming building on site is different in its design to the
    buildings in the surrounding area and fails to make a positive contribution to the
    areas character and appearance. This, however, is mitigated by the building’s
    single storey form which reduces its prominence and limits visibility. Furthermore,
    regardless of this, the presence of other inappropriate development does not justify
    harm to the character and appearance of the area.
15. It is suggested that the existing building does not positively contribute to the setting
    of the surrounding listed buildings. However, I have found that the existing building
    whilst not a positive contributor is limited in its visibility due to its modest height.
    The same could not be said for the appeal proposal given its scale and design; it
    would be a dominant and visually intrusive building. Therefore, the proposal would
    be wholly inappropriate in this sensitive historic context and would detract from the
    ability to appreciate and understand the significance of nearby listed buildings.
16. Policy HE6 of the Framework advises that where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. In undertaking this balance, I have taken account of the Planning Practice
    Guidance which outlines what constitutes a public benefit.
17. Policy HE6 also states that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a
    matter of considerable importance and weight. The proposed dwelling would not
    cause physical harm to the heritage assets; however, the proposed dwelling would
    cause visual harm to the environment in which the listed buildings are experienced.
    I find the harm to be moderate in this instance but nevertheless of considerable
    importance and weight.
18. In terms of public benefits, the proposed development would result in the
    contribution of one new self-build dwelling, which would be secured as such

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006054


     through a legal agreement, whose occupants would make a limited contribution to
     local services as well as the economy. Although I do not dispute these benefits,
     because the proposal would provide only one residential unit, I give them only
     limited weight. As such, given the great weight I must give to the conservation of
     designated heritage assets, the harm I have identified would not be outweighed.
19. Although I acknowledge the limited weight deriving from the public benefits of the
    scheme in general terms, they would not outweigh the identified harm. As such, the
    proposal would not comply with the Framework. In addition, there is no clear and
    convincing justification for the harm to the significance of the heritage assets. There
    would also be harm to the wider character and appearance of the surrounding area.
    It would therefore fail to meet the requirements of Policies SP5, NE3, HE1 and HE2
    of the Burnley Local Plan (2018). These seek amongst other things for proposals
    affecting the setting of designated heritage assets to be assessed having regard to
    the desirability of sustaining and enhancing the significance of the asset and, where
    appropriate, securing a viable use most consistent with its conservation. All levels
    of harm should be avoided.
Conclusion and Recommendation
20. Although the proposed development would be within a settlement, the benefits in
    terms of the provision of an additional dwelling, which would be a self-build
    property, would be substantially outweighed by the harm to the character and
    appearance of the area and the significance of nearby listed buildings from
    development within their setting.
21. For the above reasons, and having taken all other matters raised into account,
    there are no material considerations that indicate the proposal should be
    determined otherwise than in accordance with the development plan. I therefore
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Reed
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
22. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
