Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by H Jones BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006932
Commercial Unit 52 Mintern Street, Hackney, London N1 5EG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Pindoria (Harry Motors) against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Hackney.
•    The application Ref is 2025/1730.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of the existing building from Class E (commercial)
     to Class C3 (dwellinghouses) to provide four self-contained residential units, together with associated
     internal alterations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and prior approval is deemed to be granted under the
       provisions of Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and
       Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
       amended) for the change of use of the existing building from Class E (commercial)
       to Class C3 (dwellinghouses) to provide four self-contained residential units,
       together with associated internal alterations at Commercial Unit 52 Mintern Street,
       Hackney, London N1 5EG in accordance with the application ref 2025/1730 and
       the details submitted with it including the following plans:
       23509-OSM-1-00-DR-A-050
       23509-OSM-1-00-DR-A-100
       23509-OSM-1-01-DR-A-110
       23509-OSM-1-00-DR-A-200
       23509-OSM-1-00-DR-A-300
       23509-OSM-1-00-DR-A-301
       23509-OSM-1-00-DR-A-302
       23509-OSM-1-00-DR-A-303
       23509-OSM-1-00-DR-A-304
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Pindoria (Harry Motors) against the
       Council of the London Borough of Hackney. This is the subject of a separate
       decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. Prior approval applications under Part 3 of the
       Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006932


         2015 (as amended) (the GPDO) must be determined with regard to the Framework
         but only insofar as it is relevant to the subject matter of the prior approval. In this
         case, because of the reasons why I conclude prior approval should be deemed to
         be granted, the Framework is not a determinative factor in the appeal.
4.       The appellant’s appeal submission includes a daylight and sunlight addendum1.
         The daylight and sunlight addendum adds to the light-related submissions which
         were made at the application stage and seeks to respond to the Council’s
         concerns. The document does not substantially or fundamentally alter what is
         proposed. Furthermore, as part of the appeal proceedings, the Council and
         interested parties have had an opportunity to comment on this document. I am
         therefore satisfied that it is procedurally fair to accept the daylight and sunlight
         addendum as evidence.
Background and Main Issue
5.       Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the GPDO, development is
         permitted for a change of use of a building and any land within its curtilage from a
         use falling within Class E (commercial, business and service) to a use falling within
         Class C3 (dwellinghouses) subject to limitations, restrictions and conditions.
6.       The procedure for Class MA prior approval applications is set out at Part 3
         paragraph W. Paragraph W confirms that a local planning authority (LPA) may
         refuse an application where it considers that the proposed development does not
         comply with the applicable limitations, restrictions and conditions. An application
         may also be refused where it is considered that the developer has provided
         insufficient information to enable it to be established whether the development
         complies with those same limitations, restrictions and conditions.
7.       GPDO paragraph MA.1 sets out the criteria with which a development must
         comply in order to fall within the scope of the permitted development right afforded
         by Part 3, Class MA in the first place. The Council concluded that the development
         the subject of the appeal complies with the paragraph MA.1 criteria and thereby
         constitutes permitted development. I have no reason to disagree with this
         conclusion.
8.       The conditions then set out at paragraph MA.2 include that, before beginning the
         development, the developer must apply to the LPA for a determination as to
         whether the prior approval of the LPA will be required in respect of a series of prior
         approval matters.
9.       It was against these paragraph MA.2 prior approval matters that the Council
         refused the application which is the subject of this appeal. More specifically, the
         Council considered that the development would fail to provide for adequate natural
         light in all habitable rooms of the dwellinghouses proposed (refusal reason 1) and
         that its transport-related impacts would be unacceptable (refusal reason 2).
10. However, as well as disputing the Council’s reasons for refusal, the appellant also
    asserts that the Council failed to make its decision as to whether prior approval
    was required within the applicable statutory period. This is important because the
    effect of Article 7 and paragraph W of the GPDO is that, where an application is
    made for a determination as to whether prior approval is required, the LPA must

1
    Daylight and Sunlight Addendum by T16 Design, Ref: 6452 Issue No: 1, dated October 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6006932


         make its decision within the statutory period (or a longer period agreed between
         the applicant and LPA in writing) otherwise prior approval is deemed to have been
         granted. The applicant may then proceed with the permitted development
         regardless of its effects in relation to the relevant prior approval matters, including
         natural light and its transport-related impacts.
11. Since there is no evidence before me to suggest a longer period was agreed, the
    applicable statutory period relevant in this case is 56 days. This period starts the
    day after the Council has received the application, inclusive of the applicable
    information paragraph W (2) requires it to be accompanied by, including the
    requisite fee.
12. In this context, the main issue is whether prior approval is deemed to be granted
    for the development by reason of the timing of the Council’s decision.
Reasons
13. The Planning Portal correspondence at Appendix C of the appellant’s statement2
    provides compelling evidence that the application was submitted to the Council on
    29 July 2025. This appendix also includes a copy of the Council’s invalidation
    letter. It is dated 11 August 2025, and its sole invalidation reason and request is for
    the fee to be paid or evidence to be supplied that it has already been paid.
14. The Council treated the application as being validly received on 31 July 2025.
    Therefore, the requisite fee cannot have been received after the invalid letter was
    issued. Had that been the case, the Council would not have backdated the valid
    date. However, it did. I have been provided with no substantive evidence that the
    requisite fee did not accompany the prior approval application submission on 29
    July 2025 nor why the Council have concluded that the valid date is 31 July 2025.
15. Furthermore, insofar as it is relevant to the main issue, the Council's case neither
    substantively disputes the timeline of the prior approval application as set out by
    the appellant nor advances a detailed and compellingly evidenced alternative
    chronology.
16. As I set out within my background and main issue section above, the Council
    concluded that the development the subject of the appeal complies with the
    paragraph MA.1 criteria and thereby constitutes permitted development. Provided
    the development is permitted development, if an LPA fails to make its
    determination on the prior approval application within the applicable statutory
    period, then the development can be carried out in accordance with the submitted
    details and plans. In such circumstances, how the development fares against the
    paragraph MA.2 prior approval matters becomes irrelevant – it can be undertaken
    regardless.
17. Given the evidence before me, I conclude that the application was submitted to the
    Council on 29 July 2025, and it was accompanied by all the necessary information
    paragraph W (2) requires, including the requisite fee. As a result, the first day of
    the application’s statutory 56-day determination period was 30 July 2025 meaning
    that the Council was required to determine the application by no later than 23
    September 2025.


2
    Appeal Statement by Planning Insight, Ref: P1406, dated March 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6006932


18. However, the Council’s decision notice is dated 25 September 2025.
    Consequently, the Council failed to notify the applicant of its decision within the
    required 56-day period. Therefore, prior approval is deemed to be granted for the
    development by reason of the timing of the Council’s decision.
Other Matters
19. Having established through my main issue that prior approval is deemed to be
    granted, it is not appropriate or necessary for me to address the paragraph MA.2
    prior approval matters, including the natural light and transport-related matters the
    subject of the Council’s reasons for refusal. In turn, although the appellant has
    submitted a unilateral undertaking to secure the proposal as a car-free
    development and address the Council's second reason for refusal, it is not
    determinative in this case.
20. Furthermore, I note the interested party representations, which contend that there
    is a demand for the site to remain in commercial use, that it should be retained for
    such purposes, and that the building is unsuitable and unsafe for residential
    occupation. However, these cannot alter the conclusion that prior approval is
    deemed to have been granted and that the appeal should therefore be allowed on
    this basis.
Conditions
21. The GPDO attaches standard conditions to this type of development. In summary,
    these set out that the development must be completed within a period of 3 years,
    that the development must be carried out in accordance with the details provided
    in the application, and that the building permitted to be used for dwellinghouse use
    should remain in use for that purpose.
22. Since these standard conditions already impose requirements for the development
    to be implemented within a particular timeframe and for it to accord with the
    submitted details, the Council’s suggested conditions regarding the development’s
    commencement and submission compliance are unnecessary.
23. The submitted proposed plans already depict where cycle storage would be
    located, and the compliance with such submitted details is already ensured by the
    GPDO. Furthermore, the transport-related prior approval matter set out within
    paragraph MA.2 particularly concerns safe site access rather than the
    development’s sustainable transport credentials. Consequently, I also find the
    imposition of an additional cycle storage condition, as suggested to me,
    unnecessary and, again, I have not imposed it.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed and prior approval is
    deemed to be granted.



H Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
