Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by F Harrison BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006322
Land at Backworth Business Park, Eccleston Close, Station Road, Backworth,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE27 0RX
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr Barry Spall of Northumberland Estates against the decision of North
  Tyneside Council.
• The application Ref is 24/00172/FULM.
• The development proposed is the demolition of existing buildings and construction of residential
  dwellings (Use Class C3(a)) with associated road infrastructure, car parking, gardens, landscaping
  and other ancillary works.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of
   existing buildings and construction of residential dwellings (Use Class C3(a)) with
   associated road infrastructure, car parking, gardens, landscaping and other
   ancillary works at Land at Backworth Business Park, Eccleston Close, Station
   Road, Backworth, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE27 0RX in accordance with the terms
   of the application, Ref 24/00172/FULM and the plans submitted with it, subject to
   the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. A Unilateral Undertaking (UU) was submitted with the appeal, executed and signed
   on 10 March 2026. I have had regard to this in my decision. During the appeal, a
   new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) came into
   effect. The main parties have had the opportunity to comment on its relevance to
   the case which I have taken into account.
Background and Main Issue
3. The proposal would involve development on land that has been identified to provide
   on-site ecological mitigation for a separate scheme1 (the approved development). It
   is long settled in law that multiple planning permissions can exist on the same plot
   of land. Where there are overlapping permissions, the implementation of one can
   affect the other, but not the granting of planning permission. It is perfectly valid for
   overlapping permissions to be granted.
4. The implications of the appeal scheme for the approved development are not for
   me to take into account in deciding whether or not the appeal scheme is acceptable
   in its own right. Any implications, including whether the implementation of the

1
    Appeal ref: APP/W4515/W/23/3327828

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006322


       appeal scheme would affect the validity of an extant permission and the
       consequences arising from such a situation including ecology mitigation are risks
       that sit with the landowner(s). My findings on this matter should not be taken as a
       dismissal of the Council’s concerns set out in its reasons for refusal. However, they
       fall beyond the scope of this appeal and are a matter for the Council and appellant.
5. Taking the above into account, the main issue is the effect of the proposal on
   biodiversity, with regard to Green Infrastructure (GI), the Eccles Colliery Extension
   Local Wildlife Site (LWS) (the extension LWS), the North Tyneside Local Plan
   Wildlife Corridor (the wildlife corridor) and priority species.
Reasons
6. The principle of housing at the site is not disputed and previous ecological
   mitigation strategies for different housing schemes in the surrounding area have
   been found to be acceptable and policy compliant2. A key consideration in this case
   is therefore whether the site-specific ecological effects of the proposal at this
   appeal site are acceptable and would satisfy development plan policies, taking into
   account the proposed mitigation and biodiversity net gains.
7. Part of the appeal site lies within the designated extension LWS and the wildlife
   corridor and is therefore part of the area’s GI network, reflective of local priorities to
   conserve a comprehensive range of habitats and species. Policy DM5.2 of the
   North Tyneside Local Plan (2017) (NTLP) states that the loss of any part of the GI
   network will only be considered if one of a series of exceptional circumstances is
   met. Where a proposal is considered to meet one of the exceptional circumstances,
   permission will only be granted where alternative provision, equivalent to or better
   than in terms of quantity and quality can be provided. The most relevant
   exceptional circumstance is at criterion b, if it is not a designated wildlife site or
   providing important biodiversity value.
8. A previous appeal decision3 indicated that based on surveys at the time of that
   appeal the value of the extension LWS had diminished to the extent that it would
   not meet the designation criteria. However, that appeal is of some age and
   predates the current criteria for LWS. More recent surveys demonstrate a gradual
   decline over time of the grassland at the appeal site and the Biodiversity Net Gain
   (BNG) Assessment concludes that it does not meet the selection criteria for a
   grassland site as it does not have a high enough diversity of plant species (15 or
   more species on average per square metre (m2)).
9. Even if the appeal site no longer meets the criteria for a LWS, there is no
   compelling evidence that the second part of criterion b is satisfied and that the site
   does not provide important biodiversity value. Notwithstanding that the term
   ‘important’ is not defined the evidence shows that, amongst other things, the site
   has clear biodiversity value including district value grassland that supports priority
   species. As such, the appeal site does not meet criterion b or any of the other
   exceptional circumstances. The second part of the policy regarding alternative
   provision does not apply and the proposal fails to accord with Policy DM5.2.
10. NTLP Policy DM5.5 includes a requirement that proposals protect biodiversity and
    minimise the fragmentation of habitats and wildlife links, and where priority species

2
    Appeal refs: APP/W4515/W/15/3137995, APP/W4515/W/21/3268413 and APP/W4515/W/23/3327828
3
    Appeal ref: APP/W4515/W/15/3137995


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6006322


     are likely to be affected, the proposal must be sensitive to, and make provision for,
     their needs. Policies S5.4 and DM5.7 require the area’s biodiversity resources,
     including local sites and wildlife corridors to be protected, enhanced and managed
     having regard to their relative significance. The quality and connectivity of corridors
     should also be protected and enhanced. Additionally, NTLP Policy DM5.9 requires
     that existing woodland, trees and hedgerows are protected.
11. The evidence shows that the site supports a range of habitats of local value,
    including neutral grassland, other woodland, mixed scrub, and species rich native
    hedgerow. Surveys have also identified the presence of Dingy Skipper butterfly, a
    priority species. It reasonably follows that the site contributes positively to the
    ecological function of the surrounding area. The proposal would permanently
    remove large areas of these habitats and replace them with hardstanding and built
    form, reducing opportunities for species movement and foraging within the site and
    connectivity with the surrounding area.
12. Although the trees to be removed are generally category C and of low quality and
    would be replaced by new tree planting, the existing habitats and support they
    provide to biodiversity in the ecosystem would be lost. It is also indicated that the
    small population of Dingy Skipper butterfly of district value at the site would be lost.
    Furthermore, on-site provision of biodiversity mitigation would be very modest and
    of such a small scale that it would provide minimal wildlife value within the site and
    would not reasonably maintain or enhance existing connectivity within the site.
13. Irrespective of the overall numerical net gains to biodiversity relating to mitigation
    on land immediately adjacent to the appeal site and even taking account of the
    structural diversity arising from the proposed creation of good quality open mosaic
    habitat, the proposal would not protect the quality and connectivity of habitats and
    wildlife links at the site, or be sensitive to, and make provision for the needs of
    priority species. As a result of the scale of built form at the site, the quality and
    connectivity of species movement of a range of habitats within the site would be
    fragmented, which the development plan seeks to avoid.
14. Within a landscape increasingly fragmented by ecologically hostile land uses, it is
    well understood that by providing valuable wildlife refuges local wildlife sites play a
    key role in nature recovery in the wider environment. The Council’s concerns
    regarding the effect of the proposal on the function of the area’s biodiversity
    resources have not therefore been overstated and any adverse effects on locally
    important sites are a matter of consequence.
15. Compliance with the statutory BNG framework does not indicate that the proposal
    would accord with the development plan requirements outlined above, which
    interpreted objectively in accordance with the specific wording used do not
    expressly indicate that their requirements can be overcome through mitigation.
    Even if the land identified for off-site mitigation was included in the site boundary
    there is no clear evidence that it would minimise the fragmentation of existing
    habitats or protect the ecological quality and connectivity of the existing situation
    given the proposed scale of built form at the appeal site. Any habitat enhancement
    would also take several years to become established.
16. The proposal would therefore not minimise the fragmentation of existing habitats
    and wildlife links or protect and enhance the quality and connectivity of the wildlife



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006322


        corridor and woodland, trees and hedgerows, contrary to the requirements of NTLP
        Policies DM5.5, S5.4, DM5.7 and DM5.9.
17. Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as inserted by Schedule
    14 of the Environment Act 2021) establishes a statutory framework for BNG, under
    which, other than for some exceptions, every grant of planning permission is
    deemed to have been granted subject to the condition that the biodiversity gain
    objective is met (the biodiversity gain condition). The objective requires
    development to deliver at least a 10% increase in biodiversity value relative to the
    pre-development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat, to be achieved through
    onsite biodiversity gains, registered offsite biodiversity gains or statutory
    biodiversity credits.
18. The appellant has utilised the standardised BNG metric as a measure of the
    existing biodiversity value of the site and the anticipated change in biodiversity units
    because of the proposal. It records other neutral grassland, other woodland, mixed
    scrub, and species rich native hedgerow as baseline habitats. While moderately
    species rich, the assessment says that the grassland falls short of the lowland
    meadow higher distinctiveness category and I have no clear reason to come to a
    different view. I am therefore satisfied that the correct baseline has been identified.
19. On-site mitigation measures are limited in scope, and the majority of mitigation
    would be provided off site immediately adjacent to the site, to reach an overall BNG
    of 11.51% and 35.01% net gain for hedgerows. While some of the proposed tree
    planting appears to be within private gardens there is no substantive evidence that
    the proposed layout would not allow for trees to be accommodated elsewhere to
    ensure they would be under the control of the management company. Due to the
    scale of housing proposed it is not possible to avoid impacts or provide sufficient
    mitigation on site. However, this does not mean that the appellant has not followed
    the biodiversity gain hierarchy. Moreover, a proposal that largely relies on off-site
    units is still capable of complying with the statutory framework.
20. While the Council has some concerns about the level of detail provided relating to
    these gains and whether they can be delivered, the Planning Practice Guidance4
    (PPG) sets out that it would generally be inappropriate for decision makers, when
    determining a planning application for a development subject to BNG, to refuse an
    application on the grounds that the biodiversity gain objective will not be met.
    Furthermore, there is no statutory requirement to assess or settle these matters at
    the appeal stage.
21. Notwithstanding that decision makers may need to consider more broadly whether
    the biodiversity gain condition is capable of being successfully discharged the
    statutory framework has been designed as a post-permission matter. Once
    planning permission has been granted, unless exempt, a Biodiversity Gain Plan
    must be submitted and approved prior to the commencement of that development.
    Amongst other things, this plan is the mechanism to ensure that any mitigation to
    make the development acceptable in planning terms is achievable. Furthermore,
    the biodiversity gain hierarchy has been designed for the purpose of the statutory
    framework for discharge of the biodiversity gain condition and so the Council must
    consider how the hierarchy has been applied when discharging the condition. If it


4
    Paragraph: 019 Reference ID: 74-019-20240214


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decision 6006322


     has not been applied, it must consider the reason for that or absence of a reason
     when determining whether to approve the Biodiversity Gain Plan.
22. I therefore have no clear reason to find otherwise that the proposal would deliver
    the required net gains for biodiversity. The proposal would accord with NTLP Policy
    DM5.5 insofar as it requires that proposals incorporate features providing net gains
    to biodiversity.
23. To conclude on the main issue, while the proposal would deliver the required net
    gains to biodiversity and the proposed mitigation would be closely related to the site
    on adjacent land which may minimise the risk of local species loss and the decline
    of locally distinctive biodiversity, in the specific circumstances of the case, it would,
    nevertheless, cause some moderate localised harm to biodiversity, with particular
    regard to the extension LWS, the wildlife corridor, priority species and GI. It would
    be in conflict with NLTP policies DM5.2, DM5.5, DM5.9, S5.4 and DM5.7.
Protected Sites
24. The proposal would be in the coastal buffer zone of the Northumbria Coast Special
    Protection Area/Ramsar Site, and Durham Coast Special Area of Conservation
    afforded protection under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 (the regulations) which require that permission may only be granted having
    ascertained that the development will not affect the integrity of these designations.
    The qualifying features of the protected sites include breeding populations of Little
    Tern and non-breeding populations of Purple Sandpiper and Ruddy Turnstone,
    alongside vegetated sea cliffs of the Atlantic and Baltic coasts. The proposal has
    the potential to impact on these qualifying features through additional
    recreational disturbance.
25. To ensure there are no likely significant effects from developmental the North
    Tyneside Coastal Mitigation Supplementary Planning Document (2019) identifies
    that development in all parts of North Tyneside is required to contribute to fund a
    tariff-based approach to coastal mitigation. A dated and signed S106 has been
    submitted to secure the required contribution to fund coastal access management
    and monitoring measures.
26. In carrying out the appropriate assessment, the adverse effects of the proposal on
    the integrity of the protected sites would be avoided. Consequently, with the above
    mitigation measures in place, the proposal would not adversely affect the integrity
    of the protected sites, either alone or in combination with other development.
Other Considerations
27. There is an acknowledged shortfall in housing land supply, which stands at 2.82
    years. There is also a shortfall in delivery, based on the most recent housing
    delivery test results. The proposal would deliver 37 homes on a vacant brownfield
    land that has been allocated for development in the NTLP. In doing so it would
    make an important contribution to the delivery of both market and affordable homes
    in an accessible location, delivering a mix of house types and sizes of which 9 units
    would be affordable housing, comprising affordable rent and discount for sale units,
    meeting an identified need in the area. Taking account of the extent of the shortfall,
    the scale of the proposal and the delivery of housing for specific groups I give these
    benefits substantial positive weight.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006322


28. There are also likely to be time-limited economic benefits from the construction
    stage and economic benefits arising from council tax income and expenditure by
    future occupiers. As these have not been quantified, in combination they attract
    moderate positive weight.
29. The Council did not allege any harm to the historic environment, including the
    setting of the Grade II listed building known as Dairy Cottage, an early nineteenth
    century house noted for its period architecture and historical association with the
    former colliery. Insofar as is relevant to this case, its setting includes the open
    landscape to the rear of the building, including the appeal site, which allows for an
    appreciation of its significance as a historic building.
30. Mindful of the statutory duty set out in section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have had special regard to the
    desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special
    architectural or historic interest which it possesses. On the basis of the evidence
    before me and my site visit observations, the proposal would be largely separated
    from the listed building by the intervening open land and would not detract from
    views of the asset from Station Road due to proposed landscaping and the set
    back from the road. It would have a neutral effect on the significance and setting of
    the designated heritage asset.
31. There is no clear evidence that the proposal’s sustainable design and construction
    would deliver over and above what is already required by policy or building
    regulations. Similarly, the design of the scheme, landscaping and BNG would
    mitigate the proposal’s effects. These matters are neutral factors weighing neither
    for nor against the proposal. Regarding highway safety, flood risk, contamination,
    ground conditions, archaeology, noise, the living conditions of future occupiers and
    development contributions there are no unresolved technical objections, and the
    Council did not allege any harm. Based on the evidence I concur, however the
    associated policy compliance is a neutral matter.
32. I have carefully considered the objections from residents which cover a variety of
    topics that have largely been covered above and under the main issue. There is no
    substantiated evidence that there are better places to build houses, or that existing
    houses in the area are not selling and so there is no firm evidence there is not a
    pressing need for housing in the area. As such, these matters have limited weight
    in the determination of the appeal.
Planning Balance
33. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan as a whole
    due to its adverse effects on biodiversity, specifically the fragmentation and
    connectivity of existing habitats and wildlife links at the appeal site. Taking account
    of the net gains to biodiversity that would be delivered and the proximity of the off-
    site mitigation which would offer the potential for new connections with the
    surrounding area including the LWS and wildlife corridor, cumulatively, I give the
    identified development plan policy conflict moderate negative weight. In line with
    Framework Policy N2 the proposal would make some positive contributions to the
    natural environment and support nature’s recovery. For the same reasons as
    above, the adverse effects of the proposal on biodiversity do not amount to
    significant harm that Policy N2 paragraph 2 seeks to avoid.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006322


34. Considering the current housing land supply, the delivery of 37 dwellings, including
    affordable provision to meet identified needs are clear social benefits that carry
    substantial positive weight. There are economic benefits that weigh in favour of the
    appeal scheme that attract moderate positive weight.
35. The Framework’s presumption in favour of sustainable development is set out in
    Policies S3, S4 and S5. Since the appeal site is within a settlement, Policy S4 is
    applicable, which states that development proposals within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework.
36. In applying Policy S4, the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include
    situations where the proposal would have a substantial adverse impact in relation
    to the application of the policies in the Framework for areas of particular importance
    for biodiversity and geodiversity set out in Policy N6. As a site of local importance,
    the appeal site is an area of particular importance for biodiversity and geodiversity
    for the purposes of Framework Policy N6 paragraph 1 c, which sets out that to
    support the conservation of important habitats, species and sites of geodiversity
    value, proposals affecting a site of local importance should only be supported if
    there would not be a significant adverse on the integrity of the site or the benefits of
    development in the location proposed clearly outweigh the likely impact on the
    features which make the site valuable for nature conservation.
37. Despite the harms identified under the main issue and the identified development
    plan conflict, there is no substantive evidence that the proposal would have a
    significant adverse effect on the integrity of the LWS. In any event, Framework
    Policy N6 paragraph 1 c. ii. supports development proposals affecting a site of local
    importance if the benefits of development in the location proposed clearly outweigh
    the likely impact on features which make the site valuable for nature conservation.
    It therefore follows that for the purposes of Framework Policy S4 paragraph 2 a. ii.
    the proposal would not have a substantial adverse impact in relation to the
    application of polices in the Framework for areas of particular importance for
    biodiversity and geodiversity. As such, it is correct to apply the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development.
38. The proposal would result in benefits, but it would also cause some harm. Weighing
    the two up is not a mathematical outcome; it is an overall judgement. In this case,
    the benefits of approving the proposal would not be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework taken as a whole and having particular regard to the circumstances
    listed in Framework Policy S4 paragraph 2 a. ii.
Planning Obligation
39. The UU would secure financial contributions towards the impacts of the
    development on a range of matters and would satisfy the tests in Regulation 122 of
    the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 (as amended), namely that
    they are all necessary to make the development acceptable, directly related and
    fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind. Accordingly, they are material
    considerations in this appeal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006322


40. Taking account of the planning obligations that are set out in the UU, I conclude
    that the proposal would make adequate provision for coastal mitigation, allotments,
    parks and green spaces, equipped play areas, playing pitches, built sports facilities,
    employment and training, primary education, on and off site BNG land and
    monitoring and travel plan monitoring. On this basis, the proposal accords with the
    relevant requirements in NTLP Policies S7.1, DM7.2, DM7.5, DM4.7 which require
    that development appropriately mitigates its impact on the physical, social and
    economic infrastructure of North Tyneside
Conditions
41. A condition identifying the approved plans is necessary for clarity. Reference to
    supporting documents have been removed as these are either covered in other
    conditions, by the statutory BNG regime or do not contain implementation
    measures. In the interest of biodiversity, conditions are imposed to ensure the
    development is carried out in accordance with the ecological impact assessment,
    and tree reports and protection plans. For the same reason an external lighting
    condition is necessary and a condition relating to pedestrian access. To protect the
    living conditions of future occupiers’ conditions are necessary regarding
    contamination and to ensure the development is carried out in accordance with the
    noise assessment, which includes the provision of an acoustic barrier.
42. A condition requiring the submission and approval of a Construction Environmental
    Management Plan is required in the interests of highway safety, the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers and to protect biodiversity, including
    amphibians and invasive species control. It is required before the commencement
    of development as the details relate to the construction phase. To manage the risk
    of flooding a condition is necessary in relation to drainage and before the
    commencement of development to ensure a suitable scheme can be achieved.
43. To protect the character and appearance of the area a materials condition is
    necessary. For the same reason, and in the interests of biodiversity and aircraft
    safety a condition requiring a detailed landscaping scheme is imposed. A condition
    relating to finished floor levels is necessary in the interest of character and
    appearance and drainage. Conditions securing cycle storage and a travel plan are
    imposed in the interest of promoting sustainable travel choices. In the interest of
    highway safety, a condition is necessary to ensure that areas to be used by
    vehicles are laid out and parking is implemented prior to the first occupation. For
    highway safety and protecting living conditions reasons a condition requiring refuse
    and recycling storage to be implemented is imposed.
44. The Council’s manager of new developments (highways) consultation response
    indicates that offsite highways works are in relation to a different permission. As
    there is no clear evidence that such works are necessary in highway safety terms
    for this appeal scheme, I have not imposed the suggested condition. I have also not
    imposed a condition relating to electric charging points as this is covered by
    building regulations.
45. The Framework states that planning conditions should not be used to restrict
    permitted development rights unless there is clear justification to do so. The Town
    and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
    amended) includes limitations on the extent of any such extension. That being the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6006322


     case, there is no clear justification for restricting future occupiers permitted
     development rights and so I have not imposed a condition on this matter.
Conclusion
46. Even with the identified conflict with development plan policies, there are material
    considerations that indicate that this decision should be made otherwise than in
    accordance with the development plan. Accordingly, for the reasons given above, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6006322


                                           Schedule of Conditions
1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
   date of this decision.

2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with drawing
   nos: 202-P7 – Proposed Site Layout; 203-P7 – Proposed Site Layout in Context;
   204-P4 – External Finishes; 205-P4 – Street Scenes A-A and B-B; 12621133-GHD-
   XX-XX-DRG-LA-00003-P06 – Landscape Masterplan; 12621133-GHD-XX-XX-
   DRG-LA-00004-P04 – Landscape Buffer Cross Sections; and 400 P1, 420 P1, 421
   P1, 422 P1 - House type Booklet January 2025.

3) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   submitted Ecological Impact Assessment Version 2 dated January 2025 by OS
   Ecology Ltd.

4) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   submitted Arboricultural Impact Assessment Report Rev B dated June 2025 by
   AllaboutTrees Ltd and the Arboricultural Method Statement For Trees at Eccleston
   Close – West Portion, Backworth - Revision B dated June 2025 by AllaboutTrees
   Ltd and the tree protection plans within them, which shall be implemented prior to
   any site clearance and retained throughout the construction period.

Pre commencement
5) No development shall take place until a Construction Environmental Management
   Plan (CEMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
   authority. Thereafter the construction of the development shall be carried out in
   accordance with the approved plan. The CEMP shall include details of:

    a) construction traffic routing, parking and delivery arrangements;
    b) measures for the control of dust, noise and vibration arising from
       construction activities;
    c) pollution prevention measures, including the protection of surface water and
       ground water;
    d) measures for the protection of retained trees, hedgerows and
       landscape features;
    e) ecological protection and precautionary measures, including timing of works and
       site working practices, with particular regard to practical measures for invasive
       species control and precautionary measure to protect amphibians; and
    f) site compounds, storage areas and construction working hours.

6) No development shall take place until detailed surface water drainage and
   Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS) designs have been submitted to and
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall
   thereafter be constructed and operated in accordance with the approved details.
   The scheme shall include details of:



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         10
Appeal Decision 6006322


    a) drainage calculations and layout drawings demonstrating compliance with the
       approved drainage strategy;
    b) any works to the existing culvert, including repairs or improvements
       where required;
    c) a timetable for implementation of the drainage scheme; and
    d) a long-term management and maintenance plan for all surface water drainage
       and SuDS features, including responsibility for maintenance of boundary ditches.

Post commencement
7) No development shall commence above ground level until full details of the finished
   levels, above ordnance datum, of the ground floor(s) of the proposed building(s), in
   relation to existing ground levels have been submitted to and approved in writing by
   the local planning authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance
   with the approved levels.
8) No development above slab level shall take place until a detailed landscaping
   scheme has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
   authority. The scheme shall include:

     a) full planting schedules specifying species, sizes and planting densities. No more
        than 10% of the total planted species shall comprise bird-attractive species for
        reasons of airport safeguarding;
     b) details of retained and proposed hedgerows, trees and boundary treatments;
     c) a timetable for implementation; and
     d) details of replacement planting for any trees or plants which are removed, die,
        are severely damaged, or become diseased within five years of planting.

     The approved landscaping scheme shall be implemented in accordance with the
     approved timetable and retained a such thereafter.

9) No development above damp-proof course level shall take place until samples
   and/or details of external materials have been approved in writing by the local
   planning authority. The development shall be constructed in accordance with the
   approved samples and/or details and retained as such thereafter.

10) Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the approved
    development that was not previously identified shall be reported immediately to the
    local planning authority. Development on the part of the site affected shall be
    suspended and a risk assessment carried out and submitted to and approved in
    writing by the local planning authority. Where unacceptable risks are found
    remediation and verification schemes shall be submitted to and approved in writing
    by the local planning authority. These approved schemes shall be carried out
    before the development is resumed or continued.

11) Prior to the installation of external lighting, other than in private gardens, full details
    including height, design, location and intensity shall be submitted to and approved
    in writing by the local planning authority. The lighting installation shall then be
    carried out in accordance with the approved details and retained as such thereafter.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6006322


Pre occupancy
12) No dwelling shall be occupied until all areas shown on drawing no 202-P7 –
    Proposed Site Layout to be used by vehicles is fully laid out, including car parking,
    and is made available for use. The arrangements shall be retained as
    such thereafter.

13) No dwelling shall be occupied until space has been laid out within the site in
    accordance with drawing nos 202-P7 – Proposed Site Layout and 420 P1 Cycle
    Shed Planning Drawing for secure cycle storage which shall be made available for
    use. The arrangements shall be retained as such thereafter.

14) No dwelling shall be occupied until a travel plan has been implemented in
    accordance with details first submitted to and approved in writing by the local
    planning authority. The approved travel plan shall be monitored for a minimum
    period of five years following first occupation.

15) No dwelling shall be occupied until pedestrian links to the Public Right of Way
    network have been implemented and retained as such thereafter, with details first
    submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.

16) No dwelling shall be occupied until the areas for refuse and recycling storage as
    shown on drawing no 202-P7 – Proposed Site Layout have been implemented,
    made available for use and retained as such thereafter.

17) No dwelling shall be occupied until a scheme of acoustic mitigation has been
    implemented in accordance with the submitted Noise Assessment Version 3 dated
    January 2025 by Wardell Armstrong LLP, including the erection of a minimum 1.8
    metre acoustic barrier fence. The approved mitigation measures shall be retained
    and maintained as such thereafter.

                                           ***End of Conditions***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         12
