    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 24 July 2026
    by Victor Callister BA(Hons) PGC(Oxon) DipTP MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 14 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6006123
    Court Farm, Padbrook Lane, Elmstone, Kent CT3 1HF
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Ron Bogun against the decision of Dover District Council.
    •   The application Ref is 25/01256.
    •   The development proposed is the conversion and change of use from light industrial shed to 3
        dwellinghouses with associated garden, amenity space and parking.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
   appeal relates, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (August 2026) (the Framework). I have sought comments from the main
   parties on the revised Framework in relation to the appeal. It will therefore not
   prejudice any party by making my decision with regard to the revised Framework.
3. The appellant has submitted revised plan 2025/P/004-A with the appeal. This shows
   a change in dwellinghouses 1 and 2 of the application proposal, where bedroom 2 in
   each of these two proposed dwellings becomes a bathroom. This is intended to
   overcome the Council’s concerns with regard to the effect on living conditions of
   occupants. The Council and other interested parties have had opportunity to
   comment on the revised plan; the Council have confirmed in their appeal
   submission that this overcomes reason 3 given in their decision notice of refusal of
   the application. I have accepted the revised plan in line with the Wheatcroft1
   principles and I am satisfied that reason 3 for the refusal of the original application
   relating to outlook and effect on living conditions can fall away. In this instance, lack
   of harm in this regard is a neutral factor in my considerations.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
      • whether the appeal property is suitable for the development proposed, having
        regard to local and national policies concerned with the location and
        sustainability of new development.
            •    The effect on the provision of land for employment purposes.

1
    Bernard Wheatcroft Ltd v SSE [JPL 1982 P37]

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6006123


Reasons
Suitable and Sustainable Development
5. The appeal site forms part of a cluster of light industrial, 3 residential properties, and
   other buildings and structures in unspecified use known as Court Farm. This is
   located off Padbrook Lane in the loose collection of properties that form the village
   of Elmstone. The existing building of the appeal site is a large modern barn type
   building, previously in agricultural use that was changed to a light industrial use, for
   which a certificate of lawfulness2 has been issued. It is currently in use for timber
   storage and joinery, related to a sash window business.
6. The group of buildings at Court Farm bounded on either side on Padbrook Lane by
   residential properties. However, the appeal site is on the outer part the collection of
   buildings and structures at Court Farm and backs onto and is bounded by fields
   against which it is read and which form the wider backdrop and setting.
7. The proposal is for a change of use of the building on the appeal site from light
   industrial use (Use Class E) to Residential (Use Class C3) and the conversion and
   alteration of the building to create 3 new terraced dwelling houses. Each with
   generous gardens spaces and parking for 3 cars.
8. The appeal property is a large and functionally designed building with what appears
   to be concrete bonded asbestos roof panels, with a variety of concrete bonded
   asbestos panels and lapped timber cladding for walls. The proposal is to change to
   a black metal roof system with rooflights, and to have black vertical timber cladding
   with brick plinth, with additional areas of fenestration. However, I find that the
   proposed design of the conversion of the building on the appeal itself would not
   greatly affect its appearance as a utilitarian barn type building. However, the use of
   the other majority part of the appeal site as residential curtilage with large garden
   areas, with parking area for a total of 9 cars, along with the inevitable domestic
   paraphernalia which would arise from the proposed development, would urbanise
   and domesticate the appearance of the building and erode its present character as
   a functional rural barn type building within a farmyard and countryside setting.
9. The existing building and nearby buildings form an established enclave of
   development that is in keeping with the rural character of the area. Consequently,
   the proposal’s domesticating effects would not enhance the character or
   appearance of the site or its immediate surroundings. Instead, they would be
   unsympathetic and harmful to the rural character and appearance of the local area
   of countryside. This would be contrary to Policies PM1 and SP4 of the Dover District
   Local Plan to 2040 (2024) (the Local Plan) and Policy DP3 of the Framework.
10. The 3 dwellings resulting from the proposal would be situated outside of the defined
    boundaries of any developed area, with the nearest defined settlement being
    Preston, located to the west of the Court Farm, from which it is separated by open
    fields. As such the proposal would result in the appearance of an isolated
    residential development in the countryside that would not meet the requirements set
    out in Policy HO11 of the Framework, requiring the proposed dwellings to either
    provide essential need for a rural worker, be appropriate enabling development to
    secure the future of heritage assets, reuse a redundant or disused building and


2
    Planning Ref: 22/00620


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6006123


     enhance its immediate setting, the subdivision of an existing residential building or
     that the design is of exceptional quality. None of which apply to the appeal proposal.
11. Further, the proposed dwellings would be in a location with very poor and unsafe
    access to nearby services and public transport, requiring the use of unlit country
    lanes without footways as pedestrians or cyclists, or more likely the use of a motor
    vehicle. This would be contrary to Policy SP4 of the Local Plan and Policy S5 and
    T3 of the Framework, which collectively seek residential development in urban
    areas or other defined settlements, or if a change of use of an existing building in
    the open countryside, to meet the criteria or criterium set out in Policy HO11 or be
    within reasonable walking distance of a well-connected station and be physically
    well-related to the station or the settlement within which the station is located.
Land for Employment
12. The appeal building is currently in use for timber storage and joinery by a sash
    window business. As a light industrial use withing Use Class E the appeal dwelling
    currently provides employment within the local rural area. The proposed change of
    use of the appeal building to 3 dwellings in Use Class C3, would result in a
    reduction in the amount of available land for employment purposes, in a rural
    location within the Council area.
13. Policy E2 of the Local Plan sets out that proposals that would result in the loss of
    existing employment sites, where they are not allocated in the Local Plan for
    alternative use, will only be supported where they would not result in a significant or
    harmful reduction in supply of such land, having regard to the type of employment
    land and its location, and that it has been demonstrated that employment use is no
    longer suitable or viable.
14. In order to demonstrate that a site is no longer viable for an employment use, the
    Local Plan sets out that, where the proposal is not in an area allocated in the local
    plan for alternative use, robust evidence must be provided that the premises have
    been marketed unsuccessfully for both the existing uses and any alternative suitable
    employment uses for a period of at least 12 months for such proposals. Policy E2 of
    the Framework also makes explicit reference to market signals in planning for
    employment land and floorspace. No marketing or other information with regard to
    the likelihood of obtaining a user for the building its current use or alternative
    suitable employment use has been provided by the appellant, and the requirements
    of this policy have not been met.
15. The appellant has however set out intentions, as owner and operator of the current
    business using the appeal building, with regard to retirement and closure of the
    business. This is a personal choice for the appellant and the potential
    consequences of any decision made by the appellant with regard to the future use,
    maintenance and condition of the appeal building as set out in by the appellant is
    also a matter for them to consider. As such these are not a direct planning matters
    and I afford no significant weight to them in my considerations.
16. The appellant has drawn attention to Certificates of Lawfulness granted for the
    residential use of the Pole Barn and Bungalow at Court Farm. Whilst these do
    demonstrate that residential occupation within the building cluster at court farm is
    established and is a mixed use cluster, the original use, small scale and location of
    these properties within a farmyard and not open countryside setting, varies
    considerably from that of the appeal site as a large building in light industrial use in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
    Appeal Decision 6006123


       an open countryside setting. I have therefore given these only moderate weight in
       my considerations.
17. The appellant has also drawn attention to agricultural buildings within the immediate
    local area for which approval of a prior approval applications have been issued for
    permitted development of changes of use to dwelling in Use Class C3 at Moonglow
    and Summercrisp. These would have been considered on their own individual
    merits and the planning regime in place at the time. However, a prior approval
    application has not been made or assessed for the appeal site. As such, I find that it
    has not been demonstrated by the appellant that the proposal would meet the
    requirements for such an assessment. Therefore, I find that a legitimate fallback
    position for the appellant to exercise a permitted development site does not
    reasonably exist in this instance.
18. The appellant has also drawn attention to the approval3 of 9 caravans and amenity
    block and conversion of a farm building to a dwelling at a nearby farm, considered
    by the Council under the operation of the previous local plan, which was determined
    with significant weight being given to farming requirements, which is not a
    consideration in this instance and, notwithstanding the re-use of an existing building,
    does not therefore provide a convincing exemplar for the appeal proposal.
    Consequently, I have afforded this only moderate weight in my considerations.
19. For the reasons given above, I find that the appeal property would not be suitable
    for the proposal, which would encroach on open countryside and result in isolated
    dwellings, with an urbanising and domesticating effect, harmful to the rural character
    of the area, with no safe access to public transport and services for pedestrians and
    cyclists and with an unsustainable reliance on the private car. Further, for the
    reasons given I find that the proposal would result in the unjustified loss of
    employment land, to which I have given substantial weight in my considerations.
20. This would be contrary to policies PM1, SP4 and E2 of the and Local Plan and
    Polices DP3, HO11, S5, T3 and E2 of the Framework. Collectively these seek
    developments that are of high quality design that respond to context so that they
    integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Are walkable and have safe access
    to public transport, facilities and services, adjoin existing settlement boundaries or if
    isolated in the countryside meet the specific criteria set out above. Do not result in
    the loss of employment land without robust marketing or other information with
    regard to the likelihood of obtaining a user for the building its current use or
    alternative suitable employment use.
21. The proposal would have the benefit of resulting in 3 new dwelling houses.
    Collectively small housing developments make a significant contribution to the
    delivery of new housing, to which I have given substantial weight, although the
    creation of 3 new houses in isolation would make only a small contribution to
    housing in the Council area. However, I find that this does not outweigh the harm
    through the creation of isolated housing in the countryside and the loss of
    employment land, to both of which I have afforded substantial weight in my
    considerations. As such, I do not find that the proposal would result in sustainable
    development.



3
    Planning Ref: DOV/20/00425


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
 Appeal Decision 6006123


22. As I have found, for the reasons given, that the proposal is not sustainable
    development, I do not consider it necessary to pursue the submission of a planning
    agreement with regard to achieving the required Biodiversity Net Gain, as
    suggested by Council.
Conclusion
23. The appeal is dismissed.



Victor Callister
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     5
