Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 June 2026
by R Dickson BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26 August 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6006920
4 Highfield Gardens, Golders Green, Barnet, London NW11 9HB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Nathan against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Barnet.
•   The application Ref is 25/5086/FUL.
•   The development proposed is demolition of the existing dwelling and erection of a new two storey
    dwelling including new basement level with associated light wells and rooms in the roof space with
    two side, one rear and two front facing dormers and four roof lights to the roof. Installation of three air
    conditioning units on the side elevation. Provision of external amenity space, two off-street parking
    spaces, cycle storage (in the rear garden) and refuse and recycling facilities.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of the
   existing dwelling and erection of a new two storey dwelling including new basement
   level with associated light wells and rooms in the roof space with two side, one rear
   and two front facing dormers and four roof lights to the roof. Installation of three air
   conditioning units on the side elevation. Provision of external amenity space, two
   off-street parking spaces, cycle storage (in the rear garden) and refuse and
   recycling facilities at 4 Highfield Gardens, Golders Green, Barnet, London NW11
   9HB in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/5086/FUL, subject to
   the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The appeal site has planning permission, which has been varied through a S73
   approval, for a similar scheme. However, the proposal before me differs from the
   development that has planning permission, in so far as it has front dormers.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   site and surrounding area.
Reasons
4. Highfield Gardens is predominantly residential, comprising mainly detached
   dwellings. The design and form of the dwellings vary, with some modest two storey
   dwellings with bay windows, while others are comparitively grand, and are double
   fronted and either two or three storeys in height. Many of the dwellings have been
   altered through time which is particularly apparent in the variation of roof structures,
   with a collection of roof shapes and styles, as well as some dwellings having
   varying styles of dormer and catslide windows on the front and side elevations. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006920


     overall character of the area is defined by large residential dwellings which have
     been altered over time to have individual appearances.
5. The appeal site, 4 Highfield Gardens, is a large double fronted dwelling, which
   together with No 6, stands at the entrance of Highfield Gardens. The existing
   dwelling has a gabled element in the middle of the front elevation, which joins onto
   a simple hipped roof form with two rooflights on the front elevation. Given the
   individual appearance of the dwelling, it contributes positively to the character and
   appearance of the area.
6. The proposal would demolish the existing dwelling, and replace it with a two storey
   dwelling with accommodation in the attic and basement. Notably, it would have a
   different roof arrangement to that already approved (Ref. 24/4304/FUL, as
   amended by Ref. 25/4927/S73), including two dormer windows on the front
   elevation.
7. The proposed dormer windows would by symmetrical on the front roof slope, and
   would be relatively small in comparison to the overall size of the proposed dwelling.
   The plans before me show that the windows on the front elevation would decrease
   in size on the first floor, therefore the smaller size of the dormer window would be in
   keeping with the overall style of the proposed dwelling. As such, the front dormers
   would not be visually intrusive on the front façade, or detrimental to the character
   and appearance of the host dwelling.
8. The appeal site is in a prominent location at the entrance of Highfield Gardens
   where the variety of dwellings and their roofscapes can be seen when entering the
   street. Paragraph 6.2 of the Barnet Local Plan: Supplementary Planning Document:
   Residential Design Guidance (2016) requires new residential development to
   reinforce the character of an area. Although the majority of properties do not
   feature front dormers within Highfield Gardens, the roofscape is so varied that the
   proposed front dormers would be a sensitive addition to the street scene. The front
   dormers would amalgamate with the street scene and would respect and enhance
   the prevailing character of the area, including its neighbours, reinforcing the
   individuality of the large dwellings.
9. Accordingly, the proposal would not harm the character and appearance of the site
   and surrounding area. As such, it would be in accordance with Policy CHD01 of the
   Barnet Local Plan 2021 - 2036 (2025) and Policy D3 of the London Plan (2021)
   which together seek to ensure that all new envelopment is of a high architectural
   and urban design quality, which respond sensitively to the distinctive local
   character and design, including roof form.
Conditions
10. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out following the approved plans, for the avoidance of
    doubt and in the interests of certainty.
11. The Council has suggested a number of conditions, which I have considered. A
    condition has been imposed that requires the submission of a demolition and
    construction management and logistics plan, to ensure adverse impacts on the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers are avoided during the construction
    phase. A separate condition has been imposed to ensure that any machinery used
    during the construction phase does not result in an adverse impact in terms of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006920


     pollution. A condition requiring a condition survey of the agreed route for
     construction traffic, together with any reinstatement of the route is necessary to
     ensure highway safety. A condition specifying the construction operation times is
     necessary to ensure that the proposal does not have any adverse impacts on
     neighbouring occupiers in terms of living conditions during the construction phase.
12. Two conditions have been imposed to ensure that the proposal provides adequate
    vehicle parking and cycle parking, to prevent the proposal from prejudicing highway
    safety or causing inconvenience to other highway users.
13. Three conditions have been imposed which ensure that the development will
    comply with the optional Building Regulations standards in respect to accessibility
    and adaptability of housing design, water consumption, and carbon dioxide
    emissions reduction, which are necessary to ensure that the proposal is
    sustainable. An additional condition requiring details of the boilers to be submitted
    to and approved by the local authority is also necessary for the same reason.
14. A condition requiring the submission and approval of external materials to the local
    authority is necessary to ensure that the proposal does not harm the character and
    appearance of the area. A condition requiring details of the proposed green roof to
    be submitted to and approved by the local authority is also required for this reason.
    A separate condition to ensure that the roof is not used as outdoor amenity area is
    required to protect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with specific
    regard to noise and disturbance.
15. Finally, although I have altered the wording of the condition to meet the tests, a
    condition is required to ensure that the side elevation windows are obscure glazed
    is necessary for the privacy of the neighbouring occupiers.
16. A condition requiring the removal of the permitted development rights for the appeal
    site was suggested by the Council. However, I have not imposed it as it would be
    overly restrictive, and therefore not necessary.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed, subject to conditions.

R Dickson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006920


SHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawings: Site Location Plan, 2503_P40_RevA, 2503_P41_RevA,
              2503_P42_RevA, 2503_P43_RevA, 2503_P44_RevA, 2503_P45_RevA,
              2503_P46_RevA, 2503_P47_RevA, 2503_P48_RevA, 2503_P49_RevA,
              2503_P50_RevB, 2503_P51, 2503_P52, 2503_P53_RevA.
     3)       a) No development or site works shall take place on site until a 'Demolition
              and Construction Management and Logistics Plan' has been submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Demolition and
              Construction Management and Logistics Plan submitted shall include, but not
              be limited to, the following:
              i)    details of the routing of construction vehicles to the site, hours of
                    access, access and egress arrangements within the site and security
                    procedures;
              ii) site preparation and construction stages of the development;
              iii) details of provisions for recycling of materials, the provision on site of a
                    storage/delivery area for all plant, site huts, site facilities and materials;
              iv) details showing how all vehicles associated with the construction works
                    are properly washed and cleaned to prevent the passage to mud and
                    dirt onto the adjoining highway;
              v) the methods to be used and the measures to be undertaken to control
                    the emission of dust, noise and vibration arising from construction
                    works;
              vi) a suitable and efficient means of suppressing dust, including the
                    adequate containment of stored or accumulated material so as to
                    prevent it becoming airborne at any time and giving rise to nuisance;
              vii) noise mitigation measures for all plant and processors;
              viii) details of contractors compound and car parking arrangements;
              ix) details of interim car parking management arrangements for the
                    duration of construction;
              x) details of a community liaison contact for the duration of all works
                    associated with the development.
              xi) Details of all qualifying Non-Road Mobile Machinery (NRMM, i.e.
                    construction plant and mobile generators) with a net power between
                    37kW and 560 kW used for demolition and construction activities, which
                    shall comply with the Greater London Authority's NRMM Low Emission
                    Zone for oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and particulate matter (PM), which
                    shall be registered as compliant or exempt with the Greater London
                    Authority, following the guidance available at and from
                    www.nrmm.london.
              b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
              measures detailed within the statement.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
Appeal Decision 6006920


     4)       Throughout the duration of demolition, site preparation and construction
              activities and until site occupation, an inventory and emissions records for all
              Non-Road Mobile Machinery shall be kept on site. The inventory shall
              demonstrate proof of emission limits for all equipment. All documentation
              shall be made available for inspection by Local Authority officers upon
              request. Registered equipment shall be updated as required to reflect
              equipment used at any one time.
     5)       The applicant shall carry out a "before" and "after" condition survey of the
              agreed route to be utilised by all construction traffic. The "before" survey shall
              be submitted to and approved in writing by Local Planning Authority prior to
              the commencement of the development. The "after" survey shall be
              completed three months before the completion of the development and
              thereafter submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority. Any recommended works necessary to reinstate the condition of
              the agreed route to that identified within the "before" survey shall be
              implemented as approved following completion of the development.
     6)       No construction work resulting from the planning permission shall be carried
              out on the premises at any time on Sundays, Bank or Public Holidays, before
              8.00 am or after 1.00 pm on Saturdays, or before 8.00 am or after 6.00pm on
              other days.
     7)       Prior to first occupation of the development, parking spaces and the access
              to the car parking spaces from public highway shall be provided in
              accordance with a scheme to be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              Local Planning Authority. Thereafter, the parking spaces shall be used only
              as agreed and not to be used for any purpose other than the parking and
              turning of vehicles in connection with approved development.
     8)       a) Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied cycle parking
              spaces and cycle storage facilities shall be provided in accordance with a
              scheme to be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority.
              b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
              details as approved under this condition and the spaces shall be permanently
              retained thereafter.
     9)       a) No development other than demolition works shall take place until details
              of the materials to be used for the external surfaces of the building(s) and
              hard surfaced areas hereby approved have been submitted to and approved
              in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
              b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
              materials as approved under this condition.
     10)      Prior to installation, details of the boilers shall be forwarded to the Local
              Planning Authority for approval. The boilers shall have dry NOx emissions
              not exceeding 40 mg/kWh (0%) and shall be installed in full accordance with
              the details approved.
     11)      Notwithstanding the details shown in the drawings submitted and otherwise
              hereby approved, prior to the first occupation of the new dwellinghouse(s)
              (Use Class C3) permitted under this consent they shall all have been
              constructed to meet and achieve all the relevant criteria of Part M4(2) of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006920


              Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010 (or the equivalent standard in
              such measure of accessibility and adaptability for house design which may
              replace that scheme in future). The development shall be maintained as such
              in perpetuity thereafter.
     12)      Prior to the first occupation of the new dwellinghouse(s) (Use Class C3)
              hereby approved they shall all have been constructed to have 100% of the
              wholesome water supplied to them by the mains water infrastructure
              provided through a water meter or water meters and each new dwelling shall
              be constructed to include water saving and efficiency measures that comply
              with Regulation 36(2)(b) of Part G 2 of the Building Regulations to ensure
              that a maximum of 105 litres of water is consumed per person per day with a
              fittings based approach should be used to determine the water consumption
              of the proposed development. Any use of grey water and/or rain water
              systems needs to be separate from the potable (wholesome) water system
              and needs to meet the requirements and guidance set out in Part G of the
              Building Regulations. The development shall be maintained as such in
              perpetuity thereafter.
     13)      Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby approved it shall be
              constructed incorporating carbon dioxide emission reduction measures which
              achieve an improvement of not less than 10% in carbon dioxide emissions
              when compared to a building constructed to comply with the minimum Target
              Emission Rate requirements of the 2013 Building Regulations. The
              development shall be maintained as such in perpetuity thereafter.
     14)      The roof of the development hereby permitted shall only be used in
              connection with the repair and maintenance of the building and shall at no
              time be converted to or used as a balcony, roof garden or similar amenity or
              sitting out area.
     15)      a) Prior to the first occupation of the hereby approved development, details of
              the proposed green roof have been submitted to and approved in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority.
              b) The green roof shall be implemented in accordance with the details
              approved this condition prior to the commencement of the use or first
              occupation of the development and retained as such thereafter. Should part
              of the approved green roof be removed, die, become severely damaged or
              diseased within five years of the completion of development, it shall be
              replaced in accordance with the details approved by this condition.
     16)      The building hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the side elevation
              window(s) facing no. 2 Highfield Gardens has been fitted with obscure
              glazing, and no part of that window that is less than 1.7 metres above the
              floor of the room in which it is installed shall be capable of being opened.
              Details of the type of obscured glazing shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority before the window is installed and once
              installed the obscured glazing shall be retained thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
