Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 June 2026
by S Simms BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006819
Land South of The Street, Furneux Pelham, Hertfordshire
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Jan Boruch against the decision of East Hertfordshire District Council.
    The application reference is 3/25/1108/FUL.
    The proposal is the erection of eco self build dwelling and garage with associated landscaping.


Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the
      latest Housing Delivery Test results were published on 17 August 2026. I invited
      the main parties to comment on any implications of these for their cases and took
      their responses into account in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues are whether the proposal is in a suitable location, having regard
      to the accessibility of services and facilities, and the effects of the proposal on:
               the character and appearance of the area, including Furneux Pelham CA;
               highway safety, with particular regard to access, visibility and drainage;
               trees, hedges and landscape features; and
               the provision of agricultural land.
Reasons
Accessibility of services and facilities
4.    The site is located between parts of the village of Furneux Pelham. There is a field
      between it and part known as Barleycroft End, which has a development boundary
      on the Policies Map of the East Herts District Plan 2018 (EHDP). To the other side
      of the site, there is more dispersed outlying development with no boundary.
5.    The proposal is for a detached dwelling outside the boundary of the village shown
      on the Policies Map. Whilst the site is within walking distance of a pub, shop, bus
      stops and village hall along a road with a 30mph speed limit, that road has high
      hedgerows, which limit forward visibility, no footways and is unlit.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006819


6.    Consequently, it unlikely that residents of the proposal would walk or cycle to
      these, still less to the recreation ground further south or primary school or church
      further west. I have no evidence as to bus service frequency, but it is probable that
      residents would be dependent on the car for most other facilities.
7.    This would be contrary to the development hierarchy set out in Policy DPS2 of the
      EHDP, which focusses first on sustainable brownfield sites, then on sites in main
      urban areas, then on extensions to those and then on villages. Whilst Policy VILL2
      of the EHDP identifies Furneux Pelham as a Group 2 Village, the site is not within
      its built-up area as shown on the Policies Map. Furthermore, the proposal would
      not constitute infill, the site being open on at least three sides.
8.    Policy GBR2 of the EHDP limits development in the rural area beyond the Green
      Belt to, amongst other things, the limited infilling or redevelopment of previously
      developed sites in sustainable locations. The site appears previously undeveloped
      and the appellant states that it is part of an agricultural holding.
9.    I am referred to permissions granted on application or appeal, which the appellant
      considers demonstrate that less accessible locations have been found sustainable.
      I do not have all the evidence on which these were determined but note that there
      are differences between the appeal site and those referred to.
10. For example, I cannot be sure of the exact location of each case, the housing land
    supply or delivery positions, or bus service frequency at the time of the decisions.
    However, I note that some of the permissions relate to previously developed land
    and others to infill plots, of which the appeal site comprises neither.
11. One of the guiding principles of the hierarchy in Policy DPS2 of the EHDP is to
    direct development to locations with reasonable proximity to services and facilities.
    The site is not within a settlement in that hierarchy, it is neither an infill plot nor
    previously developed land, and it has poor access to services and facilities by
    means other than the car. Therefore, I conclude that the site is not in a suitable
    location, contrary to Policies DPS2, VILL2 and GBR2 of the EHDP.
Character and appearance
12. The appeal site comprises a rectangular part of a field with a fence running along
    its length accessed via a narrow gap in the thick hedgerow to the road. The gap is
    shared with the driveway to a house, with which the site also shares a hedgerow
    boundary. To the other side, there is an open field between the site and the edge
    of Barleycroft End, which also forms the boundary of Furneux Pelham CA.
13. The Council’s conservation officer reports that the significance of the CA derives
    from its relationship with the rural landscape that surrounds it, which historically
    sustained the village, that the site forms part of its open and agricultural setting,
    and that the transition from countryside to village as experienced from the road is
    important for understanding the settlement’s historic character.
14. The proposal is to erect a bungalow and double garage with flat green roofs and
    photovoltaic panels on a south-facing shallow pitched roof. A new access would be
    formed to the road, and the existing access would lead to a ‘permissive bridleway’
    that would continue to provide access to land to the rear of the plot. Whilst there is
    disagreement as to the length of hedgerow lost, a gap would be created.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006819


15. At least the garage and possibly the sloping roof would be glimpsed in summer,
    and more generally perceived during winter, from the road. The proposed form,
    despite green roofs, walls and planting, would appear unusual compared to other
    buildings in the area and entail an incremental loss of open agricultural fields and
    attendant rural landscape character, eroding the setting of the CA.
16. I conclude that this would harm the character and appearance of the area and
    cause less than substantial harm to the setting of the CA and therefore to its
    significance. This is not outweighed by the benefits of a self-build, zero-carbon
    dwelling and economic and social benefits to local services, all of which could be
    achieved in less harmful ways and on less sensitive sites.
17. These harms would be contrary to Policies DES2, DES4 and HOU12 of the EHDP,
    which seek to conserve the district’s landscape character and require development
    to reflect local distinctiveness, respect the character of the site and area, and avoid
    harmful incursion into the countryside.
Highway safety
18. The site plan shows visibility splays, which the County Council’s highways officer
    considers unachievable without the removal of a substantial length of hedgerow in
    the highway. I note the 30mph speed limit, lack of evidence of accidents, likely low
    traffic generated and space for vehicles to turn. However, no further technical
    evidence is presented to refute the concerns raised.
19. Therefore, I cannot be sure that adequate space exists or that details of drainage,
    relocation of signs or vegetation works could be addressed by planning conditions.
    This is due not only to the lack of technical evidence, but also to the potential for
    consequential effects on character, appearance, trees, hedges and landscape
    features should it transpire that space does not exist.
20. Whilst the residual impacts on the road network would not be severe, the impacts
    on highway safety of a substandard access would be unacceptable, particularly for
    pedestrians or cyclists. Consequently, the proposal is contrary to Policy TRA2 of
    the EHDP, which requires proposals for access to be acceptable in highway safety
    terms and avoid significant harm to the local environment.
Trees, hedges and landscape
21. Whilst unclear, it appears from the submitted drawings that trees and hedgerow
    along the fence line running the length of the site would be lost because of the
    proposal. Furthermore, the concern raised by the County Council’s highways
    officer that a substantial length of hedgerow in the highway would be lost is not
    refuted by any technical evidence presented by the appellant.
22. I accept that none of these landscape features are protected and am reasonably
    content that sufficient land would be available for landscape proposals that could
    mitigate the loss of these hedgerows in terms of biodiversity. However, I remain
    concerned that hedgerow within the highway, which has amenity value as part of
    the landscape character of the area, could be permanently lost.
23. Consequently, I cannot be sure that the proposal would not have a harmful effect
    on trees, hedges and landscape features, contrary to Policies DES3, HOU12 and
    NE3 of the EHDP, which require proposals to demonstrate how they will retain
    landscape features of amenity or biodiversity value.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006819


Agricultural land
24. The site is part of an agricultural holding but does not appear to be in production
    other than for grazing or taking off grass. The application form states that it is a
    disused access to a larger field, but the proposed bridleway would nonetheless
    retain that function and could be the subject of a planning condition.
25. I have no evidence that the land is amongst the best and most versatile and I
    consider it unlikely that the proposal would lead to the loss of the agricultural use
    overall. I am therefore content that the limited loss of agricultural land would be
    acceptable and complies with Policy ED2 of the EHDP.
Other Matters
26. The proposal would provide a self-build, zero-carbon dwelling and economic and
    social benefits to the local economy during construction and occupation.
Planning Balance
27. The Council accepts that there is an unmet need for housing in the district and
    suggests that between 3.4 and 3.7 years’ supply of land exists.
28. Unless the benefits would be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework, Policy
    S5 of the Framework requires development that would address evidenced unmet
    need outside a settlement to be approved where it would be physically well-related
    to an existing settlement and of a scale that can be accommodated.
29. Policy DP3 of the Framework states that proposals that fail to respond to their
    context or conflict with principles for creating well-designed places should be
    refused. It requires substantial weight to be given to relevant development plan
    policies when assessing design quality. Policy TR6 requires proposals that would
    have an unacceptable impact on highway safety to be refused.
30. I have found that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the
    area, including Furneux Pelham CA, and have unacceptable impacts on trees,
    hedges and landscape features, contrary to relevant development plan policies. I
    attach substantial weight to these conflicts. Furthermore, I have found that the
    proposal would have unacceptable impacts on highway safety.
31. These adverse effects assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposal, despite the
    housing land shortfall. I have also found that the proposal would not be suitably
    related to an existing settlement and that its need for access to services and
    facilities could not be accommodated by available infrastructure.
Conclusion
32. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Consequently, having had regard to all matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Simms
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
