Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Alison Fish BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006725
1 King Edward Crescent, Newquay, Cornwall TR7 1HL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Haddrell against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•   The application Ref is PA25/08437.
•   The development proposed is construction of a townhouse to include an additional bedroom within
    the roof.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr and Mrs Haddrell against Cornwall
   Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. I have largely taken the description of development in the banner heading above,
   from the application form but have left out superfluous detail so that it succinctly
   describes the proposal before me.
4. The Council’s appeal statement suggests that the Inspector should assess the
   appeal site from the objector’s property. However, I was unable to do so as no
   address for the objector had been provided. Furthermore, no representations have
   been received from neighbouring occupiers either during the application process or
   at appeal stage.
5. The updated National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
   on 17 August 2026 but does not materially affect the assessment of this appeal
   scheme. Therefore, I will not prejudice any party by taking the Framework into
   account in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are:
           •    the effect on the character and appearance of the area; and
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of existing
                neighbouring occupiers with regards to outlook and light.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006725


Reasons
Character and appearance
7. The appeal site is located in a residential area which contains a range of
   architectural styles. I observed that there are examples of properties with
   accommodation within the roof. However, in the main, properties are two storeys
   under a simple roof form.
8. The overall height of the property would be comparable with the neighbouring
   properties and the provision of land around all sides of the proposed building would
   mean that the development would not appear cramped. Notwithstanding this, the
   inclusion of numerous gabled elements would create an overly complex roof form,
   while the variation in window sizes, styles and positioning across the elevations
   results in a disjointed appearance.
9. Collectively, these features would result in a development with a cluttered and
   visually discordant character. This would be at odds with the regular spaced
   openings and simple roof form of the surrounding buildings. This could not be
   overcome by the Councils suggested, without prejudice condition relating to
   external construction materials. The proposal therefore fails to demonstrate high-
   quality design which respects and responds to the existing character and
   appearance of the area.
10. The proposal would be contrary to Policies 1, 2 and 12 of the Cornwall Local Plan
    Strategic Policies 2010-2030 adopted November 2016 (CLP) and Policy C1 of the
    Climate Emergency Development Plan Document (DPD) which seek high-quality
    design which responds to its townscape setting.
11. The Council refer to Policy H2 of the Newquay Neighbourhood Plan 2019-2030
    (NP) in their reason for refusal. However, this relates to development in Sensitive
    Landscape Areas but there is no evidence before me that the appeal site is in such
    an area.
Living conditions
12. The proposed townhouse would be located between Atlantic Lodge to the west and
    Harvest Moon to the east. Harvest Moon has windows on its southwest flank wall
    which face the appeal site. The proposed townhouse would be located closer to the
    road than Harvest Moon. This siting, together with its similar eaves height means
    that the occupiers of Harvest Moon are unlikely to experience a loss of light or a
    reduced outlook to a harmful extent.
13. Atlantic Lodge has a number of openings on its eastern elevation which look
    towards the appeal site. In addition, there is an external courtyard enclosed by high
    boundary walls forming a boundary with the appeal site, providing one of the
    ground floor flats with a private outdoor space.
14. The eaves of the proposed townhouse would be higher than those on Atlantic
    Lodge. The proposed height and massing of the building, together with its close
    proximity and location to the east of Atlantic Lodge would result in a loss of outlook
    and light to the east facing windows of Atlantic Lodge and the courtyard garden
    area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006725


15. Two daylight and sunlight assessments have been submitted, both have a
    reference RN/211223. The first assessment dated October 2021 considers a
    scheme with a specified ridge height of 38.1m which is below that proposed in the
    current appeal. This assessment considered the impact on light to the garden of 8
    King Edward Crescent (Harvest Moon). The second assessment dated September
    2024 assessed the effect on daylight and sunlight to the south-east facing windows
    of Atlantic Lodge. It assessed the proposal as shown on drawing number PL-01E
    which is not before me, and the document does not set out what the proposed ridge
    height of that development would be. For these reasons, neither assessment can
    be relied upon in the determination of this appeal.
16. In addition, no cross sections have been provided which demonstrate the
    relationship between the appeal proposal and Atlantic Lodge. In the absence of
    substantive evidence to the contrary, I cannot conclude that the loss out outlook
    and light to the neighbouring property and the private outdoor courtyard as a result
    of the proposed development would not be harmful. The Council’s suggested,
    without prejudice condition requiring obscured glazed and fixed shut windows
    would not mitigate this effect.
17. Paragraph 9.3.5 of the Cornwall Design Guide December 2021 (CDG) requires that
    there should be adequate levels of outlook for existing residents and paragraph
    9.5.7 requires that all homes have access to private external space which is not
    excessively shaded. I have found that compliance with these requirements has not
    been demonstrated.
18. The proposal would conflict with Policies 12 and 16 of the CLP and G1 of the DPD
    which seek to protect people from the harmful impacts of development including
    overshadowing and overbearing effects.
Other considerations
19. The appeal proposal follows a recent grant of planning permission for a town house
    on the site which was allowed on appeal1 (‘the 2025 permission’). Should this
    appeal fail I am satisfied that there is a reasonable prospect that the 2025
    permission would be implemented. Consequently, the extant approval represents a
    realistic fallback position.
20. The full details of that 2025 permission are not before me but I understand that it
    was for a property with the same footprint, orientation and separation distance to
    neighbouring properties as the proposal before me. However, the appeal proposal
    also includes an additional storey of accommodation, changes in fenestration and
    an overall increase in height of 1.3m to the eaves and 1.7m to the ridge.
21. The overall result would be a development with a greater height and massing than
    the 2025 permission. Whilst the Inspector in that instance was able to conclude
    from the evidence before them that the loss of outlook and light which occupiers of
    Atlantic Lodge would experience would not be harmful, I cannot conclude likewise.
    Given that I have found harm arising from the appeal proposal in respect of the
    effect on the character and appearance of the area and the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers, the 2025 permission attracts very limited weight in favour
    of the appeal proposal.


1
    Appeal Ref: APP/D0840/W/25/3361328 1 King Edward Crescent, Newquay, Cornwall TR7 1HJ


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             3
Appeal Decision 6006725


22. The Council cannot demonstrate a five year housing land supply. The proposal
    would deliver a new home on previously developed land. The appellant argues that
    the additional floorspace would be a more efficient use of land. However, as there
    is an extant planning permission for the provision of a dwelling, this proposal would
    not result in additional housing and any benefits arising from the additional
    floorspace in a single family home would be very modest indeed.
23. The proposal is advanced as self-build. However, in the absence of a legally
    binding mechanism to secure this, it carries limited weight in my assessment.
Planning Balance
24. I have found that the proposal conflicts with policies in the LP, the CDG and the
    DPD relating to design. These are generally consistent with national decision-
    making policy DP3 of the Framework, which seeks proposals that respond to their
    context, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. As the
    proposal fails to comply with these explicit design standards, policy DP3 (3) states
    that development should be refused. Consequently, the proposal would fail to
    comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances, as set out in
    policy S4(2)(c) of the Framework.
25. I have found that the limited benefits of approving the proposed development would
    be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework, and the presumption in favour
    of sustainable development set out in policy S3 and S4 of the Framework does not
    apply.
Other Matters
26. Had I been minded to allow the appeal, I would have had to consider whether the
    proposal benefitted from a biodiversity net gain exemption and the effect of the
    proposed development on the Penhale Dunes Special Area of Conservation.
    However, as the appeal is to be dismissed, I need not consider these further.
Conclusion
27. The proposed development would be contrary to the development plan and there
    are no other considerations which outweigh this finding. Consequently, with
    reference to Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, the
    appeal is dismissed.

Alison Fish
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
