Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by N Armstrong BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006003
Land adjacent 837 Manchester Road, Linthwaite HD7 5NF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Daphne Bamforth of Construction Industry against the decision of Kirklees
     Metropolitan Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/62/91903/W.
•    The development proposed is erection of single dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The Government issued a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties have had the
       opportunity to make any comments on the implications of that relevant to the
       appeal. I have had regard to these and the revised Framework in my decision.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
                having regard to the Framework; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area,
                including its effect on trees, and whether the proposal would preserve or
                enhance the character or appearance of the Linthwaite Conservation Area
                (the CA).
Reasons
4.     The appeal site comprises an open area of grassland, scrub, a mix of trees and
       other vegetation, which slopes up from a stone boundary wall adjacent to
       Manchester Road to its rear boundary. It incorporates an existing access track
       forming part of the route of a public right of way, which runs through the site
       leading to the open countryside setting beyond the rear boundary. A line of
       established trees separates the site from the fields adjacent to the right of way.
       The site occupies a prominent position, situated between two and three-storey
       residential development at Nos 837 and 845 Manchester Road, in an area
       characterised by similar scale residential development, predominantly to the same
       side of the road as the appeal site. Directly opposite the site the land is also open
       in character, featuring low stone walls, trees, a vehicular access leading to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006003


       commercial development at a lower level and a car park, with a group of terraced
       residential properties adjacent further along the road.
Whether inappropriate development
5.     The appeal site is within the Green Belt. The Framework states that the objective
       of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open,
       and the essential features of Green Belts are their openness and permanence.
       The five purposes of the Green Belt are set out in Framework policy GB2.
6.     Policy GB6 of the Framework states that development in the Green Belt is
       inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in policy GB7. Based on
       the evidence before me, of particular relevance to the appeal, these include where
       all of the following apply in relation to policy GB7(1)(g):
       i.       The development would utilise grey belt land and would not fundamentally
                undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt
                across the area of the plan;
       ii.      There is an evidenced unmet need for the type of development proposed;
       iii.     The development would be in a sustainable location, with particular
                reference to policy TR3 of this Framework; and
       iv.      In the case of major development involving the provision of housing, the
                development proposed complies with policy GB8.
7.     This reflects the provisions set out in paragraph 155 of the previous version of the
       Framework regarding the development of grey belt land. Similarly, the revised
       Framework defines grey belt as land in the Green Belt comprising previously
       developed land and/or any other land that, in either case, does not strongly
       contribute to any of purposes (a), (b), or (d) in policy GB2.
8.     There is no dispute between the parties that the appeal site does not strongly
       contribute to any of Green Belt purposes (a), (b) or (d). From the evidence before
       me and my observations on site, I have no reason to reach a different conclusion.
       Therefore, the site can reasonably be described as grey belt land. However, there
       is dispute between the parties with regard to policy GB7(1)(g)(i), and whether the
       proposal would fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of the
       remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan, and in particular, purpose (c).
9.     In this regard, the proposal would continue the line of existing built form that fronts
       Manchester Road. Given the modest size of the site and the degree of enclosure
       created by the trees and the right of way, in comparison to the more open rural
       setting of the fields beyond, there would be a modest degree of encroachment into
       the countryside. The site is also close to existing housing either side, and
       alongside the trees and right of way, it would be largely contained by existing
       physical features. Therefore, any encroachment into the countryside beyond the
       existing built form, and in relation to the extent of the Green Belt as a whole, would
       be limited. Consequently, the proposal would not fundamentally undermine the
       purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt.
10. Turning to the other requirements of policy GB7(1)(g), the evidence shows that the
    Council does not currently have a five year supply of deliverable housing sites,
    therefore there is an evidenced unmet need for housing. In addition, due to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006003


       site’s proximity to local amenities, services, footpath links and public transport, the
       proposal would be in a sustainable location in the context of policy TR3 of the
       Framework. As the proposal is not major development, the ‘Golden Rules’
       requirements set out in policy GB8 of the Framework are not applicable.
11. Consequently, the proposal would utilise grey belt land, it would meet the
    requirements of policy GB7(1)(g) of the Framework, and therefore it would not be
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Accordingly, I am not required to
    consider any effects on the openness of the Green Belt, or if very special
    circumstances exist to justify the development.
Character and appearance
12. The appeal site lies within the CA, which covers a large area comprising a mix of
    residential and commercial development, and areas of open countryside that are
    of particular importance to its setting. The CA is set on the hillside above the valley
    of the River Colne, characterised by nucleated settlements with several cores,
    along with buildings that have developed around the woollen industry, including
    mill buildings and cottages. Insofar as is relevant to the appeal, the significance of
    the CA derives in part from these factors, which contribute to its architectural and
    historic interest.
13. There is development along the majority of Manchester Road within the CA, which
    provides an early example of ribbon development and is an important component
    in the historical development of Linthwaite. Notwithstanding the rural location, this
    form also contributes to an urban feel along parts of Manchester Road. However,
    the Council’s Linthwaite Conservation Area appraisal report states it is essential to
    preserve the spaces between buildings which have not been developed as these
    provide important glimpses to the rural tranquillity beyond.
14. The appeal site is more open in character in comparison to the existing built form
    to either side, which includes some later mill worker cottages and more recent
    redevelopment of former mill buildings. It is also in an area of more open character
    in comparison to the more built-up parts along Manchester Road. Additionally, the
    site is seen in the immediate context of the rural setting formed by the trees and
    open fields beyond its rear boundary and experienced from the public right of way
    that provides a link to the more open countryside setting. Whilst smaller trees and
    vegetation towards the front of the appeal site are of lower amenity value, the taller
    trees at a higher level above Manchester Road within the site and adjacent to the
    public right of way appear as more substantial features that significantly contribute
    to the visual amenity of the site and the surrounding area within the CA.
15. Due to its prominent position adjacent to the road, the elevated ground level, the
    existing trees, and the clear visual break between existing development, the site is
    a notable feature within this part of Manchester Road. It forms part of a pleasant,
    verdant and more open setting in this section of the road that positively contributes
    to the overall significance of the CA.
16. The proposal would result in the construction of a new dwelling between, and on a
    similar building line to, the existing development to the same side of the road. Due
    to the topography of the site, the front elevation would have three-storeys with a
    two-storey rear elevation. It would be constructed from stone and slate, which
    would reflect the prevailing materials in this area and the wider CA. As a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006003


       standalone design, the overall scale and appearance of the proposal would
       therefore reflect the form of nearby development.
17. Due to its width and the spaces that would be retained either side, the proposal
    would not result in a continuous built-up frontage alongside the existing
    development at Nos 837 and 845. The topography and existing trees within and
    close to the site also limit the extent of views from the road towards the rural
    character beyond to the rear of the site to some degree, in comparison with other
    more expansive views from Manchester Road, particularly from locations looking
    northwards across the valley. However, the extent of screening from the trees
    would likely change at times throughout the year as views become more open.
    The proposal would therefore preserve some space between the existing buildings
    that would allow for glimpses to the rural setting beyond the rear boundary of the
    site. However, there would be a notable and material reduction in the extent of the
    existing visual break between the existing buildings, which would erode the
    contribution this undeveloped open space makes to the character of the area.
18. The layout of the proposal would also result in the loss of a number of trees within
    the appeal site, and there is some dispute between the parties regarding their
    condition and significance in this location. The appellant’s supporting ecological
    and biodiversity reports identify 13 trees on the site, stating five are medium size,
    two of which are classed as good condition and three as moderate. The remaining
    trees are classed as small and in moderate condition. Whilst the Council does not
    object to the removal of lower value trees to the frontage of the site, they consider
    the larger trees towards the rear of the site are significant, high amenity trees.
19. Despite some information within the supporting reports, the application is not
    accompanied by an arboricultural impact assessment that would provide a more
    detailed appraisal of the condition and quality of the trees, their suitability for
    retention, and the impact of the proposal on them. Whilst the appellant suggests
    that the trees are self-seeded, small and poor quality, the larger trees appear to be
    established features of the site and the surrounding area. Although emergency
    pruning work has been undertaken to some trees, in the absence of any
    substantive evidence demonstrating that the larger trees to be removed are not
    capable of retention, there is little to justify the removal of the larger trees that
    make a significant contribution to the visual amenity of the area.
20. Notwithstanding the standalone design of the proposal, when considered together,
    the reduction of the open space between the existing development and the loss of
    the larger trees would significantly detract from and harm the character and
    appearance of the appeal site and the surrounding area within the CA. The
    proposal would not retain or conserve features that make a positive contribution to
    the character or appearance of the CA. The contribution the site makes to the
    significance of the CA would be eroded, therefore the proposal would fail to
    preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. It would harm the
    significance of the CA and there is no clear and convincing justification for this
    harm. As the effect would be localised in terms of the CA as a whole, and having
    regard to the scale of the development, the harm to the significance of the CA
    would be moderate.
21. Policy HE6(1) of the Framework states that when considering the potential effect
    of a proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
    should be given to the asset’s conservation, irrespective of whether any potential

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006003


       effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its
       significance. The Framework is clear that any harm to a designated heritage asset
       will be a matter of considerable importance and weight. With regard to policy
       HE6(4) of the Framework, where a proposal would harm the significance of a
       designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its significance should be
       weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
22. Public benefits have not been specifically outlined by the appellant, although there
    is some reference to the development contributing to local housing supply. It would
    be reasonable to treat this as being a public benefit in as much that it would
    contribute to the objectives set out in the Framework to support the delivery of a
    substantial increase in the supply of homes. Furthermore, policy HO7 of the
    Framework states substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing
    homes which will contribute towards meeting evidenced accommodation needs of
    the community.
23. As established above, the Council does not currently have a five year supply of
    deliverable housing sites, with the most recent figure provided within the Officer
    Report stating a 4.18 years supply. I therefore give the provision of housing
    substantial weight in the context of policy HO7 of the Framework. However, given
    that the proposal relates to a single dwelling and the extent of the shortfall, the
    contribution it would make to housing supply would be limited.
24. The appellant also states that they wish to return to the area, and the application
    form suggests the proposal would be self-build or custom-build development,
    which could potentially contribute to the Council’s supply of such housing. Despite
    the appellant’s willingness to accept an occupancy condition, there is no detailed
    mechanism before me to ensure it would be satisfactorily secured as self-build or
    custom-build housing. In addition, there is nothing before me to sufficiently
    demonstrate the extent of any such supply and the contribution the proposal would
    make to this. I therefore give limited weight to potential benefits arising from the
    proposal as self-build or custom-build development.
25. Consequently, whilst the level of harm to the CA would be moderate, from the
    evidence before me, the public benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the
    substantial weight that should be given to the conservation of the CA, and the
    considerable importance and weight given to any harm to it.
26. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the area, including its effect on trees, and it would fail
    to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. It would therefore
    conflict with Policies LP24, LP33 and LP35 of the Kirklees Local Plan (2019) (the
    KLP). Amongst other things, these policies aim for proposals to respect and
    enhance the character of the townscape, heritage assets and landscape, retain
    valuable or important trees that contribute to public amenity, and preserve or
    enhance the significance of designated heritage assets. It would also conflict with
    the Housebuilders Design Guide SPD (2021), and its aims for development to
    respect and enhance the local character of the area and retain existing features
    such as valuable trees and landscape features.
27. Additionally, the proposal would conflict with policy DP3(1) of the Framework and
    its aims for proposals to respond to their context so that they integrate with and
    enhance their surroundings. Policy DP3(3) states that proposals should be refused


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006003


       if, without clear justification, they conflict with policy DP3(1). The application does
       not provide clear justification in this regard. In addition, it would conflict with policy
       N2(1)(d), which aims to conserve and enhance existing natural features of visual
       or nature conservation value, such as established trees.
Other Considerations
28. As set out above, the Council is currently unable to demonstrate a five year supply
    of deliverable housing sites. The proposal would accord with the Framework’s
    objectives to support the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes,
    and I again acknowledge the substantial weight to be given to this under
    policy HO7. However, for the same reasons as above, the contribution a single
    dwelling would make to housing supply is limited. The potential contribution to the
    Council’s supply of self-build and custom-build housing has also been
    acknowledged, although for the above reasons, I give this limited weight.
29. Within the application form the appellant states that biodiversity net gain (BNG)
    does not apply to the proposal on the basis that it would be self-build and custom-
    build development. Notwithstanding some reference to a lack of information, as
    well as the statutory BNG condition, the Council’s Officer Report acknowledges
    this exemption. However, the lack of a detailed mechanism to secure the proposal
    as a self-build and custom-build development also has implications for any
    exemption from BNG and subsequent assessment. However, as I am dismissing
    the appeal for other reasons, I have not pursued this further with the parties.
30. Whilst the proposal has been found to be acceptable in respect of other matters,
    including effects on the living conditions of existing residents and future occupiers,
    highway safety, climate change, contaminated land and the public right of way,
    these are neutral matters that do not weigh in favour of the proposal. In addition,
    the representations received commenting on the design and that the site may be
    suitable for a dwelling do not alter my conclusion on the proposal’s effect on the
    character and appearance of the area and the CA.
Planning Balance
31. For the reasons set out, the proposal is not in accordance with the above policies
    of the KLP having regard to the harm to the character and appearance of the area
    and as it fails to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. For
    these reasons, the development conflicts with the development plan as a whole
    and should be refused unless other material considerations indicate otherwise.
32. Policy S5 of the Framework relates to development outside settlements.
    Paragraph 5 states that the policy does not apply to proposals in the Green Belt,
    although where development would not be inappropriate in the Green Belt,
    proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework and applying paragraph 2 of
    the policy. Paragraph 2 makes clear that the circumstances in which the benefits
    of approving development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where the development
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    6
Appeal Decision 6006003


33. The proposal would result in a single dwelling in a sustainable location, which
    would make a limited contribution to housing supply. However, due to the harm to
    the character and appearance of the area and the CA, there would be conflict with
    Framework policy DP3(1). Having regard to policy DP3(3), this means that
    proposals should be refused if there is no clear justification, as is the case here.
    Though not explicitly directing refusal, the Framework also requires that
    substantial weight should be given to the conservation of designated heritage
    assets, and any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of
    considerable importance and weight. Having regard to all of the above, the
    benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
Conclusion
34. Notwithstanding my finding in relation to Green Belt policy, the proposal conflicts
    with the development plan and the material considerations, including the
    Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should
    be dismissed.

N Armstrong
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
