Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 June 2026
by D Ellis MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006720
10 Pine View Close, Badshot Lea, Farnham, Surrey GU9 9JS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Joanna Fry against the decision of Waverley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is WA/2025/02373.
•    The development proposed is removal of existing outbuildings and construction of single storey new
     dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
       2024. This latest version of the Framework has introduced plan-making and
       national decision-making policies and is effect from the day of publication. The
       appellant and the Council have had the opportunity to comment on the new
       Framework.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of 10 and
                11 Pine View Close and 5 and 7 Crown Lane, with particular regard to
                outlook, noise and private garden space;
           •    whether the proposal would provide adequate living conditions for future
                occupiers of the new dwelling, with particular regard to outlook, daylight and
                sunlight, privacy and private garden space; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on biodiversity.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.     The appeal site consists of a two-storey semi-detached dwelling with two detached
       outbuildings in the rear garden in a largely residential area. The dwellings in Pine
       View Close are symmetrically laid out, with three pairs of semi-detached dwellings
       with private rear gardens on either side of the road and two pairs of semi-detached

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006720


         dwellings with private rear and side gardens, including the appeal property, at the
         end of the cul-de-sac. Some of the dwellings have been extended and there is
         some variety to the roof forms in the street, although these variations respect the
         symmetry of the dwellings in the street. Overall, the dwellings in the street have a
         cohesive and pleasing appearance and rhythm which contributes strongly to the
         character of the area.
5.       A previous appeal for the erection of extensions, including a two-storey extension,
         to the existing dwelling to create one additional dwelling1 was dismissed in 2025.
         The Inspector concluded that the proposed two-storey extension would not be
         subordinate to the existing dwelling and that the proposal would effectively change
         the semi-detached pair into a terrace of three houses which would diverge from
         the semi-detached pattern of development in the rest of the street.
6.       The proposal before me would see the existing outbuildings replaced with a
         detached single-storey dwelling. Although the proposed dwelling would be
         subordinate to the existing dwelling, it would be situated to the rear of the existing
         dwelling and the private garden area of the new dwelling would be at the front of
         the plot with no garden area to the rear or sides. Furthermore, although the new
         dwelling would be adjacent to the bungalows at 5 and 7 Crown Lane, the new
         dwelling would be single-storey whereas the existing dwellings in Pine View Close
         are two-storey. Consequently, the new dwelling would be at odds with the current
         layout and built form of the street. Moreover, the new dwelling would be in very
         close proximity to its boundaries on three sides and consequently would appear
         cramped in its plot. The new dwelling would be partly visible from the footpath
         between Pine View Close and Crown Lane and, as such, the proposed dwelling
         would have an awkward and incongruous presence.
7.       For these reasons, the proposed dwelling would cause harm to the character and
         appearance of the area. The proposal would therefore conflict with policy TD1 of
         the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 1: Strategic Policies and Sites February
         2018 (LPP1), policy DM4 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 2: Site
         Allocations and Development Management Policies March 2023 (LPP2), and
         policies FNP1 and FNP15 of the Farnham Neighbourhood Plan (April 2020) (NP)
         insofar as they require development to respond to the distinctive local character
         and context of the area, including with regards to building plot sizes and width,
         established street patterns and streetscape rhythm.
8.       The reason for refusal also cites a conflict with NP policy FNP16. However, this
         policy has regard to extensions to buildings, whereas the proposal is for a new
         detached dwelling. NP policy FNP16 is therefore not determinative in this matter.
9.       Paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the Framework requires development proposals to
         respond to their context, including the character and features of their site and its
         setting, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. The paragraph
         further states that this should not preclude change where appropriate, especially
         where an increased density is justified in accordance with Policies L2 (Making
         effective use of land) and L3 (Achieving appropriate densities).
10. For the reasons given above the proposal, through its cramped and awkward
    appearance, would fail to respond to its context, character and features of the site
    and its setting. As such, the proposal would not integrate with or enhance its
1
    Appeal ref. APP/R3650/W/24/3347423


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6006720


       surroundings. I am therefore not satisfied that the additional unit would constitute
       an effective use of land or that the increase in density would be justified. This
       adverse effect is a matter of considerable importance to be taken into account in
       the planning balance.
11. The proposal would therefore fail to comply with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the
    Framework.
Living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring dwellings and 10 Pine View Close
12. The proposed dwelling would be situated in very close proximity to the rear
    boundaries of 5 and 7 Crown Lane, both of which are L-shaped bungalows with a
    small rear projection close to the boundary. The dwelling would not project
    significantly beyond the rear element at No 5 and thus would not cause a harmful
    loss of outlook or sense of enclosure to the garden area of No 5.
13. However, although the proposed dwelling would be single-storey and the highest
    part of the roof would be away from the boundary, the dwelling would project along
    the entire width of the rear garden at No 7 and the entire length of the remaining
    rear garden at 10 Pine View Close which, given the very close proximity of the
    dwelling to the respective boundaries, would result in a significant loss of outlook
    and sense of enclosure to the rear garden areas of No 7 and No 10, to the
    detriment of the occupiers of these properties.
14. Due to the single-storey nature of the proposed dwelling, an appropriate boundary
    treatment which prevents any significant overlooking of Nos 5, 7 or 10 could be
    secured by a condition. LPP2 policy DM5 states that a private garden for a
    dwelling house should be at least 10m in depth and the width of the dwelling, and I
    have no evidence before me to indicate that the remaining rear garden at No 10
    would not meet these requirements. Furthermore, the proposed dwelling would be
    in a residential area where, despite its proximity to surrounding properties, the
    addition of a one-bedroom dwelling would not increase noise and disturbance to a
    level beyond what would reasonably be expected in a residential area. The
    proposal would therefore not cause unacceptable levels of noise and disturbance
    for the occupiers of 11 Pine View Close and Nos 5, 7 and 10.
15. Nevertheless, the significant loss of outlook and sense of enclosure to the rear
    garden areas of No 7 and No 10 would cause harm to the living conditions of the
    occupiers of those properties. The proposal would therefore conflict with LPP1
    policy TD1 and LPP2 policy DM5, insofar as they require development to meet the
    needs of users and should avoid harm to the amenity of existing occupants of
    nearby residences including by way of an overbearing effect.
16. Although not referred to in the reason for refusal, the officer’s report also cites a
    conflict with NP policy FNP1, insofar as it requires development to not result in
    unacceptable levels of light, noise, air or water pollution. As the proposal would not
    cause unacceptable light, noise, air or water pollution, the proposal would not
    conflict with this policy with regards to the living conditions of the occupiers of Nos
    5, 7 and 10.
17. Paragraph 14 of Section 1 of the Framework states that national planning policy is
    supported by a suite of planning practice guidance, the purpose of which is to play
    an important supporting role in the implementation of national planning policy.
    Such guidance includes the National Design Guide (2021) (NDG). Section H1 of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006720


       the NDG states that good design promotes quality of life for the occupants and
       users of buildings, and that external amenity space is important.
18. For the reasons given above the proposal, through its proximity to the boundaries
    with Nos 5 and 7, would be detrimental to the external amenity spaces for the
    occupants at Nos 5 and 7 and as such would detract from their quality of life. As
    such, the proposal would fail to comply with section H1 of the NDG.
Living conditions of future occupiers
19. The proposed windows on the side elevations, to serve rooms including the
    bedroom, office, kitchen and the open-plan living and dining area, would look out
    on to the boundary treatment at close proximity, and as a result would provide a
    very restricted outlook which would also restrict the amount of daylight and
    sunlight received by these rooms. The living and dining area would also be served
    by a window and entrance door on the front elevation which would have views of
    the front garden. Nevertheless, the outlook from the bedroom, office and kitchen
    windows would be so enclosed as to feel oppressive.
20. LPP2 policy DM5 states that a private garden for a dwelling house should be at
    least 10m in depth and the width of the dwelling, and I have no evidence before
    me to indicate that the proposed garden would not meet these requirements.
    Furthermore, the boundary treatment would prevent a significant overlooking from
    No 5, whilst there are no side-facing windows at No 10 and the rear windows at No
    11 would not provide a wide view of the proposed garden.
21. Nevertheless, the proposal would not provide acceptable living conditions for its
    future occupiers, with regard to outlook, daylight and sunlight. As such, it would be
    contrary to LPP1 policy TD1 and LPP2 policy DM1, insofar as they require
    development to meet the needs of users and should avoid significant harm to the
    amenity of future occupiers.
22. The reason for refusal also cites a conflict with LPP2 policy DM4 and NP policies
    FNP1 and FNP16. However, LPP2 policy DM4 has regard to design and character
    and does not expressly refer to living conditions of future occupiers. NP policy
    FNP16 has regard to extensions to buildings, whereas the proposal is for a new
    detached dwelling. As such, both LPP2 policy DM4 and NP policy FNP16 are not
    determinative in this matter. NP policy FNP1 requires, amongst other things, for
    development to not result in unacceptable levels of light, noise, air or water
    pollution. As the proposal would not cause unacceptable light, noise, air or water
    pollution for future occupiers, the proposal would not conflict with NP policy FNP1
    in this matter.
23. Criterion (a) of paragraph 2 of Policy P3 of the Framework requires development
    proposals to provide healthy living conditions for occupiers and users in terms of
    adequate access to light. Furthermore, Section H1 of the NDG states that good
    design promotes quality of life for the occupants and users of buildings, and that
    well-designed homes provide a good standard and quality of internal space
    including with regards to sunlight and daylight.
24. For the reasons given above the proposal, through the restricted levels of sunlight
    and daylight and oppressive outlook from the bedroom, office and kitchen windows
    would be detrimental to the living conditions of the future occupiers of the
    proposed dwelling and as such would detract from their quality of life. As such, the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006720


       proposal would fail to comply with Policy P3 of the Framework and section H1 of
       the NDG.
Ecology
25. The appellant’s Planning Statement describes the existing and proposed additional
    landscaping at the appeal site. However, no landscaping plan or site-specific
    biodiversity values or metrics have been submitted, and it is unclear whether
    boundary shrubs, hedges and trees have been taken into account. I therefore do
    not have sufficient evidence before me to demonstrate that the proposal could
    achieve at least a 10% biodiversity net gain. The proposal would therefore fail to
    accord with LPP1 policy NE1, which requires new development to make a positive
    contribution to biodiversity.
26. Criterion (a) of Paragraph 1 of Policy N2 of the Framework requires development
    proposals to consider the environmental qualities of land proposed for
    development and identify opportunities for those qualities to be conserved or
    enhanced, including through requirements for biodiversity net gain where these
    apply.
27. For the reasons given above the proposal, it has not been demonstrated that a
    biodiversity net gain of at least 10% could be achieved. The proposal would
    therefore fail to comply with paragraph 1 of Policy N2 of the Framework.
Other Matters
28. Section 66 (1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires that special regard shall be had to the desirability of preserving a listed
    building or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest that
    it possesses. To the rear of the appeal site is the grade II listed Premises
    Occupied by Vick and Squires, referred to as Knights Cottage. The building is a
    late 18th century former kiln range, and insofar as is relevant for this appeal its
    historic nature and traditional architectural detailing. The building is situated on
    Crown Lane, from where it is primarily viewed. Despite its proximity, the proposed
    dwelling would be largely screened from the listed building which, together with its
    single-storey scale, ensures that the proposed dwelling would preserve the setting
    of the listed building.
29. I note that the appellant would be willing to enter into a planning obligation under
    Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended), to secure
    the appropriate mitigation and financial contributions for the effect of the proposal
    on the Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area. Although no such obligation
    has been provided, the Council has not objected in this regard and, as I am
    dismissing the appeal on other grounds, I do not need to consider this matter
    further.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
30. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. For
    development within settlements, such as the appeal proposal, Policy S4 of the
    Framework states that development proposals should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006720


31. Paragraph 2 of Policy S4 lists circumstances where the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse impacts.
    Criterion C of paragraph 2 is where a proposal would fail to comply with one of the
    national decision-making policies which state that development proposals should
    be refused in specific circumstances.
32. The Council currently has a housing land supply of 1.28 years. There is, therefore,
    a significant shortfall in housing land. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that
    substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will
    contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community.
33. The provision of one additional unit would make a small but worthwhile difference
    to the existing supply. Economic advantages would also arise from the
    construction and occupation of a new house, although some of these would be
    temporary and limited by the scale of the scheme. The additional dwelling would
    be located in a fairly sustainable location where future occupants would have
    access to services and facilities without the need to rely on the private vehicle.
    Taken together and having regard to the lack of a five-year housing land supply,
    these benefits, because an additional dwelling would result, should be attributed
    substantial weight
34. Paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 of the Framework states that development proposals
    should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of
    Policy DP3. As described above, the harm that would be caused to the character
    and appearance of the area would conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3, and
    there is no clear justification for this conflict. The proposal would also fail to comply
    with Framework policies P3 and N2 as well as with section H1 of the NDG. In the
    circumstances of this case, I conclude that the benefits of the scheme would not
    outweigh the harms that would be caused. Consequently, I am satisfied when
    having regard to paragraph 2.c. of Policy S4 of the Framework that the benefits of
    the scheme would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
35. I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan and that material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

D Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
