Appeal Decision
Inquiry held on 11-14 and 18 August 2026
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by Simon Rawle BA (Hons) Dip TP Solicitor
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006497
Land at Mount Avenue, Chaldon, CR3 5BB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for outline
    planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Sigma Homes against Tandridge District Council.
•   The application Ref is TA/2025/771.
•   The development proposed is the erection of up to 30 dwellings (including 50% affordable) including
    provision of vehicular and pedestrian access, landscaping (incorporating SUDS) and other
    associated infrastructure provision.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of up to
   30 dwellings (including 50% affordable) including provision of vehicular and
   pedestrian access, landscaping (incorporating SUDS) and other associated
   infrastructure provision at Land at Mount Avenue, Chaldon, CR3 5BB in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref TA/2025/771, subject to the
   conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2. Applications for costs have been made by both main parties against each other
   which are subject to separate decisions.
Preliminary Matters
3. I have made minor amendments to the description of development included on the
   application form to remove matters that are not acts of development. The
   application was submitted in outline, although scale, layout and access are to be
   determined at this stage with appearance and landscaping reserved. I have treated
   any plans showing details of the reserved matters as illustrative.
4. There was some discussion at the Inquiry about the appeal plans and whether
   drawings 2502094-TS-002 and 2502094-TS-003 included within the Transport
   Statement (transport statement plans) should be included. However, as I am
   satisfied that the access arrangements are adequately indicated on the proposed
   site plan (PL-02 P2) and some of the works shown on the transport statement
   plans fall outside the appeal site boundary I consider that they should not be
   included as appeal plans.
5. I have had regard to the updated National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) which was published during the Inquiry. I note that national policies

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006497


     relating to housing and the Green Belt have changed and consequently I have
     given both main parties the opportunity to provide comments on these changes and
     I have taken account of their views on the updated Framework in the determination
     of the appeal.
6. As outlined above, this appeal relates to the failure of the Council to give notice
   within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for outline planning
   permission. The Council has provided putative reasons setting out those matters on
   which they would have refused the original application if they had been able to do
   so. I have used these matters to define the main issue. The first putative reason is
   in relation to Green Belt matters and in particular that the proposal amounts to
   inappropriate development in the Green Belt and that very special circumstances
   do not exist necessary to justify the proposal.
7. Given my findings in relation to the question of inappropriate development, for
   reasons that will become clear when reading my decision, it has been unnecessary
   to include some of the issues I identified in my opening remarks at the Inquiry
   including those in relation to openness and other considerations that would be
   required to amount to the very special considerations necessary to justify the
   proposal.
8. Similarly, the second putative reason relates to the Council’s concern that the
   appeal site is located in an unsustainable location. Given that whether the
   proposed development would be in a sustainable location is a critical element when
   assessing whether the proposal amounts to inappropriate development in the
   Green Belt this matter has been included as part of my assessment on the Green
   Belt main issue and I note that in their closing submissions the Council took a
   similar approach.
Main Issue
9. The main issue is whether or not the proposal would represent inappropriate
   development in the Green Belt having regard to the National Planning Policy
   Framework and any relevant development plan policies with particular reference to
   whether the appeal site represents grey belt land, meets the Golden Rules, and
   whether the proposed development would be in a sustainable location.
Reasons
Introduction
10. The Framework identifies that the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
    sprawl by keeping land permanently open. It goes on to state that inappropriate
    development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be
    approved except in very special circumstances.
11. National decision-making Policy GB6 of the Framework further establishes that
    development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the
    categories in national decision-making Policy GB7. Of note is Policy GB7 1.g which
    deals with development that would utilise grey belt land and where other criteria are
    met.
12. The appeal site is located adjacent to the built-up area of Caterham, within the
    village of Chaldon. Policy CSP1 of the Tandridge District Core Strategy adopted in
    October 2008 (TDCS) sets out the spatial strategy for the district and identifies

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006497


     Category 1 and Category 2 Settlements. Category 2 Settlements includes Green
     Belt Settlements. Although the policy indicates that the settlements within this
     classification and their exact boundaries would be decided in the Site Allocations
     DPD (DPD) , the explanatory text to Policy DP12 of the Tandridge Local Plan Part
     2: Detailed Policies 2014-2029 adopted in July 2014 (TLP) clarifies that rather than
     identify the Green Belt Settlements in the DPD it was more appropriate to list them
     as defined villages in the Green Belt in Policy DP12 of the TLP.
13. Chaldon is not included as a defined village in the Green Belt in Policy DP12 of the
    TLP. According to the explanatory text in support of that policy, villages that are not
    listed such as Chaldon are not considered sustainable locations for even limited
    development and general Green Belt policy will apply. The explanatory text does
    not have the same weight as the policies themselves, but it is helpful in setting the
    context.
14. Moreover, Policy CCW1 of the Caterham, Chaldon and Whyteleafe Neighbourhood
    Plan 2025 to 2040 made in June 2026 (CC&WNP) indicates that development
    proposals outside the defined settlement boundaries will only be supported where
    among other things they comply with national Green Belt policy and they do not
    result in further physical and/or visual coalescence of the individual communities of
    Caterham on the Hill, Caterham Valley Whyteleafe and Chaldon.
15. It follows that on the face of it the relevant development plan policies do not support
    residential development at the appeal site unless overall the proposal accords with
    relevant Green Belt policy, would not result in the unacceptable coalescence of
    certain communities and meets other criteria.
16. Policy DP13 of the TLP deals with buildings in the Green Belt and in some respects
    is consistent with the Framework as it sets out that within the Green Belt unless
    very special circumstances can be clearly demonstrated the construction of new
    buildings will be regarded as inappropriate development unless they fall within a
    specific exception.
17. However, given the age of the TLP there is no exception that relates to grey belt
    land. It follows that as part of Policy DP13 is materially inconsistent with national
    decision-making policies that deal with developments that would utilise grey belt I
    afford only very limited weight to that part of Policy DP13 that deals with the
    relevant exceptions when considering whether the proposal represents
    inappropriate development. Instead, I have afforded much greater weight to Policy
    GB7 of the Framework in the determination of the appeal. On that basis, I will now
    consider whether or not the appeal site meets the definition of grey belt land.
Is the appeal site grey belt land?
18. The definition of grey belt land is set out in the Glossary of the Framework and is
    land in the Green Belt comprising previously developed land and/or any other land
    that in either case, does not strongly contribute to any of purposes (a), (b) or (d) in
    policy GB2 of the Framework.
19. The appeal site does not comprise previously developed land. However, it is
    common ground between the main parties that the appeal site does not strongly
    contribute to prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another (purpose b), nor
    does it preserve the setting and special character of historic towns (purpose d). I
    agree with that analysis.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006497


20. I turn now to consider whether the appeal site strongly contributes to purpose (a),
    which is to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas. The northern and
    eastern boundaries of the appeal site adjoin the settlement boundary of Caterham
    which is a category 1 settlement as defined in Policy CSP 1 of the TDCS and which
    is a large built-up area.
21. There is residential development to the north and east of the appeal site. To the
    west, there is a track that leads from Birchwood Lane to Maplewood a dwelling and
    associated garden set back from the lane. Beyond Maplewood is an area marked
    as building yard on the site location plan which appears to comprise a domestic
    shed like building. On the other side of the track are more residential dwellings
    including Birchwood and Fairview a pair of semi-detached bungalows.
    Consequently, I am satisfied that to the north, east and west there are physical
    features in reasonable proximity that would restrict and contain development.
22. To the south opposite the appeal site is Birchwood Lane which has mature
    vegetation including hedgerows along both sides. There are some gaps in this
    vegetation to provide access into the more open areas of paddock on the other side
    of this lane opposite the appeal site. However, this area is enclosed by woodland
    including Tim’s wood to the east which wraps around to the south and ancient
    woodland to the west.
23. The Framework sets out that ancient woodland is considered irreplaceable habitat
    and any development proposals that would result in loss or deterioration of such
    habitat should be refused unless there are wholly exceptional circumstances. This
    effectively contains unrestricted sprawl to the southwest of the appeal site.
    Moreover, in my judgement the combination of the woodland, Birchwood Lane and
    the mature vegetation on both sides of the lane in proximity to the appeal site
    provides adequate physical features in reasonable proximity that would restrict and
    contain development.
24. Further, given the context of the appeal site being largely enclosed by existing
    development on three sides with Birchwood Lane to the south the proposed
    development would not result in an incongruous pattern of development
25. Therefore, in my judgement, although the appeal site itself does not contain
    existing development and is not subject to other urbanising influences, it
    nevertheless would contribute moderately to purpose a, to check the unrestricted
    sprawl of Caterham as for the reasons set out above, it has physical features in
    reasonable proximity that would restrict and contain development and it is partially
    enclosed by existing development such that the proposed development would not
    result in an incongruous pattern of development. Further, given the close
    relationship of the appeal site with surrounding development I am satisfied that the
    proposal would not result in unacceptable physical or visual coalescence of
    individual communities.
26. It follows that the appeal site is land in the Green Belt comprising land that does not
    strongly contribute to any of the purposes (a), (b) or (d) as set out in Policy GB2 of
    the Framework. Consequently, it meets the definition of grey belt land.
Whether or not inappropriate development
27. Policy GB7 g i-iv of the Framework covers the relevant criteria to ascertain whether
    development on grey belt land is not inappropriate in the Green Belt. As set out in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006497


        the Statement of Common Ground the main parties agree that the proposed
        development would not fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of
        the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan. I agree. In reaching that view
        I have had regard to the Planning Practice Guidance on Green Belt1, and my
        assessment is not confined to the effect of the proposed development on the
        appeal site or its immediate surroundings, nor to a single Green Belt purpose in
        isolation.
28. Rather, having undertaken an evaluative judgment I am satisfied that the proposal
    would not materially affect the ability of the remaining Green Belt across the plan
    area to serve all five Green Belt purposes in a meaningful way. Bearing in mind my
    view that the appeal site is grey belt land criterion g.i. of Policy GB7 is satisfied.
29. Again, as set out in the Statement of Common Ground, the main parties agree that
    there is an evidenced unmet need for the type of development proposed as there is
    a lack of a five-year supply of housing with an agreed range of housing land supply
    of between 1.22 and 1.97 years. Based on the available evidence I agree, and it
    follows that criterion g.ii. of Policy GB7 is satisfied.
30. Criterion g.iv of Policy GB7 sets out that in the case of major development involving
    the provision of housing, it is necessary for the proposed development to comply
    with Policy GB8 which deals with the “Golden Rules”. The main parties agree and
    so do I that the proposed development would meet the Golden Rules as it would
    include 50% affordable housing, makes provision for necessary improvements to
    local infrastructure and makes provision for a significant area of woodland open
    space that would be accessible to the public. Not only is Criterion g.iv of Policy GB7
    satisfied, but also, I attach substantial weight to the fact that the proposal would
    comply with the Golden Rules.
31. That only leaves criterion g.iii of Policy GB7 which deals with whether the
    development would be in a sustainable location. The parties do not agree on
    whether the proposed development meets this criterion.
32. In considering Policy GB7 g.iii of the Framework it is necessary to have particular
    regard to Policy TR3 of the Framework. This means that the location of the appeal
    site should limit the need to travel, particularly by private car, and offer a genuine
    choice of transport modes for residents and users, unless the nature of the
    development would make this impractical.
33. In considering this matter I have taken account of the fact that the Council has
    granted planning permission for a site at 15 Mount Avenue2 and in their delegated
    report they indicated that the site would provide 7 additional dwellings in a
    sustainable brownfield location with local amenities close by. However, that site is
    not within the Green Belt, but rather as pointed out in the delegated report is within
    the urban area of Caterham a defined Category 1 settlement where development is
    encouraged. As a result of the materially different planning context, the Council’s
    view on the other nearby site as set out in the delegated report is not definitive on
    whether or not the appeal site should be considered a sustainable location.
34. Land use patterns that are most conducive to walking are where there are a range
    of facilities within a 10-minute walk or 800m. I accept that this is not a cap, but the

1
    Reference ID: 64-009-20250225
2
    2025/947


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006497


     propensity to walk will not only be influenced by distance but also by the quality of
     the experience. The same can be said for cycling. One significant element that was
     discussed at the inquiry and I observed for myself on the site visit was the gradient
     particularly on the walking and cycling route to Caterham, including the station. I
     therefore accept the evidence of the Council, a local councillor and local residents
     that this would act as a significant deterrent for anyone contemplating walking or
     cycling to the facilities and services at Caterham, including to the station.
35. That said, certain facilities are within a comfortable walk or cycle and although just
    over the 800m range at 850m, I am satisfied that future occupants would have a
    genuine choice of whether to walk or cycle to them. Importantly these include
    Chaldon pre-school, St Peter and St Paul Church Primary School as well as
    Chaldon Village Hall and a café (Café 181). I am therefore satisfied that future
    occupants of the proposed development who have younger children (primary
    school and below) would have a genuine choice of sustainable transport modes to
    reach local educational facilities and also a local café and any events at the village
    hall.
36. Similarly, there are other facilities and services a little further away including a
    convenience shop and off licence and beauty shop and spa at 1.1 km and the
    recreational facilities at Westway Common at 1.2 km. During the site visit I walked
    to these facilities, and I consider that although they fall outside the 800m rule of
    thumb they are in walkable and certainly cyclable distance of the appeal site.
37. There are also bus stops within about 150m of the appeal site. These specifically
    provide public transport services for secondary school and college age children to
    reach East Surrey College and St Bede’s Secondary and Sixth Form (Metrobus
    657 and 658), Reigate College (Metrobus 658) and Oxted School Metrobus 611). I
    appreciate these services run during term time schooldays only. However, they
    provide an adequate service for school children and again I am satisfied that future
    occupants of the proposed development who have older children (secondary
    school and college) would have a genuine choice of sustainable transport modes to
    reach appropriate educational facilities.
38. There is another more conventional service, the Metrobus 411 which provides a
    service throughout the day. This provides a service approximately every two hours
    to Reigate in one direction and Warlingham and less frequently to Selsdon in the
    other. This provides a public transport link to services and facilities, including
    supermarkets and railway stations.
39. However, due to the lack of services in the early morning towards Caterham Station
    and the lack of services in the evening back from Merstham or Redhill Stations, this
    does not provide a convenient service for any future occupants who would want to
    access employment opportunities further afield, and who would want to work a
    typical working day. When combined with the gradient of local roads, I accept the
    evidence of the Council, a local councillor and local residents that commuting to
    employment opportunities by public transport would be challenging.
40. Notwithstanding that finding, the 411 bus service does provide a genuine
    sustainable transport mode to reach other facilities and services throughout the
    day, including for grocery shopping at several supermarkets.
41. Connectivity is defined in the Framework as the degree to which a location provides
    access to jobs, services and facilities by sustainable transport modes. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006497


     Framework goes onto set out that the Connectivity Tool should be used alongside
     other relevant quantitative or qualitative evidence in assessing the connectivity of
     particular locations proposed for development.
42. The Connectivity tool gives each square a connectivity score from 0-100. A higher
    score means the square is better connected relative to other squares and vice
    versa. A score of 50 does not mean a location has average connectivity. Rather the
    score is a relative measure not an absolute measure of connectivity and it shows
    how places compare to other places and should always be interpreted
    comparatively.
43. The connectivity score for the appeal site is 52. The appellant’s unchallenged
    evidence shows that the connectivity tool indicates that the appeal site sits within
    local authority band A. Within the context of Tandridge this demonstrates that the
    appeal site sits within the highest relative accessibility band. I therefore agree with
    the appellant that the connectivity tool indicates that the appeal site is in a relatively
    sustainable location.
44. My view on this is supported by the fact that the connectivity score is comparable to
    many areas within the settlement boundary of Caterham as well as several
    Category 2 settlements as defined in the TDCS including Woldingham (56),
    Godstone (55), Nutfield (52) and Smallfield (50) where certain types of
    development could be permitted.
45. So overall, while I accept that some journeys may well be made by private car, the
    appeal site is in a location that would limit the need to travel including by private
    car, particularly for certain journeys such as to schools and to reach other more
    local services and recreational facilities. Moreover, as set out above it offers a
    genuine choice of transport modes for residents and users, including walking,
    cycling and public transport. In my judgement, the appeal site is located in a
    sustainable location. A position that the Council’s witness accepted at the Inquiry
    would be a logical position for me to reach.
46. Further, as part of the proposed development the appellant has committed to make
    some sustainable transport enhancements which would include measures to
    secure a 20-mph zone and traffic calming between the appeal site and Caterham
    on the Hill High Street, improved bus stops with shelters and real-time passenger
    information, and new uncontrolled pedestrian crossing points between bus stops.
    These improvements would take the opportunity to improve walking, wheeling,
    cycling and public transport as well as enhancing the connectivity of the area.
47. I therefore conclude that the proposal does not represent inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt and meets the Golden Rules. Consequently, it
    accords with Policies GB7 and GB8 of the Framework.
48. Moreover, given my finding that the appeal site is located in a sustainable location
    the proposed development would also accord with Policy DP5 of the TLP which
    among other things seeks to ensure development promotes access by public
    transport, foot and bicycle to nearby residential, commercial, retail, educational,
    leisure and recreational areas where appropriate.
49. As I have found that the proposed development does not represent inappropriate
    development within the Green Belt it is not necessary to assess the impact of the
    proposed development on openness.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006497


50. Policy S5 of the Framework which deals with the principle of development outside
    settlements indicates that it does not apply to development proposals in the Green
    Belt which instead should be determined in accordance with Policies GB6, GB7
    and GB8 which is what I have done.
51. However, Policy S5 goes on to highlight that where development would not be
    inappropriate in a location outside a settlement, proposals should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework or where it would fail to comply with one of the national decision-
    making policies which state development proposal should be refused in specific
    circumstances. No such specific circumstances apply in this case, and I shall take
    account of this direction in my overall planning balance later in the decision.
Other Matters
52. I turn first to consider housing land supply. The Council accept that they cannot
    demonstrate a 5-year supply of housing land and in fact, although the parties
    agreed a range, based on their own figures they accept that they can only
    demonstrate 1.97 years of housing land supply. This is well below Government
    expectations.
53. The proposal would involve the erection of up to an additional 30 dwellings,
    including 15 affordable dwellings. Whilst the Council consider that numerically the
    housing numbers are small, I find that does not diminish their significance. The
    existing situation can only be described as dire and any help to address the
    shortfall is welcome. Moreover, behind the statistics are real people who are in
    pressing need for new homes. The proposal would also have moderate economic
    and social benefits. For example, it would provide jobs and create demand for
    materials during the construction phase, would broaden the availability of housing
    in the area and once occupied would support the existing services and facilities in
    Chaldon and the wider area. I afford both the provision of the market housing
    element and the affordable housing element substantial weight, and I afford the
    economic and social benefits moderate weight.
54. I have taken account of all other matters raised including from a District Councillor,
    a representative of Chaldon Village Council, other local residents and interested
    parties. Some of the points raised are covered above, but I will deal with other
    matters in the following paragraphs.
55. Notwithstanding that appearance and landscaping are reserved matters, I am
    satisfied that the proposal for up to 30 dwellings at this scale would fit comfortably
    into this setting and would integrate well with its surroundings without being over
    dominant or appearing cramped. Further, given the proposed position of the
    dwellings relative to surrounding properties and the trajectory of the sun, the
    proposal would not unacceptably harm the living conditions of neighbouring
    residents in relation to loss of daylight/sunlight, loss of outlook, or loss of privacy.
56. As highlighted in the Statement of Common Ground, the local highway authority
    does not object to the proposal subject to the imposition of appropriate conditions
    and the implementation of certain sustainable transport improvements. I accept that
    at certain times refuse vehicles and other delivery vehicles have had to reverse
    along Mount Avenue and that vehicles have had to wait for vehicles to enter before
    they exit and join Rook Land. However, having carefully considered the available

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6006497


     evidence I am satisfied that the proposal would not have any significant adverse
     impacts on the transport network in terms of capacity and congestion or on highway
     safety. In fact, the transport statement demonstrates that refuse and delivery
     vehicles would be able to access the appeal site turn within the turning head
     provided and leave in forward gear which to my mind would improve the existing
     situation.
57. I have taken account of concerns about disruption during the construction phase.
    However, any disturbance would only be temporary, and I am satisfied that this
    could be satisfactorily dealt with by the imposition of a suitably worded condition to
    require the submission, approval and implementation of a construction method
    statement.
58. In terms of surface water run-off and potential flooding, the appellant has submitted
    a flood risk assessment (FRA). The FRA sets out that the appeal site lies within
    flood zone 1 and overall, the flood risk profile of the site is low, and I am satisfied
    that the proposed development would not present a risk from flooding to potential
    occupiers, users or visitors and would not increase flood risk elsewhere.
59. I have taken account of the concerns raised in relation to wildlife, protected species
    and the loss of habitat. The appellant submitted a preliminary ecological appraisal
    and a hazel dormouse survey report which made certain recommendations to
    incorporate ecological enhancements. Based on this information, subject to the
    imposition of suitably worded conditions the Council and Surrey Wildlife Trust are
    satisfied that the proposal would not harm protected species or result in the
    unacceptable loss of habitat and I agree.
60. The appellant has submitted a Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) Survey and Report and
    a BNG assessment. This shows anticipated gains of 13.53% of habitat units and
    123.23% of hedgerow units. Moreover, any planning permission granted at the
    appeal site is deemed to have been granted subject to a condition that the
    biodiversity gain objective is met (the biodiversity gain condition). The objective is
    for development to deliver at least a 10% increase in biodiversity value relative to
    the pre-development value of the onsite habitat. Based on the available evidence I
    am satisfied that more than adequate biodiversity net gain would be achieved, and I
    afford this matter moderate weight.
61. Interested parties consider that the proposal does not comply with the CC&WNP.
    However, given my findings in relation to Green Belt matters, character and
    appearance, living conditions, coalescence of individual communities, highway and
    sustainability matters I am satisfied that overall, the proposal accords with Policy
    CCW1 and other relevant policies of the CC&WNP which among other things seek
    to ensure development supports sustainable development, responds and integrates
    well with its context and surroundings, protects wildlife, supports biodiversity and
    protects the living conditions of neighbouring residents.
62. Interested parties have also expressed concern that the appeal site has been
    subject to environmental damage and sanitation undertaken to support the appeal
    proposal. However, although there may have been some clearance work, I
    observed at the site visit there is a significant amount of vegetation on the appeal
    site including mature trees and hedgerows, I have not been provided with evidence
    that any of the clearance works were unauthorised and I am satisfied that any
    works that have been undertaken have not changed the character and appearance


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6006497


        or the wildlife value of the appeal site to such an extent that it would have materially
        affected the determination of the appeal. Moreover, I am satisfied that existing trees
        and hedgerows of high amenity value would be protected by an appropriately
        worded condition.
63. I also note that concern has been raised about whether there is adequate capacity
    in local services and infrastructure, including local GPs, dentists, hospitals, schools,
    electricity, internet and mobile phone coverage. However, based on the available
    evidence I do not consider that the situation would be so materially exacerbated by
    the appeal proposal as to justify dismissing the appeal. Similarly, I note that the
    proposal would be connected to the local sewerage system and there is no firm
    evidence to suggest that the existing system would ultimately not be able to cope
    with the additional flows associated with the proposal.
64. In the determination of this appeal, I have had regard to another appeal decision in
    Chaldon on Willey Lane3. However, that appeal site is not adjacent to the built-up
    area of Caterham and the previous Inspector observed that public transport
    services would be accessed via a route comprising rural partly unsurfaced roads
    with limited pavements and street lighting. That is materially different from this
    case.
65. Similarly, due to the distances involved and the remoteness of the appeal site in
    that case that Inspector found that walking would not be a viable regular means of
    accessing services and facilities. Again, that is materially different from this case,
    where public transport services and services and facilities, including a pre-school, a
    primary school, the village hall and a café would be within a comfortable walk of the
    proposed dwellings. Moreover, this other appeal proposal only involved six
    dwellings and did not meet the Golden Rules. As a result, this other appeal
    decision is materially different from the proposal before me which significantly
    lessens its weight as a material planning consideration.
66. The appeal proposal is supported by a planning obligation by deed of agreement
    under section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 dated 1 September
    2026 (the planning obligation). The planning obligation secures delivery of a
    contribution to secure a traffic regulation order to implement a speed limit reduction
    to 20mph and traffic calming measures between the appeal site and Caterham on
    the Hill High Street as well as extending the 20 mph speed limit on Rook Lane
    (TRO works). It also secures affordable housing, and off-site highway works
    including improvements to bus stops on Rook Lane to include shelters, enhanced
    waiting areas, real time passenger information, a pedestrian crossing, pedestrian
    crossing improvement works and traffic calming measures. I am satisfied that the
    executed agreement meets the relevant tests set out in the Framework as it is
    necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms, is directly
    related to the development and fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to
    the development.
Planning Balance
67. Whilst as recognised above, the spatial strategy and other development plan
    policies do not directly support the introduction of residential development at the
    appeal site, when taken together they make it clear that general Green Belt policy
    will apply. Moreover, I afford only very limited weight to that part of Policy DP13 of
3
    Appeal Ref:6002299


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    10
Appeal Decision 6006497


     the TLP that deals with relevant exceptions that would not be considered
     inappropriate development in the Green Belt as it is materially inconsistent with
     national decision-making policies that deal with developments that would utilise
     grey belt. As a result, I have afforded much greater weight to the latest national
     green belt policy as set out in the Framework.
68. I have afforded some matters weight as outlined above including substantial weight
    to the fact that the proposal meets the Golden Rules, substantial weight to both the
    contribution the proposal makes to market and affordable housing land supply and,
    moderate weight to both the economic and social benefits that flow from the
    proposal and the BNG contribution.
69. I have also found that the proposal would not represent inappropriate development
    in the Green Belt. Bearing in mind that the proposed development would not
    conflict with any of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances, Policy S5.5 of
    the Framework is clear in that the proposal should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework. That is
    not the case here and consequently the proposal should be approved.
Conditions
70. A list of suggested conditions has been agreed between the parties. In the
    interests of clarity, precision and to avoid duplication I have made changes to
    some conditions to ensure that any condition I impose accords with the Framework
    which sets out that they should be kept to a minimum and only imposed where
    they are necessary, relevant to planning and to the development to be permitted,
    enforceable, precise and reasonable in all other respects.
71. I have imposed standard outline planning permission conditions in respect of
    submission of the reserved matters and time limits. It is also necessary to ensure
    that the development is carried out in accordance with the plans that show the
    details in relation to those matters that are approved at this stage.
72. In the interests of protecting future residents a construction method statement
    condition is necessary. However, I have simplified this condition to amalgamate
    some requirements and to remove matters that do not comply with the relevant
    guidance in the Planning Practice Guidance – use of planning conditions such as
    the positive commitment to fund the repair of any damage caused to the highway.
73. It is necessary to impose conditions to ensure that bats, badgers, reptiles, other
    wildlife and ecological features are appropriately protected and that appropriate
    ecological enhancements are incorporated into the development. Moreover, given
    that the proposed biodiversity net gain will exceed the statutory percentage it is
    necessary to impose a specific condition.
74. To ensure surface water is appropriately dealt with by a sustainable drainage
    system it is necessary to impose a condition. An archaeology condition is
    necessary to ensure any features of interest are properly recorded. In the interests
    of the character and appearance of the area and to protect wildlife habitat it is
    necessary to impose a condition to ensure that trees and hedgerows to be
    retained are appropriately protected.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6006497


75. To ensure the safe and efficient operation of the highway network it is necessary
    to impose conditions in relation to the vehicular access arrangements from Mount
    Avenue, pedestrian access arrangements from Birchwood Lane, the provision of
    internal roads, car parking and manoeuvring space and pedestrian safety
    measures. Finally, in the interest of sustainable modes of transport it is necessary
    to impose a condition in relation to the provision of cycle facilities.
Conclusion
76. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

Simon Rawle
INSPECTOR
APPEARANCES
For the Appellant:
Hashi Mohamed                                   Counsel for the appellant
John-Paul Friend
BA(Hons) HND (LGD)PG Dip LA CMLI                Landscape Consultant
Richard Allman
Beng (Hons) Ieng MCIHT CMILT FIHE               Transport Consultant
Tom Cole BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI                    Planning Consultant


For the Council
Ashley Bowes                                    Counsel for the Council
Amit Patel MA (Town Planning)                   Tandridge District Council
Interested Parties
Cllr Lewis Sharp                                District Councillor and local resident
David Harper FRICS                              Chaldon Village Council
Timothy Hill                                    Local resident
Richard Marsh                                   Local resident
Russel Copeland                                 Local resident
Mark Day                                        Local resident
Penny Maurice                                   Local resident
David Dennison Smith                            Local resident


DOCUMENTS
1. List of appearances - appellant


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6006497




2. Opening Statement - appellant

3. Opening Statement - Council

4. Chaldon Village Council’s Statement

5. Cllr Sharp’s statement

6. Mr Hill’s statement

7. Mr Marsh’s statement

8. Ms Maurice’s statement

9. Site location plan for appeal site - land off northwest side of Rook Lane

10. Draft s106 agreement

11. Draft List of Conditions

12. Updated draft s106 agreement

13. CIL Compliance Statement

14. Walking route – site visit

15. Final version draft conditions

16. Closing submissions – Council

17. Closing submissions – appellant

18. Costs application – appellant

19. Response to appellants cost application and costs application – Council

20. Cost final submissions and response to Council’s cost application - appellant

21. Comments on updated National Planning Policy Framework – appellant

22. Executed s106 Agreement.

23. Comments on draft schedule of conditions – appellant

24. Comments on draft schedule of conditions - Council




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6006497


                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


1)       Details of the appearance and landscaping, "the reserved matters" shall be
         submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority before any
         development takes place and the development shall be carried out as approved.
2)       Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
         planning authority not later than 3 years from the date of this permission.
3)       The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than 2 years from
         the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.
4)       In respect of access, layout and scale the development hereby permitted shall
         be carried out in accordance with the following approved plans: PL-01 rev. P1;
         PL-02 Rev. P2; PL-03 rev.P1; and PL-05.
5)       No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until a
         Construction Method Statement has been submitted to, and approved in writing
         by the local planning authority. The Statement shall provide for:
             (i)    the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;
             (ii) loading and unloading of plant and materials including measures to
                    prevent the deposit of materials on the highway;
             (iii) measures for vehicle routing and traffic management, including
                    construction vehicles waiting to enter the site;
             (iv) measures to ensure construction vehicles can enter and exit the site in
                    forward gear;
             (v) storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development;
             (vi) the erection and maintenance of security hoarding including decorative
                    displays and facilities for public viewing, where appropriate;
             (vii) wheel washing facilities;
             (viii) measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during construction;
             (ix) a scheme for recycling/disposing of waste resulting from demolition and
                    construction works;
             (x) delivery, demolition and construction working hours.
         The approved Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to throughout
         the construction period for the development.
6)       No development shall take place, including any demolition or clearance works,
         until a site walkover survey undertaken by a suitably qualified ecologist to check
         for badger setts within the application site and within a 30m buffer, where
         accessible, has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
         authority. If any badger activity is detected details of an appropriate method of
         working, including details of any necessary licences shall be included within the
         information submitted to the local planning authority for approval and the
         development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved method of
         working.
7)       No development shall take place, including any demolition or clearance works,
         until a detailed bat mitigation strategy including a sensitive lighting management
         plan and a habitat connectivity map and plan showing the
         retention/enhancement of boundary habitats and dark corridors (in line with the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          14
Appeal Decision 6006497


         Bat Conservation Trust and Institute of Lighting Professionals Guidance 2023),
         shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
         development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details.
8)       No development shall take place, including any demolition or clearance works
         until there has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
         authority a reptile mitigation scheme prepared by a suitably qualified ecologist.
         The reptile mitigation scheme shall include
              (a) Location plan of any proposed translocation sites to safeguard reptiles
                  during both the operational and operational phases;
              (b) Details of the timing of works and management measures including an
                  annual work schedule capable of being rolled forward over a five-year
                  period;
              (c) Details of the body or organisation responsible for the reptile mitigation
                  scheme;
              (d) Details of ongoing monitoring and remedial measures including how the
                  reptile mitigation scheme will be implemented and retained for the longer-
                  term and how any necessary remedial action will be identified, agreed
                  and implemented.
         The development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved
         scheme.
9)       No development shall take place, including any demolition or clearance works
         until a Biodiversity Gain Plan and Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan
         (BGP&HMMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
         planning authority pursuant to Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning
         Act 1990. The BGP&HMMP shall make provision for the achievement of the on-
         site biodiversity net gain identified within the Biodiversity Net Gain Assessment
         prepared by Urban Edge Environmental Consulting dated 16 June 2025. The
         BGP&HMMP shall be implemented in accordance with the timetable that has
         been set out and agreed as part of the approved BGP&HMMP and shall be
         retained managed and monitored for a period of not less than 30 years from the
         date of completion of the works approved in the BFP&HMMP.
10)      No development shall take place, including any demolition or clearance works
         until an Ecological Enhancement Plan (EEP) in accordance with the
         recommendations and conclusions set out in the Preliminary Ecological
         Appraisal Report prepared by Urban Edge Environmental Consulting dated 16
         June 2025 shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
         authority. The EEP shall include an implementation timetable, and the
         development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved timetable
         and retained thereafter.
11)      Prior to the commencement of development, a Construction Environmental
         Management Plan (CEMP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
         Local Planning Authority. The CEMP shall include details of a scheme and
         accompanying plan for the protection of ecological features including any habitat
         of principal importance which shall include lowland mixed deciduous woodland
         and native hedgerows as well as any protective measures including buffer zones
         to protect ancient woodland on adjacent land. The CEMP shall include an



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
Appeal Decision 6006497


         implementation timetable, and the development shall be implemented in
         accordance with the approved timetable and retained thereafter.
12)      No development shall take place until details of the implementation, adoption,
         maintenance and management of the sustainable drainage system shall have
         been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. Those
         details shall include:
            (i)   a timetable for its implementation; and,
            (ii) a management and maintenance plan for the lifetime of the
                  development which shall include the arrangements for adoption by any
                  public body or statutory undertaker, or any other arrangements to
                  secure the effective operation of the sustainable drainage system
                  throughout its lifetime.
         The sustainable drainage system shall be implemented and thereafter managed
         and maintained in accordance with the approved details.
13)      No demolition/development shall take place until a Written Scheme of
         Archaeological Investigation shall have been submitted to and approved in
         writing by the local planning authority. The scheme shall include an assessment
         of significance and research questions and:
             (i)   the programme and methodology of site investigation and recording
             (ii) the programme for post investigation assessment;
             (iii) the provision to be made for analysis of the site investigation and
                   recording;
             (iv) the provision to be made for publication and dissemination of the
                   analysis and records of the site investigation;
             (v) the provision to be made for archive deposition of the analysis and
                   records of the site investigation;
             (vi) the nomination of a competent person or persons/organization to
                   undertake the works set out within the Written Scheme of Investigation.
14)      No demolition/development shall take place other than in accordance with the
         Written Scheme of Archaeological Investigation approved under condition 13.
15)      No development shall take place, nor any demolition works or site clearance,
         until there has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
         authority details of a scheme for the protection of trees and hedgerows to be
         retained. The approved scheme shall be carried out during the demolition of any
         buildings or structures and throughout the course of the development and shall
         include:
             (i)   a plan, at 1:200 scale showing the position of every tree or hedgerow on
                   the site and on land adjacent to the site that could influence or be
                   affected by the development, indicating which trees/hedgerows are to
                   be removed;
             (ii) in relation to every tree/hedgerow identified a schedule listing:
                     - information as specified in paragraph 4.4.2.5 of British Standard
                       BS5837:2012 - Trees in Relation to Design, Demolition and
                       Construction – Recommendations
                     - any proposed pruning, felling or other work;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     16
Appeal Decision 6006497


               (iii)    in relation to every existing tree/hedgerow identified to be retained,
                        details of:
                       - any proposed alterations to existing ground levels, and of the position
                         of any proposed excavation, that might affect the root protection area;
                       - all appropriate protection measures required before and during the
                         course of development (in accordance with BS5837:2012).
                       - areas of existing landscaping to be protected from construction
                         operations and the method of protection.
16)      No development shall commence until details of a scheme for the provision of
         vehicular access from Mount Avenue and the associated pedestrian footway
         connections between the site and Mount Avenue have been submitted to and
         approved in writing by the local planning authority.
         No dwelling shall be occupied until the approved vehicular access and
         associated pedestrian footway scheme has been implemented and made
         available for use in accordance with the approved details.
17)      No development shall commence until details of a scheme for the provision of a
         pedestrian access to Birchwood Lane, including a permanent barrier to prevent
         motor vehicle accessing the site have been submitted to and approved in writing
         by the local planning authority.
         No dwelling shall be occupied until the approved pedestrian access and
         permanent barrier have been implemented and these shall be retained
         thereafter.
18)      No dwelling shall be occupied until the internal roads have been constructed as
         shown on approved plan reference PL-03 rev.P1.
19)      No development above ground level shall commence until details of a raised
         table pedestrian crossing at the site access onto Mount Avenue, and block
         paving for the shared surfaces areas to indicate a pedestrian priority
         environment have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
         planning authority. No part of the development shall be first occupied until these
         measures have been implemented in accordance with the approved details and
         they shall be retained in that form thereafter.
20)      No dwelling shall be occupied until details of a scheme for the provision of cycle
         facilities has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
         authority. The scheme shall include (i) secure, lit and covered cycle parking for
         each dwelling; (ii) charging points with timers for e-bikes; and (iii) hardstanding
         routes between the cycle stores and the site access. The development shall be
         implemented in accordance with the approved scheme and the cycle facilities
         shall be retained thereafter.
21)      No dwelling shall be occupied until space has been laid out within the site in
         accordance with drawing no PL-02 Rev P2 for vehicles to be parked and for
         manoeuvring space to be provided so that vehicles may enter and leave the site
         in forward gear and that space shall thereafter be kept available for such
         purposes in perpetuity.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       17
