Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 July 2026
by Ann Veevers BA(Hons) PGDip(BCon) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006162
26 Groveway, London SW9 0AR
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Anthony Thomas against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
     of Lambeth.
•    The application Ref is 25/02449/LB.
•    The works proposed are described as ‘to retain and remodel the existing building by providing a 5-
     storey extension to the front of the property, which will immediately adjoin the party wall of its original
     pair at No.24’.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The address of the appeal site in the application and appeal forms refers to
       26 Groveway Road. However, the street-sign that I saw at my site visit identifies
       the street as Groveway. This address has been used in the Council’s decision
       notice and it has been accepted by the appellant by inclusion in his appeal
       submissions. As such, I am content that the address I have used in the banner
       heading above accurately reflects the location of the appeal site.
3.     The Council have described the proposal as ‘Application for Listed Building
       Consent due to the impact on neighbouring listed building (No.24 Groveway) as a
       result of proposed application for the proposed erection of a 5 storey front
       extension to the existing house (No.26 Groveway) along with other associated
       alterations’. Evidence indicates the appellant did not agree to this description and
       preferred that it referred to the proposal as a replacement dwelling. However, the
       application was made as a householder application with a description referencing
       an extension to the existing building. I have therefore taken the description in the
       banner heading above from the application form, removing wording that appears to
       contain arguments in support of the proposal as these are not acts of development
       in themselves.
4.     The appellant’s appeal submissions include a Daylight and Sunlight Assessment.
       This was not before the Council at the time the application was determined or
       upon which the views of interested parties were sought. I cannot therefore be
       certain that if I was to accept it no party would be prejudiced by my so doing.
       Furthermore, the document relates to a matter which does not form part of the
       considerations in this listed building consent appeal. Accordingly, I have not taken
       it into account in my assessment of the appeal


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006162


5.     During the appeal process, the Government published a new version of the
       National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)1, upon which the parties
       were given the opportunity to comment. I have taken the new Framework and any
       responses received into account in my determination of the appeals.
6.     The appeal property, 26 Groveway (No 26), is attached to a Grade II listed building
       known as 24, Groveway SW92 and is located within the Stockwell Park
       Conservation Area (the CA). Therefore, as decision maker, I am required to
       discharge the relevant statutory duties under sections 16(2) and 72(1) of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended) (the
       Act). These require that I have special regard to the desirability of preserving the
       listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic
       interest which it possesses; and that the character or appearance of the CA is
       preserved or enhanced.
7.     The Council’s reason in refusing the application for only references perceived
       harmful effects of the proposed works on the significance of the listed building.
       Nevertheless, both main parties have commented on any perceived effects of the
       proposal on the character and appearance of the CA as part of their evidence and
       as assessed against Policy Q22 of the Lambeth Local Plan 2020-2025, adopted
       September 2021 (LLP), concerning development in conservation areas.
       Consequently, I am satisfied that neither party would be prejudiced by me
       considering this issue as part of the determination of the appeal, as I am required
       to do by the Act.
8.     An associated application for planning permission for the same scheme was
       refused by the Council on 10 September 20253 for several reasons. However, no
       appeal against that decision was made within the relevant timescale. Whilst I have
       had regard to that decision as a material consideration, for the avoidance of doubt,
       my decision relates solely to this appeal made against the refusal of listed building
       consent and thus only to the heritage aspects of the proposal.
Main Issues
9.     The main issues are whether the proposal would: a) preserve the listed building,
       24 Groveway, SW9, or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic
       interest which it possesses; and b) preserve or enhance the character or
       appearance of the CA.
Reasons
Special interest and significance
10. No 26 forms one half of a pair of two-storey semi-detached dwellings that includes
    28 Groveway (No 28). The pair were constructed in the mid-20th century as post-
    war infill development following bomb-damage to the previous Victorian villas on
    the site, which left a gap between the neighbouring Victorian villas. Part of No 26 is
    attached to the side elevation of 24 Groveway (No 24), a Grade II listed building.
    The former villa at No 26 historically formed a semi-detached pair with No 24 and
    the former villa at No 28 formed a semi-detached pair with 30 Groveway.


1
  National Planning Policy Framework, Plan-making and national decision-making policies, August 2026
2
  National Heritage List for England, List Entry Number: 1080534; listed 9 August 1978
3
  Lambeth Council Ref: 25/01781/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6006162


11. The list entry for No 24 notes that this three-storey plus attic and basement
    property was built in the mid-19th century and sits in a narrow plot with a
    reasonably long rear garden. It is a substantial-sized and architecturally detailed
    brick building set back from Groveway behind a low brick wall, paved driveway and
    mature trees. The glazed 4-panel entrance door is accessed up steps and
    windows on the front elevation include moulded architraves, with the long first floor
    windows containing cast iron guards. The attic level is formed by a slated mansard
    with a dormer which wraps around three sides of the building. The blank rendered
    side elevation with No 26 includes a multi-pot chimney stack at roof level.
12. From the evidence before me and my own observations, the special interest and
    significance of the listed building insofar as it relates to this appeal mainly stem
    from its architectural and historic interests in illustrating a good example of a
    19th century Victorian villa. Important contributors in these regards include its
    architectural composition, use of traditional construction and high quality materials,
    the extent of surviving external historic fabric and its historic association with the
    Victorian era suburban growth of London.
13. The building has been changed in the past, most notably being the addition of a
    large conservatory at the rear. Even so, from what I saw, the building’s intrinsic
    heritage merit has not been unduly eroded, and its historic plan form and quality
    architectural appearance remain legible and perceptible.
14. Pertinent to the appeal, special interest and significance are also derived to some
    extent from No 24’s urban setting amongst other 19th century buildings on the
    street, which have a similar front-facing building line. Due to the set-back of Nos
    26 and 28, it allows the prominent status of No 24 to be appreciated.
15. The CA is predominantly residential, although there are commercial properties,
    including the imposing former Printworks on Clapham Road. The residential
    buildings along Groveway encapsulate the historic expansion of the area,
    particularly during the early to mid 19th century. There is an architectural richness
    to the varied size and design of the mostly detached or semi-detached properties
    to each side of the street. Trees and vegetation within front gardens as well as
    gaps between some buildings provide a verdant spaciousness to the area and a
    sense of place that holds communal and aesthetic value.
16. Given the above, I find that the significance of the CA, insofar as it relates to this
    appeal, to be primarily associated with the architectural integrity of these buildings
    that remain substantially intact as a valuable component within a wider verdant
    streetscape of similarly aligned 19th century buildings. I note the list entry to
    No 24 identifies group value with these other neighbouring 19th century buildings.
    Given its age and architectural merit, No 24 makes a positive contribution to the
    character and appearance of the CA as a whole.
17. No 26, together with No 28, are something of an anomaly set against the larger
    and older buildings to each side and elsewhere along Groveway. Constructed in
    brick with a rendered first floor front elevation, they are set back further from the
    street than Nos 24 and 30. No 26 includes a flat roof projecting porch and garage
    as well as a single storey infill built against the side elevation of No 24. Being of
    typical 1950/60’s design, it has a strong horizontal emphasis and is much plainer
    in architectural detailing than the 19th century buildings on the street.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006162


18. Policy HE9.2 of the Framework notes that not all elements of a conservation area
    will necessarily contribute to its significance. The main parties disagree on this
    matter. The appellant contends Nos 26 and 28 are a ‘blight’ within the area and
    make a negative contribution towards the significance of the CA, whereas the
    Council makes a somewhat inconsistent assessment. Paragraph 1.12 of the
    Officer Report (OR) states that No 26 makes a negative contribution to the
    character and appearance of the CA. Evidence suggests this view is also set out in
    the Council’s Stockwell Park Conservation Statement, 2009 (SPCS). However, in
    the same section of the OR at paragraph 1.4, it is recognised that whilst No 26 is
    not characteristic of the CA, it provides a subordinate infill that does not cause
    harm to the setting of the adjacent listed buildings and has a neutral impact on the
    wider area.
19. I concur with that assessment. In my judgement, as a pair of semi-detached post-
    war properties, despite being set back further from the street than most other
    properties and having a very different scale and form, both No 26 and No 28 hold
    some value in demonstrating the evolution of the CA. They illustrate how parts of
    London were affected by bombing during World War II and the post-war
    reconstruction effort. Given their set back and low height, the pair have a recessive
    presence in the street which has a neutral effect on the setting of No 24 and the
    character and appearance of the CA as a whole and thereby to their significance
    as designated heritage assets.
Proposal and effects
20. In essence, the proposal seeks to provide a reinstatement of the ‘missing’ half of
    the historic semi-detached pairing with No 24 by extensive additions to No 26.
    These would involve a five-storey front addition, including a lower ground floor and
    attic, that would abut the flank wall of No 24 and align with its front elevation and
    mansard roof. An upward extension across most of the existing front half of
    No 26 would align with the rear elevation and mansard roof of No 24 and the
    remaining rear part of the existing property would incorporate a previously
    approved extension at ground floor4, a re-modelled first floor and an extended
    dormer at second floor.
21. To the side, adjoining No 28, and tying in with the existing ridge-line, No 26 would
    incorporate a narrow dormer to the front roof-slope, a re-aligned first floor window
    and a single-storey front flat-roof glazed addition that would align with the main
    front elevation of No 26 and provide separate access to lower ground floor level. A
    central internal staircase would provide the link between the extended part of
    No 26 and the existing property and would be lit by a projecting rooflight between
    the front and rear mansard roof.
22. The Council argue that the proposal would not be a subordinate extension to the
    existing property and would appear visually over-dominant due to its scale. Whilst
    this would most certainly be the case given the more-than-double increase in floor
    area5, I understand the appellant’s reasoning for the proposed scale and mass in
    attempting to replicate the scale of the previous 19th century pair to No 24. The
    overall size of the proposal as an extension to the existing property is therefore not
    a concern I share insofar as it relates to the main issue in this appeal. However,
    the overall scale of the proposal and its contextual arrangement with
4
    LPA Refs: 19/00961/FUL; 20/02256/NMC and 21/03210/NMC
5
    Appellant’s Design and Access Statement, May 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decision 6006162


       No 28 cannot, to certain extent, be disassociated with its effect upon the setting of
       No 24 and the appearance of the CA.
23. The width of the front extension would be marginally less than the width of
    No 24, but this would not be readily perceptible from street level and other paired
    properties in the street are not identical. Furthermore, the proposed materials,
    fenestration and architectural detailing of the proposed front elevation would
    reference those at No 24. The proposed front extension would also align with the
    rear elevation of No 24 and would somewhat replicate its vertical fenestration
    pattern and detailing at upper floor and roof level, although the proposed roof
    lantern would be overly large and would not be representative of a traditional roof-
    form.
24. Importantly however, the retention of the existing property would jar with the
    elegant and generally uncluttered rear elevation of No 24. Moreover, the ad hoc
    additions to the rear of the existing property exacerbate the disconnect that would
    arise between two very different styles of built form – that being the mimicking of a
    19th century Victorian villa and a 1950/60’s semi-detached property with some
    contemporary additions. Even if the proposed front elevation would generally
    resemble that at No 24, in attempting to match the very different scale and design
    of both No 24 and No 28 on a relatively narrow plot, the cumulative effect of the
    proposal would be discordant and unsympathetic. It would not relate well to No 24.
25. The rear of the appeal site would not be publicly visible from the street, but it does
    not follow that a lack of public visibility results in a lack of harm to the significance
    of a designated heritage asset. It remains that the proposal would be conspicuous
    from the private domain of some adjacent properties. In any event, listed buildings
    are safeguarded for their inherent architectural and historic interest irrespective of
    whether or not public views of the building can be gained.
26. From the information before me, the method of attachment would minimise the
    physical harm to the historic fabric of No 24, but there would be a significant
    increase in built development and a marked erosion of the spaciousness to the
    setting of No 24. The aim to replicate the long gone former 19th century villa would
    not compensate the adverse impact. Rather, it would harmfully alter the
    authenticity of how No 24 is experienced, particularly from within its immediate
    setting, altering the ability to appreciate its heritage merit.
27. Furthermore, the proposed dormer to the front roof slope of the retained part of
    No 26 would appear ‘squeezed’ in and at the same time, draw the eye towards an
    uncharacteristic feature at this height within the street. It would highlight the
    awkward transition between the five-storey element of the proposal and its
    relationship with No 28, which would be a visually abrupt increase in height. The
    projecting single storey extension to the front would further overwhelm and
    diminish the space currently afforded around No 28, to the detriment of the
    character and appearance of the street scene. Whilst I saw other similar side
    extensions along the street at my site visit, including at No 24, these were adjacent
    to properties with a similar building line, which is not the case here.
28. The recessive appearance of Nos 26 and 28 and the space created by this semi-
    detached pair is part of the character of the street. The proposal would result in
    one half of the pair being significantly extended, occupying a substantial portion of
    the available space. This would leave the adjoining property at No 28 very


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006162


         noticeably recessed, creating a visually discordant relationship between the pair.
         Consequently, the development would create an unbalanced form of development
         that would detract from the character and appearance of the street.
29. As a purported pair of matching villas, it is notable that side elevations of
    comparable properties within the locality are predominantly finished in brick,
    whereas it appears that the proposed side elevation of No 26 would be
    uncharacteristically rendered. Even though the existing side elevations of Nos
    24 and 30 that face Nos 26 and 28 are rendered, their undulating profiles reflect
    their evolution as former semi-detached villas that have lost their respective
    counterparts through bomb damage. I do however appreciate that the material
    used in this elevation could be amended through an appropriately worded
    condition in the event I was to allow the appeal.
30. Drawing the above together, I find that the proposal would result in a contrived and
    wholly inappropriate response to the development of the plot and thus to the
    setting of No 24 and the character and appearance of the CA. Consequently, it
    would not only result in harm to the special interest of No 24, but would also harm
    the character and appearance of the CA. As such, it would harm the significance
    of these designated heritage assets.
Public benefits, heritage balance and conclusion
31. Policy HE4.2 of the Framework sets out that any harm to, or loss of, the
    significance of a designated heritage asset (including from development within its
    setting) should have a clear and convincing justification. Policy HE6.1 of the
    Framework goes on to state that when considering the potential effect of a
    development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation, irrespective of
    whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm,
    or total loss of its significance.
32. As I have set out above, I find the effect on the significance of No 24 and the CA
    that would result from the proposal would amount to harm to each of these
    designated heritage assets. Mindful of advice in Planning Practice Guidance6
    (PPG) which directs that the extent of harm within each category of harm should
    be clearly articulated, and given the nature and extent of the works, I deduce the
    harmful effects in this case would be towards the lower end of harm. Nevertheless,
    any harm is a matter of considerable importance and weight. As such, Policy
    HE6.4 states that the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits resulting from the proposal. Important public benefits
    can include securing that long-term reuse of vacant or underused listed building
    and enabling energy efficiency and low carbon heating measure to be employed.
33. Taking this into account, along with what is stated to constitute a public benefit
    within the PPG7, it is reasonable to conclude that the proposal would generate
    economic benefits in the construction phase and social benefits in an improvement
    to the local housing stock. In addition, and as stressed by the appellants,
    environmental benefits would accrue from re-use of some of the existing property
    and an improvement in the thermal performance/energy efficiency of the
    completed property, including the installation of an air source heat pump, and thus

6
    Paragraph: 018 Reference ID: 18a-018-20190723
7
    Paragraph: 020 Reference ID: 18a-020-20190723.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             6
Appeal Decision 6006162


       a reduction in its carbon emissions and enhancement of its environmental
       sustainability.
34. I accept that these outcomes would facilitate the delivery of objectives of the
    planning system to re-use buildings, to create additional floorspace using airspace,
    to optimise flexible, energy efficient homes, and to create modern, larger family
    accommodation in a highly accessible location, making effective use of land as
    outlined in the Framework. These factors would represent benefits to the public at
    large. However, the proposal would remain as a single dwelling, and the extent of
    the benefits is tempered by the absence of detailed information in relation to the
    energy efficiency measures proposed within the new building or in its construction.
    I am also not convinced that the only way of securing the public benefits identified
    above would be via the appeal proposal. Nonetheless, I attribute these benefits
    moderate weight in favour of the appeal.
35. The submitted drawings indicate the proposal, through its construction against the
    party wall with No 24, would provide better insulation for the listed building which
    would be a potential heritage benefit of moderate positive weight. However, the
    appellant’s claim that the proposal would improve the structural integrity of
    No 24 as a heritage benefit and would reduce external noise levels for its
    occupants has not been substantiated by any evidence. As such, these are neutral
    factors rather than ones that carry positive weight in favour of the proposal.
36. There is no evidence before me which demonstrates that the proposal is
    necessary to secure the listed building’s ongoing residential use or that its
    conservation as a designated heritage asset would be at risk if the appeal was to
    fail and the proposal, as submitted, was not implemented. In all of the above
    respects, clear and convincing justification has not been provided for the identified
    harm to the significance of the designated heritage asset.
37. On balance, in accordance with Policy HE6.3 of the Framework, in giving
    considerable importance and weight to the harm to the significance of the
    designated heritage assets, I find that this would not be outweighed by the public
    benefits that would be generated by the proposal.
38. I therefore conclude that the proposal would fail to preserve the Grade II listed
    building, 24 Groveway, SW9, or its setting or any features of special architectural
    or historic interest which it possesses; and it would fail to preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the CA. As such, it would conflict with the statutory
    presumptions set out in sections 16(2) and 72(1) of the Act; and the provisions
    within the Framework which seek to conserve and enhance the historic
    environment.
39. Listed building appeals are not subject to section 38(6) of the Planning and
    Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. Additionally, section 16(2) of the Act does not
    require the decision maker to have regard to the development plan when
    determining applications and appeals for listed building consent. Nonetheless, I
    note that the proposal would conflict with Policies Q20 and Q22 of the LLP which,
    insofar as they are relevant to this appeal, I find to be consistent with the
    Framework. Together these policies, amongst other things, require proposals to
    conserve and not harm the significance of listed buildings and to preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the conservation area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006162


Other Matters
40. The appellant draws my attention to other recent developments at 34 Groveway
    (No 34) and 41 Groveway (No 41). I was able to see both examples during my site
    visit, although No 34 was still under construction. Here, the replacement of a
    1960s house with a new building allegedly replicates that which was lost in World
    War II and was a pair with 36 Groveway. However, I am unaware of the specific
    circumstances in this case or the full details of the building’s scale and design at
    the rear. Moreover, the previous property on this site, whist of a similar age to
    No 26, was not one of a pair of semi-detached properties. Therefore, this example
    is not directly comparable due to its contextual difference. At No 41, a two-storey
    side extension results in an infill between this detached property and neighbouring
    39 Groveway. Although this demonstrates some gaps within the street have been
    infilled by extensions, it is a materially different scheme to that before me, which
    includes a large front addition and a narrow side addition with a dormer.
41. These examples demonstrate that the circumstances in each proposal are likely to
    be different, and in any event the fact that apparently similar development has
    been granted permission is not a reason, on its own, to allow unacceptable
    development. I have considered this appeal proposal on its own merits and
    concluded that it would cause harm for the reasons set out above.
42. The appellant indicates that No 28 could be redeveloped in a similar way to the
    appeal proposal in future. While I appreciate the ethos of the proposal before me
    may have been designed with this in mind, my attention has not been drawn to any
    development proposal relating to No 28. Indeed, having commented that No 28 is
    likely to be redeveloped, the appellant goes on to say that this may never occur
    due to it being in separate ownership.
43. Even if I were to agree that the living conditions of neighbouring residents would
    be acceptable, that excavations around the party wall with No 24 would be
    completed with hand tools, and there would be no flood risk, these are neutral
    factors rather than ones that carry positive weight in favour of the development.
44. I note that the proposal is a revised scheme which seeks to overcome the
    Council’s concerns in relation to previous applications8. However, for the reasons
    stated above, I consider the revised scheme to be harmful.
45. I note concerns that No 26 could be used as a House in Multiple Occupation
    (HMO). However, there is no indication that the appellant is seeking to use the
    property as an HMO, and substantive evidence to the contrary has not been
    presented. I must decide the appeal on the basis of the development before me,
    which makes no reference to a such a use.
Conclusion
46. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.

Ann Veevers
INSPECTOR



8
    LPA Refs: 20/00543/FUL and 20/01730/LB refused 25 November 2020.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              8
