Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by R Kent BA (Hons) MTP DipM MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006672
Highbeech, Lower Church Street, Cuddington, Buckinghamshire HP18 0AS
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Collins against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•      The application Ref is PL/25/4059/FA.
•      The development proposed is Installation of weatherboarding to external walls.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
         was published. The Council and the appellants have had the opportunity to make
         comments on the new Framework in so far as it relates to this appeal. I have taken
         account of the comments which were made and the 2026 Framework in my
         decision.
3.       During my visit I was shown a sample of the proposed weatherboarding material.
         However, it is not clear to me whether the Council or other interested parties have
         had the opportunity to inspect the sample material or provide comments on it.
         Therefore, having regard to the Holborn Studios1 judgement, this is new evidence
         which could result in procedural unfairness if I were to take it into account in this
         appeal. I have therefore determined the appeal on the basis of the proposed plans
         and illustrative photographs on which the Council based its decision.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character or appearance of the
         Cuddington Conservation Area (CA) and on the setting of nearby listed buildings.
Reasons
5.       Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
         (the Act) requires that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of
         preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA. The statutory
         approach is reflected in policy BE1 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan 2021
         (VALP) and in the detailed criteria set out for the design of new development in the
         CA in policy CDN 04 of the Cuddington Neighbourhood Plan 2022 (CNP).


1
    Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006672


6.     The CA appraisal indicates that the CA derives significance from being a good
       example of the local witchert villages with narrow winding lanes, grassed banks
       and enclosing walls. The CA contains buildings of various ages with common
       building materials consisting of limestone, brick and timber frame and witchert. The
       CA also derives significance from the grade II* listed Parish Church of St Nicholas2
       opposite the site which is identified in the CA appraisal as ‘a focal point of
       distinction’.
7.     Lower Church Street runs along the northern side of the church and contributes to
       the significance of the CA as a whole through its attractive mix of 16th, 17th and
       18th century cottages and houses. These include the grade II listed Beam
       Cottage3, ‘Thistledome’4 (also referred to as ‘Inglenook’ in the evidence), ‘Bay
       Cottage Prospect Cottage’5, Box Cottage6, and The Old Place7. The grade II*
       listed Tyringham Hall8 lies at the western end of Lower Church Street a short
       distance from Highbeech. The buildings around the church are identified in the CA
       appraisal as a ‘fine group.’
8.      From the evidence and my observations on site, the significance of the CA
        therefore is principally derived from its architectural and historic interest as a well-
        preserved West Buckinghamshire witchert village. That interest is expressed
        through its informal street pattern, narrow winding lanes, grass banks, enclosing
        walls, traditional building forms and the concentration of buildings constructed in
        characteristic local materials. The church and the historic buildings grouped
        around it provide a particularly important focus within that wider townscape.
9.     Highbeech itself is a relatively modern two storey detached house with a flat roof
       double garage between it and the road. It has been extended on its northern side
       by a single storey rear addition. The dwelling is constructed of light coloured
       render with concrete interlocking tiles to the main pitched roof. Although modern in
       design and appearance and clearly visible from Lower Church Street and the
       church yard opposite, its light rendered finish is consistent in appearance with
       some of the older buildings in the vicinity of the site and the wider CA. As a
       consequence, the external finish of the existing building currently has a neutral
       effect on the significance of the CA.
10. Policy CDN 04 of the CNP requires that where practicable, local materials and
    techniques should be used to create connections with existing buildings in the CA.
    It identifies mixed finishes including timber frames, stone, lime render and red brick
    as the local materials. I note that fibre cement weather boarding is not one of the
    local materials identified in policy CDN 04. In my judgement, the proposed material
    would not be consistent in character or appearance with the local materials
    prevailing in the CA. Moreover, the profiled nature of the boarding and its grey
    finish would be jarringly at odds with the stone, witchert, light render and painted
    finishes of the buildings in the CA as a whole.
11. Although the dwelling is set back into the plot, the proposed fibre cement cladding
    on both its front and side elevations would be clearly visible from the road and

2
  Historic England official list entry number 1118334
3
  Historic England official list entry number 1332895
4
  Historic England official list entry number 1118327
5
  Historic England official list entry number 1158739
6
  Historic England official list entry number 1118359
7
  Historic England official list entry number 1158751
8
  Historic England official list entry number 1118328


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6006672


      from the church yard opposite. It would also be visible in views across the church
      yard northwards from the corner of Upper Church Street with Lower Church Street.
      As a consequence the proposed grey weather boarding would have a discordant
      effect on the character and appearance of the CA and would not respect and
      enhance its built character. This would result in harm to the CA as a whole.
12. I note that cedar cladding and stainless steel balustrading have been used to the
    rear of Beam Cottage and fibre cement weatherboarding has been used at
    Hesleden in Spurt Street. Whilst occasional buildings in the CA have modern
    materials, timber cladding or weather boarding, those are not the prevailing
    materials in the vicinity of the site or the CA as a whole.
13. I saw the timber clad rear extension to the listed Beam Cottage at my site visit.
    This decision was made some time ago. I am not aware of the planning context to
    it or the exact details which made this extension acceptable at the time including
    the considerations that informed its design. Furthermore, it is also materially
    different from the appeal proposal which would introduce grey profiled cladding
    across prominent front and side elevations rather than being restricted to the rear.
    In any case the materials used at Beam Cottage or Hesleden do not justify the
    harm which would be caused by the proposal to the character and appearance of
    the CA as a whole.
14. Whilst CNP policy CDN 04 recognises that modern materials may be acceptable if
    they are of high quality and executed to a high standard, I am not convinced from
    the information before me that the proposed fibre cement material would be of
    sufficient quality to prevent its installation causing harm to the CA.
15. In accordance with NDMP policy HE6 of the Framework, the effect on the heritage
    asset and its significance should be weighed against the public benefits of the
    proposal. That balancing exercise must take place in the context of the Act which
    sets a strong presumption against a grant of planning permission for development
    that would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of a CA. I
    return to this matter in the heritage balance below.
16. Section 66(1) of the Act also requires the decision maker, in considering whether
    to grant planning permission for development which affects a listed building or its
    setting, to have special regard to the desirability of preserving the building or its
    setting. Whilst not individually cited in the reason for refusal, the Council’s
    delegated report identifies a number of grade II and grade II* listed buildings, the
    settings of which it considers would be affected by the proposal. I shall address
    these in turn.
17. The grade II* listed stone Parish Church of St Nicholas derives significance from
    its 13th century origins and subsequent additions in the 14th, 15th and 19th
    centuries. Whilst the surrounding walled church yard provides its immediate
    setting, it is experienced in views northwards from Upper Church Street and in
    views along Lower Church Street, including from Highbeech immediately to the
    north where it can be viewed from the front drive and through gaps between the
    dwelling and its side boundaries.
18. The mix of traditional buildings along Lower Church Street and Upper Church
    Street around the church, within which the appeal site is located, form part of the
    historic context of the church and the surroundings from which it is experienced.
    Consequently, the modern cladding would introduce a discordant built element into

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006672


         the historic village context from which the church’s architectural prominence and
         historic role are appreciated. This would not preserve the setting of the listed
         building and would result in harm to its significance.
19. Immediately to the east of the site and separated from it by an evergreen hedge
    and fence, is the grade II listed The Old Place. The listed building derives
    significance as a 17th century house. Set back from Lower Church Street behind a
    wall and trees it is nevertheless experienced in views from the higher ground in the
    church yard opposite and is part of the fine group of buildings around the church
    referred to in the CA appraisal. Highbeech is prominent in part of the view of The
    Old Place from the church yard. The proposed weatherboarding would jar with the
    brick façade of the listed building and compete with it in views of the building
    detracting from its appreciation and causing harm to its significance.
20. Beam Cottage is part of a short terrace of buildings on the south eastern side of
    Lower Church Street. Adjacent to the church yard, it gains significance from being
    a circa 16th century timber framed house, now colour washed over roughcast. It
    too is experienced from Lower Church Street and from the adjacent church yard.
    Whilst the boundary wall separating The Old Place from the street limits
    intervisibility between Highbeech and Beam Cottage, the upper storey of
    Highbeech is visible in the view of Beam Cottage from the street. Consequently,
    the appeal site forms part of the views towards the listed building which permit an
    appreciation of it in the street scene and its role in the evolution of the village.
21. Whilst Beam Cottage has a modern, timber clad addition to its rear, the proposed
    grey weather boarding would not harmonise with the light coloured finish of the
    main façade of Beam Cottage facing the street. As a consequence the proposal
    would cause harm to the appreciation of the listed building from the street as a
    result of the development within its setting. This would have a limited effect on its
    significance.
22. The grade II* listed Tyringham Hall derives significance from being a small country
    house dating from the 16th century. It is similarly experienced in views from Upper
    and Lower Church Streets approaching the listed building as well as from the
    church yard. However, as Highbeech is on the same side of the street as the listed
    building, separated from it by a substantial, intervening building, and is set back
    into its plot there is little intervisibility between the site and Tyringham Hall. As a
    consequence, and in the absence of evidence of a clear historic or aesthetic
    connection between the asset and the site, the proposal would have a neutral
    effect on how the listed building is experienced and its significance.
23. The grade II listed The Homestead9 immediately to the south of Tyringham Hall
    derives significance from its 17th century origins and witchert materials. The
    Thatched Cottage10, also listed grade II, lies between The Homestead and the
    adjoining school and gains significance as a 17th century timber framed, thatched
    roof cottage. These heritage assets are also experienced from Upper and Lower
    Church Streets including in views from Lower Church Street passing Highbeech.
    However, the distance between both listed buildings and the appeal site coupled
    with the intervening buildings and the setback position of Highbeech on its plot
    means that the proposed weatherboarding would have a neutral effect on the


9
    Historic England official list entry number 1158732
10
    Historic England official list entry number 1118333


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  4
Appeal Decision 6006672


          experience of the two assets. The proposal would therefore have a neutral effect
          on their significance.
24. Box Cottage gains significance from being an 18th century, part witchert, thatch
    roofed cottage. Whilst experienced from Lower Church Street, it is separated from
    the site by The Old Place and its boundary wall and mature trees. In the absence
    of evidence of a clear other connection between the asset and the site, the
    proposal would not therefore have a harmful effect on the appreciation of the listed
    building or its significance.
25. Thistledome derives significance as a late 18th century house, formerly a pair of
    cottages. Adjoining it to the east are Bay Cottage and Prospect Cottage referred to
    on the official list entry as ‘Bay Cottage Prospect Cottage’. The cottages derive
    significance as a pair of early 18th century cottages constructed partly of witchert.
    Whilst both listed buildings are experienced from Lower Church Street, the
    distance from the appeal site coupled with the intervening walls, trees and
    vegetation means that the proposed weatherboarding would not have a harmful
    effect on the appreciation of these heritage assets. The proposal would therefore
    have a neutral effect on their significance.
26. The grade II listed Tibby’s Cottage11 gains significance as a circa 1700 thatched
    cottage constructed partly of witchert. It is experienced primarily from the footpath
    running immediately past its southern and eastern sides. It is located to the north
    of the site separated from it by the grounds around The Old Place and substantial
    mature hedgerows and walls. As such, the appeal site is not part of the
    surroundings from which the building is experienced and its significance would not
    be harmed by the proposal.
Heritage balance
27. Even though the proposal would affect only one modern building and would not
    alter the historic plan form of the CA or cause the loss of historic fabric, it would
    still cause moderate harm to the character and appearance of the CA as the
    cladding would be prominent in an important part of the CA around the church.
28. The proposal would also harm the ability to appreciate the grade II* Parish Church
    of St Nicholas and grade II listed The Old Place and Beam Cottage resulting in
    harm to their significance. The harm to the Parish Church would be moderate
    because the change would be conspicuous in views from the church yard and
    would detract from the historic built context in which the church is experienced.
    The harm to The Old Place and Beam Cottage however would be limited,
    reflecting the restricted intervisibility and the fact that the principal fabric and
    broader historic settings would remain unaffected. Nevertheless, in accordance
    with NDMP HE6 of the Framework, the harm caused to these designated heritage
    assets is a matter of considerable importance and weight.
29. The proposed weather boarding is intended to address the poor condition of the
    existing render on the dwelling. Whilst primarily a benefit to the occupiers of the
    dwelling, this would also have the limited public benefit of maintaining an existing
    dwelling in a sensitive location. There would also be some limited economic
    benefits through the purchase of construction materials and the carrying out of the
    works.

11
     Historic England official list entry number 1311329


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   5
Appeal Decision 6006672


30. The limited public benefit of the proposal however does not provide the clear and
    convincing justification for the harm that the proposal would cause to the
    significance of the individual heritage assets identified above, the conservation of
    which NDMP HE6 of the Framework requires me to assign substantial weight.
31. For the reasons given, the proposal would not preserve or enhance the character
    or appearance of the CA and would fail to preserve the setting of nearby listed
    buildings. It therefore conflicts with policies BE1, BE2 and NE4 of the VALP and
    CNP policies CDN01, CDN03 and CDN04 which require that development should
    respect and conserve heritage assets and the historic character and local
    distinctiveness of the settlement. It would also conflict with the Act and the
    Framework’s policies to conserve and enhance the historic environment.
Conclusion
32. For the reasons given above the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    as a whole and there are no material considerations that would outweigh that
    conflict. Consequently, the appeal should be dismissed.



R Kent
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
