Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by J Heppell BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006517
Site I, The Mill, Catteshall Road, Godalming GU7 1NJ
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Rushmon Homes against Waverley Borough Council.
    The application Ref is WA/2023/02694.
    The development proposed is erection of a building comprising 9 residential units together with car
     parking and associated works in lieu of planning permission WA/2002/2310.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The appeal was accompanied by amended plans which reduced the width of the
      building, reflecting an earlier amended plan which was submitted to the Council
      prior to the determination of the application in response to an objection from the
      Council’s Principal Tree Officer. As harm to arboricultural interests did not form
      part of the reasons for refusal, the Council’s decision appears to have been based
      on the amended plans. Furthermore, in response to the Council’s concerns about
      living conditions, the amended plans which accompanied the appeal enlarged
      balconies and added windows. These amendments were not before the Council at
      the time of its decision.
3.    The Council objected to the plans being considered as part of the appeal on the
      basis that appeals are not intended to evolve the design of schemes. I have had
      regard to the Planning Appeals – Procedural Guide, which advises that when
      considering whether to accept amended plans, the two tests set out in the
      judgement in Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of
      Hackney (2018) should be applied: that is, whether the proposed amendments
      involve a substantive difference to the application; and, whether they would cause
      procedural unfairness to anyone involved in the appeal.
4.    The amendments sought to resolve technical issues relating to trees, outdoor
      space and sunlight, and were minor in the context of the proposal. It is not in
      dispute between the main parties that no interested parties were prejudiced by the
      changes and, having reviewed the comments of interested parties, I agree. The
      amendments therefore satisfy the two tests, and I have determined the appeal on
      the basis of the amended plans. For the avoidance of doubt, these plans are:
      P2023/11.13 Rev E (Elevations), P2023/11.21 Rev G (Site/Block Plan),
      P2023/11.22 Rev D (Floorplans) and P2023/11.29 Rev C (Site Comparison Plan).



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006517


         The appellant confirmed, in response to the Council’s concern, that Drawing No
         P2023/11.21 Rev G did not alter the setback of the development from the river.
5.       The Council’s reason for refusal which alleged an adverse impact on the character
         and appearance of the area included reference to a lack of defensible space to the
         northeastern elevation. As this concern related to living conditions, I have
         addressed it alongside the Council’s other concerns regarding living conditions.
6.       Following the submission of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy
         Framework (Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
         were afforded the opportunity to comment on the implications of the new
         Framework for the proposal.
Main Issues
7.       The main issues in this appeal are:

         the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area with
          particular reference to an Area of Strategic Visual Importance (ASVI);

         the effect of the proposal on flood risk;

         the effect of the proposal on the integrity of a Site of Nature Conservation
          Importance (SNCI); and

         whether the proposal would provide suitable living conditions for future occupiers
          with particular reference to play space, outdoor space, sunlight and privacy.
Reasons
Character and appearance
8.       The site is located within a settlement boundary. The land to the south and east is
         built up, whilst to the north and west an area known as the Lammas Lands is open.
         The Lammas Lands form the floodplain of the River Wey and are designated as
         part of the Godalming ASVI, which includes the rear portion of the site.
9.       The supporting test to Policy RE3 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 1:
         Strategic Policies and Sites February 2018 (LPP1) explains the importance ASVIs
         play in maintaining the character of the main settlements, which can be either
         because they play an important role in preventing their coalescence or because
         they are areas of open land that stretch into the urban area. The policy seeks to
         maintain and enhance the appearance of ASVIs, and requires development
         proposals to demonstrate that they would not be inconsistent with this objective.
10. The Godalming ASVI includes the land between Godalming and Farncombe. The
    boundary between the ASVI and the urban area of Godalming is mostly regular,
    but in places extends into the urban area along the course of the River Wey. One
    such instance occurs where two branches of the River Wey form a triangular area
    of largely undeveloped land, whose tree cover forms a backdrop to the River Wey
    and the parallel River Wey Navigation. The site is situated next to this triangular
    area of land.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006517


11. The historic mapping in the appellant’s heritage impact assessment identifies that
    the part of the appeal site located within the ASVI was formerly a spur of the River
    Wey. It has an open and undeveloped appearance, comprising low level
    vegetation and scattered trees, in contrast with the part of the site outside the
    ASVI, which according to the historic mapping previously contained buildings and
    is now used for car parking. It is not in dispute between the main parties that the
    front portion of the site is previously developed land but, although reference is
    made in the appellant’s submissions to the rear portion being used as a storage
    yard area and to deposit dredgings from the river, on the basis of the evidence
    before me it is unclear whether it was previously developed.
12. The site, along with the adjacent former mill buildings, benefits from planning
    permission for a new office building, conversion of existing buildings to offices, and
    14 new and converted dwellings1. The other elements of the permission have
    subsequently been implemented, and as a consequence planning permission for a
    new office building on the site remains extant. The appellant contended, by
    reference to the judgement in Mansell v Tonbridge and Malling BC & others [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1314, that there is a real prospect of this fallback development being
    implemented.
13. In response, the Council argued that that an office building constructed under the
    original permission would not satisfy current building regulations and moreover
    would increase flood risk. Whilst these factors would not necessarily prevent the
    permission from being implemented, they make it less likely that it would happen.
    More fundamentally, the two decades or more which have elapsed since the
    permission was granted strongly suggest that, whilst there is a greater than
    theoretical possibility of the development taking place, the reality is that if there
    was a real prospect of it being implemented, it would have been happened by now.
    I therefore ascribe limited weight to the fallback position.
14. I have not been advised whether the same policies apply now as those which were
    in force when the original permission was granted. The office building would have
    had three floors of accommodation and a comparable massing to the proposal,
    and would have encroached a similar amount into the ASVI in terms of ground
    coverage. However, whereas the office building would have been located near the
    converted mill buildings, the proposed building would be positioned significantly
    closer to the River Wey and the Lammas Lands. Therefore, even though the
    Council considered that the office building would have had an acceptable
    relationship with the ASVI, the proposal’s impact on the ASVI would be greater
    owing to its closer proximity to the river.
15. The character area assessment which forms part of the Godalming & Farncombe
    Neighbourhood Plan 2017-2032 April 2019 (NP), which is a material consideration,
    places the site within the Catteshall Lane character area, whose most significant
    landmark is identified as the boat house beside the River Wey, and whose most
    important view is from the bridge over the River Wey close to the boat house in
    both directions. Views of the river and the sweeping slopes of Godalming are
    described as making up a beautiful landscape.
16. Whilst part of the building would be positioned close to the current river bank, the
    proposed realignment of the bank would result in the building being set back from

1
    LPA reference WA/2002/2310


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006517


       the river. This realignment is not objectionable since, to judge from the historic
       mapping, it would complete the infilling of the spur of the river which originally
       crossed the site.
17. The appellant has supplied photoviewpoints of the site from a number of vantage
    points, which show that the proposal would be partly screened from the River Wey
    and the Lammas Lands by a two storey building next to Catteshall Road which the
    appellant refers to as Boathouse Inn and which the Council calls Riverside
    Cottage. Even so, the proposal would be clearly visible above the adjacent single
    storey boat house, and would significantly urbanise both its setting and that of the
    river and dominate views of the boat house which is currently seen against the
    backdrop of the former mill buildings and is framed by trees. Whilst planting would
    be undertaken to mitigate for the loss of existing trees, it could not completely
    screen the building.
18. The appellant highlighted that there are other buildings in close proximity to the
    site which form part of the river’s setting. The tall former mill buildings adjacent to
    the site are located further back from the river and fall outside the ASVI, and do
    not dominate the view from the river in the same way as the proposal would.
    Similarly, the houses on the opposite side of Catteshall Road from the site are
    outside the ASVI and are less visually imposing.
19. The appellant drew my attention to examples of recent residential development to
    the west of the site next to the River Wey, but these sites appear to be outside the
    ASVI, and the developments broadly reflect the grain of the urban area. They do
    not provide a reliable guide regarding the appropriateness of the proposal in
    relation to the ASVI.
20. The proposed building would have a residential appearance, contrasting with the
    historic mill buildings next to the site, and also with the unimplemented office
    building whose design bears some similarities to the mill buildings. Whilst a
    residential design is not in itself objectionable, when applied to a building of the
    scale proposed the outcome would be harmful to the ASVI. I have had regard to
    the fact that the proposed height of the building was reduced during negotiations
    with the Council, and the design modified, but the changes made do not overcome
    the concerns I have identified.
21. The River Wey and Lammas Lands, including the site and the former mill
    buildings, form part of the Godalming Navigations & River Wey Conservation Area
    (CA), which is focussed on the historic River Wey Navigation and the River Wey in
    multiple channels. The river’s pastoral, low lying floodplain is characterised by
    irregular fields interspersed with woodland, and an absence of human settlement
    apart from canal buildings and industrial sites. The CA’s significance derives from
    the contribution made by the River Wey Navigation, which was extended as far as
    Godalming in 1764, to the expansion of the town prior to the arrival of the railway.
    The surviving elements of canal engineering and architecture provide a record of
    the early stages of the industrial revolution, and the canal’s subsequent evolution
    towards leisure use is exemplified by the boat house adjacent to the site.
22. The Council identified that, owing to the proposal’s prominence and its
    encroachment into the rural setting of the boat house, it would result in a moderate
    degree of less than substantial harm to the CA. In accordance with the
    Framework, the Council weighed the harm against the public benefits, and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006517


       concluded that the provision of dwellings was a sufficient public benefit to outweigh
       the harm. Based on the evidence before me, I find no reason to disagree with the
       Council’s reasoning. However, this does not alter my conclusions in respect of the
       ASVI.
23. Bringing the above matters together in respect of the purposes of the ASVI, whilst
    the proposal would not contribute to the coalescence of Godalming and
    Farncombe, it would fail to maintain and enhance the appearance of an area of
    open land that stretches into the urban area. The introduction of a large building on
    a mainly undeveloped site close to the river would harm the setting of the river and
    the adjacent boat house, to the detriment of views from the River Wey and the
    Lammas Lands, the value of which are set out in the NP’s character area
    assessment. I have had careful regard to the fallback position of the extant
    permission for an office building, but it carries limited weight for the reasons I have
    set out. Consequently, the proposal would harm the appearance of the ASVI and
    adversely affect the character of the settlement.
24. I therefore conclude that the proposal would conflict with policies RE3 and TD1 of
    the LPP1, policies DM1, DM4 and DM7 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part
    2: Site Allocations and Development Management Policies March 2023 (LPP2)
    and Policy GOD5 of the NP. Together these policies set out the Council’s
    approach to maintaining and enhancing the appearance of ASVIs, by requiring
    new development to respond to the local context as described in the NP’s
    character area assessments, which includes scale, landscape form and views.
Flood risk
25. The proposal is for a residential use, which Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
    identifies as a more vulnerable use. Environment Agency (EA) mapping places the
    site partly within Flood Zone 2 and partly within Flood Zone 3, giving it a medium
    to high probability of river flooding. It has not been confirmed whether any part of
    the site is within the functional floodplain (Flood Zone 3b), where the PPG advises
    that more vulnerable uses are incompatible.
26. In accordance with the PPG, the application was accompanied by a flood risk
    assessment which incorporated sequential and exception tests. The Council has
    not commented on the sequential assessment in its submissions and, in the
    absence of evidence to the contrary, I am bound to accept the appellant’s finding
    that the development could not be located in an area with a lower risk of flooding.
27. The exception test requires that the development provide wider sustainability
    benefits to the community that outweigh the flood risk, and to be safe for its lifetime
    taking account of the vulnerability of its users without increasing flood risk
    elsewhere. The Council currently has a housing land supply shortfall, and the
    proposal is to utilise a sustainably-located site which includes previously
    developed land to provide a range of dwelling sizes which responds to the
    Council’s identified needs. I am satisfied therefore that the sustainability benefits of
    the proposal outweigh the flood risk.
28. In respect of the second part of the test, it is not in dispute between the main
    parties that the building would be constructed above the estimated flood level for a
    1 in 100 year event taking account of climate change, and would not therefore be
    at risk of flooding. During a flood event, residents would be able to evacuate the
    site via a bridged connection to Catteshall Road, part of which is within Flood Zone

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006517


        1 and therefore has a low probability of river flooding. The EA considered that
        there would be a potential danger to the elderly and infirm during an evacuation,
        and consequently that the access was not safe. However, on the basis of the
        appellant’s modelling showing very low to no risk on this section of Catteshall
        Road, I am satisfied that safe access could be provided during a flood event.
29. To compensate for flood storage which would be lost following the construction of
    the building, the proposal originally included voids beneath the building, but
    because the PPG is clear that such techniques should not normally be relied upon
    for compensating for any loss of floodplain storage, the proposal evolved during
    negotiations with the Council to show existing site levels being lowered in the area
    of the proposed car park. The storage thus created was designed to compensate
    for the difference in flood storage between the unimplemented office building and
    the proposal. I have set out above the limited weight which attaches to the fallback
    position. Even though the site is not on the direct flow route for flood waters, and
    surface water would be adequately managed, the appellant’s approach would not
    fulfil the PPG requirement to provide on-site level-for-level compensatory storage
    for loss of flood storage2, and consequently would increase flood risk elsewhere.
30. As I have described already, the proposal would involve reclaiming a section of the
    River Wey to create a buffer between the proposed building and the river. The
    appellant indicated that the ground level of the reclaimed land would be set at the
    existing water level, meaning that in flood conditions any flood waters would still be
    able to flood this area. However, the cross section of the new river bank prepared
    by the appellant appears to show the reclaimed land sloping up from the high
    water line of the river, which could indicate a loss of flood storage. There is
    therefore a risk that the proposed reclamation works would further reduce the
    volume of storage in this area and so increase the risk of flooding.
31. I therefore find that the proposal would not be safe for its lifetime without
    increasing flood risk elsewhere, and would fail the exception test. It would
    therefore have an adverse effect on flood risk. In making this finding, I have had
    regard to the fact that Surrey County Council as lead local flood authority (LLFA)
    did not object to the proposal. As the LLFA’s role in relation to the proposal is
    advisory and not statutory, I have placed limited weight on its position compared
    with that of the EA.
32. I conclude that the proposal would conflict with policies NE2, CC1 and CC4 of the
    LPP1, which together seek to minimise the risk from flooding whilst not increasing
    flood risk elsewhere by, amongst other things, applying the exception test in
    locations identified as being at risk of flooding, and having regard to the
    implications of climate change and the need to protect existing river corridors.
Integrity of the SNCI
33. The River Wey and River Wey – South SNCI is a local wildlife site containing a
    rich diversity of aquatic and marginal flora, placing it in the top 10% of all UK
    watercourses. It also contains dense in-stream fauna. The proposal would involve
    infilling a marginal backwater of the river. Policy NE1 of the LPP1 states that
    development adjacent to locally designated sites will not be permitted where it has
    an adverse impact on the integrity of the nature conservation interest.


2
    Paragraph: 049 Reference ID: 7-049-20220825


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          6
Appeal Decision 6006517


34. The application was accompanied by a river condition assessment designed for
    use in biodiversity net gain calculations. The assessment found that the aquatic
    species in the marginal backwater were common and widespread, and that
    consequently the proposal would not impact on the river’s important aquatic
    marginal flora assemblage. A potential impact on in-stream fauna such as young
    fish and invertebrates using the shallow water to shelter was identified, and
    mitigation in the form of submergent vegetation as part of a planting scheme was
    recommended.
35. Surrey Wildlife Trust (SWT) objected on the basis of the potential impact on in-
    stream fauna. However, as the proposal would not harm the aquatic and marginal
    flora for which the SNCI is designated, any resulting adverse impact on the
    integrity of the nature conservation interest would be negligible and would not
    justify withholding planning permission.
36. The potential impact of the proposal on the Wey Valley Meadows Site of Special
    Scientific Interest (SSSI) was raised by SWT. The assessment noted that, whilst
    infilling of the marginal backwater could result in a small increase in the river
    current which could in turn slightly increase the risk of flooding of the SSSI, the
    species within the SSSI thrive on waterlogged habitats. It is not therefore critical to
    understanding the likely impact of the proposal on the SSSI to know the
    construction methodology for the infilling work. On the basis of the evidence before
    me, the proposal would not have an adverse impact on the integrity of the SSSI.
37. I conclude that the proposal would not have an adverse effect on the integrity of
    the SNCI and would accord with policies NE1 and NE2 of the LPP1 and Policy
    DM1 of the LPP2, which together protect locally designated sites from adverse
    impacts on the integrity of their nature conservation interest, including maintaining
    appropriate buffer zones beside rivers.
Living conditions
38. Policy LRC1 of the LPP1, whilst not referred to in the reason for refusal, sets out
    by reference to the Fields in Trust standards the Council’s expectation for play
    space provision in new residential development, including that schemes of five or
    more dwellings must be within 100m accompanied walking distance of a Local
    Area for Play (LAP). Whilst there is open space within 100m of the site at the
    Lammas Lands, and recreation grounds further away, there is no LAP within the
    required distance. Consequently, the proposal is required to include a LAP, which
    it does not, and as a result it makes inadequate provision for play space.
39. Policy DM5 of the LPP2 sets out the Council’s requirements for external space.
    Where communal outdoor space is proposed, 15 sqm of outdoor is required per
    flat plus a private balcony for each flat measuring at least 1.5m by 2.0m. The
    communal space shown in front of the proposed flats on Catteshall Road satisfies
    the Council’s minimum requirements and, although it would not be private, I
    consider it acceptable having regard to the presence of the extensive Lammas
    Lands within easy walking distance of the site. Several balconies shown on the
    original plans lacked the required depth, but the amended plans show balconies of
    sufficient size. I am satisfied therefore that the proposal includes sufficient outdoor
    space. In reaching this conclusion, I have not had regard to the proposed
    landscape buffer beside the river, since it is unclear whether it would be available
    for recreational use.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006517


40. The Council raised a concern that flat F3 was a single aspect unit which, owing to
    its orientation, would not receive direct sunlight, and would not therefore provide
    adequate living conditions. The amended plans showed additional windows which
    provided the flat with a second aspect, thereby ensuring that direct sunlight would
    reach it, and improving ventilation. Consequently, I am satisfied that future
    occupiers would benefit from adequate living conditions.
41. The plans showed flat F4 having two of its three bedrooms facing towards the
    wooded area behind the site. A shared access to the river was proposed next to
    these bedrooms, which the Council feared would impact on the privacy of
    occupiers, despite the main living rooms of the flat facing towards the river.
    However, as it is not certain that the land beside the river could be used as
    outdoor space, it is unlikely that the access would be used frequently. Provided
    careful attention was paid to boundary treatment, which could be dealt with by
    condition were I minded to allow the appeal, an appropriate balance could be
    struck between protecting the privacy of occupiers and maintaining the outlook
    from the bedrooms.
42. In conclusion, whilst flats F3 and F4 would benefit from adequate sunlight and
    privacy respectively, and the proposal makes suitable provision for outdoor space
    in accordance with Policy DM5 of the LPP2, it provides inadequate play space. As
    a result, it would not provide suitable living conditions for future occupiers, contrary
    to policies LRC1 and TD1 of the LPP1, which together aim to improve the quality
    of life of future residents through, amongst other things, the provision of on site
    play space.
Planning Balance
43. The site is within a settlement where Policy S4 of the Framework applies.
    Therefore, development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in this Framework.
44. The Framework sets out the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, which
    include but are not restricted to the situations listed in Policy S4(2). Although none
    of the situations listed in the policy apply to the proposal, I am nonetheless
    required to consider whether the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the harm I have identified to the character and appearance of the
    area, flood risk and living conditions.
45. Policy HO7 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence.
    The Council confirmed that it cannot demonstrate a five year supply of housing
    land, with the main parties agreeing that the Council’s current housing land supply
    is 1.28 years. As the proposal would follow the approach set out in the HDS by
    providing homes which would contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, substantial weight is given to this benefit.
46. Policy L2 encourages the effective use of land and requires substantial weight to
    be given to the benefits of making better use of vacant and underutilised land. The
    proposal wouldutilise a sustainably located site which includes previously

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6006517


       developed land. It would provide social benefits in the form of smaller dwelling
       units which would meet local needs, and economic benefits during construction
       and from future residents making use of local services. For the reasons set out, I
       have given limited weight to the extant permission for an office building and, whilst
       the proposal would reduce flood risk to the extent that it would be at a higher level
       than the office building would be, it would introduce more vulnerable users into an
       area at risk of flooding which the office building would not. The fact that the
       Council found that the public benefits of housing would outweigh the harm to a
       heritage asset is neutral.
47. Policy DP3 sets out key principles for well-designed places, by requiring proposals
    to respond to their context including their setting, in order to integrate with their
    surroundings and thereby maintain a strong sense of place. My conclusions
    regarding the proposal’s adverse impact on the character and appearance of the
    area, resulting from the introduction of a dominant building into a sensitive part of
    the Godalming ASVI, show that these requirements would not be satisfied. In
    these circumstances, Policy DP3(3) states that proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with these requirements.
48. Policy F7 seeks to ensure that development is safe from flooding, by requiring that
    where development is proposed in a location known to be at risk from any form of
    flooding, it is demonstrated that, amongst other things, flood risk will not be
    increased elsewhere. In light of my conclusion that the proposal would have an
    adverse effect on flood risk as a consequence of increasing flood risk elsewhere,
    this requirement would not be satisfied. Policy F7(2) requires that proposals should
    be refused in these circumstances.
49. Policy HC3 requires proposals for housing which would give rise to significant
    numbers of additional people living in an area to be informed by an understanding
    of the need for associated improvements to community facilities, and to provide for
    new community facilities which are necessary for the development to be
    acceptable in planning terms. As there is an identified need for a LAP which the
    proposal does not meet, it would result in unsatisfactory living conditions.
50. The benefit resulting from the proposal’s contribution to meeting evidenced
    housing need, along with the other benefits outlined above, attracts substantial
    weight. Set against this, the harms I have identified would have a significant
    adverse effect. National decision-making Policy DP3 directs refusal in instances
    where proposals conflict with the Framework’s key principles for well-designed
    places, whilst Policy F7 directs refusal where flood risk would be increased
    elsewhere. I conclude that the benefits of approving development would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
51. For the above reasons, the proposal conflicts with the development plan, when
    read as a whole. Material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be
    taken other than in accordance with the development plan. I therefore conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Heppell
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
