Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by E Everitt BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006744
30 Honeysuckle Gardens, Hatfield AL10 8PJ
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr Yogasundaram Shrikanthan against the decision of Welwyn Hatfield
     Council.
    The application Ref is 6/2025/2268/FULL.
    The development proposed is described on the application form as “erection of fence”.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    Notwithstanding the description of development set out above, which is taken from
      the application form, it is clear from the plans and accompanying details that the
      development comprises erection of fence facilitating change of use of amenity land
      to residential garden. The Council dealt with the proposal on this basis and so
      shall I.
3.    A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
      during the consideration of the appeal. I have taken account of this in making my
      decision. As the changes are not material to the issues before me and would not
      alter my conclusions, it has not been necessary to seek further comments from the
      main parties.
Main Issue
4.    The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
      appearance of the surrounding area.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is an end-of-terrace dwelling set back from Honeysuckle
   Gardens behind a verdant front garden. To the side, it is abutted by an area of
   open land featuring established planting. By reason of its openness and verdancy,
   the land positively contributes to the character and appearance of the area,
   including by reinforcing the verdant character which results from the established
   planting in front gardens along this part of Honeysuckle Gardens. Together with the
   land adjacent to 14 Honeysuckle Gardens, this land forms a welcome break in the
   built form of the area.
6. The appeal proposal would enclose part of the land to the side of the appeal
   property, changing its use to form part of an enlarged residential garden. In this

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006744


     regard, the proposal would depart from the planned layout of the area by reducing
     the extent of open land on Honeysuckle Gardens. Although only part of the open
     land would be enclosed, the loss of this land would harmfully erode the open,
     verdant character and appearance of the area. This is irrespective of the
     reasonably modest scale of the enlargement of the existing garden and whether the
     retained land would have a broadly comparable configuration to other areas of
     open land within the surrounding area.
7. Moreover, the proposal would result in close boarded fencing extending closer to
   the road than is currently the case on the site or elsewhere in this part of
   Honeysuckle Gardens. Even if the fencing would be broadly similar in appearance
   to some nearby boundary treatments, it would appear incongruous in the context of
   the verdant front gardens along this part of Honeysuckle Gardens. Furthermore, by
   reason of the proximity of the fencing to the road, it would appear unduly prominent
   in the streetscene, in doing so markedly eroding the open character of the area.
8. I do not dispute that the character of places evolves over time. Nevertheless, and
   even though the surrounding area is considered by the appellant to be pleasant but
   unremarkable, this matter does not justify the harm I have identified above.
9. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would have a
   harmful effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding area. As such, it
   is contrary to the relevant provisions of Policies SP 1, SP 9 and SADM 16 of the
   Welwyn Hatfield Borough Council Local Plan 2016-2036 (adopted 2023). Among
   other things, these policies seek development built to high design standards
   reflecting local character, relating well to its surroundings and local distinctiveness,
   including the wider townscape and landscape, and enhancing the sense of place.
   For the same reasons, the proposal is contrary to the Welwyn Hatfield District Plan
   Supplementary Design Guidance (2005) and the relevant provisions of the
   Framework.
Other Matters
10. The appeal proposal would result in additional private garden space at the appeal
    property, thereby enhancing the living conditions of current and future occupiers. I
    attach limited weight in favour of the proposed development to this benefit.
Conclusion
11. The proposed development would enhance the living conditions of current and
    future occupiers of the appeal property through the provision of additional private
    garden space. However, this benefit does not outweigh the harm I have identified
    from the proposal.
12. In conclusion, therefore, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and the
    material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.

E Everitt
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
