Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 June 2026
by K Craddock BA (Hons) MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006388
Hall Farm, Copt Oak Road, Copt Oak, Charley, Leicestershire LE12 9XL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mark Massarella against the decision of North West Leicestershire District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01015/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the use of former groom's accommodation as independent dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development above is taken from the planning application form.
       During the course of the planning application the description of development was
       amended to include reference to ‘associated works’ to encompass surface water
       drainage mitigation measures.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the appeal site is in a suitable location for housing,
       having regard to the Council’s spatial strategy, the relevant development plan
       policies and the proximity of services and sustainable modes of transport.
Reasons
5.     The appeal relates to a stone outbuilding located within a courtyard of similar
       outbuildings and adjacent to a steel framed storage building at Hall Farm. Hall
       Farm comprises two dwellings, Hall Farm and Manor Farm, accessed via a long
       private drive off the B591, surrounded by farmland.
6.     The development plan for the area comprises the North West Leicestershire Local
       Plan (2021) (LP). Policy S2 of the LP sets out the Council’s settlement hierarchy to
       distinguish between the roles and functions of different settlements and to guide
       the location of future development.
7.     The appeal site is not located within any Limits to Development boundary and sits
       within a cluster of properties with no services and facilities. It therefore falls within

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006388


       the ‘hamlet’ settlement classification of Policy S2 of the LP. Accordingly, the
       appeal proposal must be considered in the context of the countryside and Policy
       S3.
8.     Policy S3 of the LP states that land outside the Limits to Development is identified
       as countryside. A number of specified uses (a) to (s) are supported in the
       countryside, and the proposal falls under category (d) which states the re-use and
       adaptation of buildings for appropriate purposes including housing in accordance
       with the Settlement Hierarchy.
9.     Policy S3 of the LP goes on to require any development that accords with the
       specified uses in (a) to (s) must meet six criteria to be supported in the
       countryside. Criterion (vi) requires that the proposed development is accessible, or
       will be made accessible, by a range of sustainable transport. I find LP Policies S2
       and S3 to be consistent with the Framework, which seeks to actively manage
       patterns of growth.
10. The appeal site is located within a rural location and I acknowledge that
    sustainable transport solutions vary between urban and rural areas. However, I
    have been provided with limited information in respect of nearby services and
    facilities, and I observed from my site visit that there appeared to be no such
    facilities within the immediate vicinity.
11. I also noted that the B591 did not include footpaths or street lighting. These factors
    result in both walking and cycling being unattractive options to access any such
    services and facilities in comparison to car journeys.
12. As such, based on the evidence before me, the appeal site would not represent a
    sustainable location for residential development in respect of access to everyday
    services and facilities. Future residents would therefore be heavily reliant upon the
    use of the private car.
13. The appellant has drawn my attention to Policy S3(e) of the LP, which makes
    provision for the redevelopment of previously developed land (PDL) in accordance
    with Policy S2 of the LP. The main parties disagree on whether the lawful use of
    the appeal site is agricultural or equestrian and, consequently, whether it
    constitutes PDL. I have not been provided with evidence to clarify its lawful use
    and, therefore, I cannot be certain it meets the definition of PDL as contained
    within the Framework.
14. For these reasons Policy S3(e) of the LP is not applicable to the proposed
    development. Nevertheless, even if it were, the proposal would still need to satisfy
    criterion (vi) and no evidence has been submitted to demonstrate compliance with
    it.
15. Policies S5, HO10 and T3 of the Framework make provision for the development
    of isolated homes in the countryside where the proposal would involve the re-use
    of redundant or disused buildings, enhance its immediate setting and support
    sustainable patterns of movement. However, I have not been provided with
    compelling evidence to clearly conclude that the building is redundant or disused.
16. I acknowledge that the Framework promotes the development of under-utilised
    buildings. However, at the time of my visit it appeared the building has not ceased
    to function as an ancillary dwelling as it remains laid out, equipped and available


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6006388


       for residential occupation. Its kitchen, living accommodation and domestic facilities
       remain intact and it is capable of immediate ancillary use without material works.
       While it may presently be unoccupied, vacancy does not necessarily equate to
       disuse.
17. I note the fallback position cited in the appellant’s case regarding Class Q, Part 3
    of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
    Order 2015 (as amended). However, given the case presented by the Council
    combined with the lack of evidence from the appellant to clearly demonstrate the
    appeal building is PDL and within a lawful use, I apportion the fallback position
    limited weight.
18. No traffic survey or transport statement has been submitted to substantiate the
    appellant’s claim that vehicle movements associated with the proposed use of the
    building as a separate dwelling would be comparable to the vehicle movements
    associated with its use as a groom’s or ancillary residential accommodation. As
    such I have limited substantive evidence before me that the proposed conversion
    to an independent residential dwelling would be comparable in terms of vehicle
    movements.
19. I acknowledge the proposed development would offer benefits, such as the
    creation of 1no. additional dwelling, surface water mitigation measures and short-
    term economic benefits. I attribute limited weight to these. Neither has it been
    demonstrated that an independent residential use is essential for securing the
    long-term viability of the building, given that it is not clear that there has ever been
    a cessation in its use. Weighed against these is the conflict with social and
    environmental sustainability. Social, in that housing would not be provided in a
    location where services would be accessible, and environmental, due to the heavy
    reliance on the car of any future occupants. As such, there are no material
    considerations that outweigh the conflict with the development plan.
20. In view of all the above, I conclude that the appeal site is not accessible, or will be
    made accessible, by a range of sustainable transport. The appeal site would not
    therefore represent a suitable location for residential development and would be
    contrary to the Council’s spatial strategy for new housing. The proposal therefore
    conflicts with LP Policies S2 and S3 and the Framework, the principal relevant
    provisions of which I have set out above.
Conclusion
21. I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given, the
    appeal is dismissed.



K Craddock
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
