Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by J Bowyer BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006496
Little Brook Farm, 15e Reigate Road, Sidlow, Surrey RH2 8QH
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Mr I Jones, Green Heritage Group against the decision of Reigate and
    Banstead Borough Council.
   The application Ref is 25/00197/F.
   The development proposed is ‘construction of x2 agricultural buildings’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (‘the Framework’) in August 2026. The main parties have had the
   opportunity to address the change in written comments and I have determined the
   appeal having regard to the comments received and the updated Framework.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are:
     i) the effect of the proposal on ecology;
     ii) the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
     iii) the effect of the proposal on highway safety;
     iv) whether or not the proposal would be inappropriate development in the
          Green Belt; and
     v) whether or not the proposal would make adequate provision for biodiversity
          net gain.
Reasons
4. The appeal proposes two agricultural buildings on part of a field located to the rear
   of a cluster of former agricultural buildings which have been converted to residential
   use. The appellant indicates that the proposal would provide storage for produce
   from an existing farm operation including a yield of haylage, silage and maize. At
   appeal stage, they also refer to 40 head of sheep presently grazing at the farm and
   the lack of a barn to house them in the over wintering period.
Ecology
5. Table 6.11 of the appellant’s Preliminary Ecological Appraisal Report (‘PEAR’) sets
   out an assessment of the likelihood of occurrence of protected ecological features

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006496


        and species on site, potential impacts due to the proposed development and
        recommendations for appropriate mitigation measures. It states that breeding birds
        were not identified on site and suggests that the development will not result in any
        loss of suitable habitat for breeding birds.
6. However, Surrey Wildlife Trust advise that there is habitat within the site which
   could be suitable for notable bird species including Skylark and refer to information
   indicating that Skylark may be breeding locally. Skylark are listed as a species of
   principal importance under Section 41 of the Natural Environment and Rural
   Communities Act 2006 and are included on the red list of Birds of Conservation
   Concern.
7. The PEAR does not specifically discuss Skylark and the appellant has provided no
   other compelling evidence to dispute the potential suitability of habitat on the site
   for Skylark or other notable bird species. Moreover, while the PEAR suggested that
   breeding birds were not identified on site, it refers only to a site survey visit on a
   single day in December 2024. Given the time of year which would be outside of
   breeding and nesting season and the single visit carried out, I am not satisfied that
   there is sufficient robust information to demonstrate that notable bird species
   including Skylark would not be using the site.
8. Circular 06/20051 sets out that it is essential that the presence or otherwise of
   protected species, and the extent that they may be affected by proposed
   development is established before planning permission is granted. For the reasons
   above, I consider that there is a reasonable likelihood that notable bird species
   including Skylark could be present and affected by the proposal and there is
   insufficient evidence to demonstrate otherwise. In the absence of a suitably robust
   assessment, it is also unclear to what extent development on the site might
   displace or otherwise affect notable bird species including Skylark, both during
   construction and operational phases, noting that it would occupy a reasonable area
   of the site. Nor can I be sure that any adverse effects could be suitably and
   effectively mitigated
9. The Circular is clear that ecological surveys should only be left to planning
   conditions in exceptional circumstances. I have no firm evidence that any such
   circumstances would apply here. I further cannot be confident that any necessary
   mitigation or compensation measures to address effects of the proposal could be
   properly secured and would be effective. In view of the uncertainty and the
   evidence before me, I am not satisfied that these matters could be appropriately
   deferred to planning conditions.
10. Furthermore, the PEAR refers to the area of deciduous woodland to the south of
    the appeal site as ‘ancient woodland’, with the woodland also shown as a priority
    habitat on mapping within the appendices. The proposal does not specify that there
    would be any requirement to remove trees. However, the buildings and
    hardstanding would sit relatively close to the woodland.
11. I note construction management measures proposed in the PEAR including use of
    protective barriers around the construction zone, and the Council has suggested a
    condition referring to tree protection measures during construction. However, there
    could be longer term impacts resulting from the presence of built development in
    proximity to trees and their root protection areas. In the absence of substantive
1
    Biodiversity and geological conservation – statutory obligations and their impact within the planning system


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    2
Appeal Decision 6006496


     arboricultural information to demonstrate otherwise, I can have little confidence that
     the proximity of the development to trees would not be detrimental to their health
     and longevity, with consequent detriment to the woodland habitat. It would not be
     appropriate to defer assessment of such matters to a planning condition given that I
     cannot be confident that effects would ultimately be acceptable. Moreover, having
     referred to the woodland as ‘ancient woodland’ in their evidence, the appellant has
     not disputed that the development would sit partly within a 15m buffer which Surrey
     Wildlife Trust highlight should be provided to ancient woodland in accordance with
     standing advice.
12. Given these factors and the information before me, I am not satisfied that there is
    sufficient basis to determine that the proposal would not harm priority habitat, or
    ancient woodland which the Framework advises is irreplaceable habitat.
13. For these reasons, I find that there is insufficient robust evidence to conclude that
    the proposal would not cause unacceptable harm to ecology through adverse
    effects on protected species and priority habitat. The proposal would be contrary to
    Policy NHE3 of the Development Management Plan 2019 (‘the DMP’) insofar as it
    requires an assessment of existing trees and landscape features and seeks
    retention of trees and woodland.
14. Although not cited in the Council’s reason for refusal, the proposal would also be
    contrary to Policy NHE2 of the DMP which is referenced in the Council’s officer
    report and which advises that development is expected to retain and enhance
    valued priority habitats and features of biodiversity importance.
Character and Appearance
15. There are a number of clusters of buildings along Reigate Road near to the appeal
    site, but these are typically dispersed and set within surrounding open fields and
    blocks of woodland which provides for a generally rural character to this part of the
    countryside. Insofar as the appeal site includes a predominantly open field and
    woodland parcel to the rear of a cluster of buildings close to Reigate Road, it
    contributes to the generally rural character and appearance of the area.
16. The proposed buildings would be reasonably large, but their height, scale and
    simple overall form would not be inconsistent with agricultural structures that are
    typically found within the countryside. The Council also comments that the
    proposed use of timber boarding would be appropriate and I have no firm reason to
    take a different view.
17. However, while I therefore find that the buildings themselves would not be
    uncharacteristic, they would be positioned significantly behind the closest clusters
    of development along Reigate Road, and would extend some way into the field
    parcel such that they would appear somewhat set apart. Together with the
    generous hardstanding around the buildings, there would be a notable and
    awkward incursion of built form into open countryside. Despite the set back from
    Reigate Road, the significant height and scale of the buildings means that there
    would be likely to be some appreciation from the road of their presence and the
    encroachment of development into the landscape. The Council has not highlighted
    any other public views and I consider that the visual impact would be localised.
    Nevertheless, there would be some detriment to the open and rural character and
    appearance of this part of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6006496


18. Furthermore, I have noted above that there is insufficient information to determine
    that development would not adversely affect the health and longevity of trees within
    the woodland parcel on the site in the long term. Loss or harm to these trees which
    contribute to the rural quality of the area would further exacerbate the harm that I
    have identified.
19. Even if I were to accept the appellant’s assertion that there is an immediate need
    for the proposed agricultural buildings, it is still important to ensure that
    development, including for agriculture, does not detract from the qualities of an
    area. Furthermore, the conversion of former agricultural buildings on the wider site
    to dwellings means that the site would not benefit from permitted development
    rights for the erection of an agricultural building but even if it did, such rights are
    subject to a prior approval process including in respect of the building’s siting,
    design and appearance. That there are permitted development rights for
    agricultural development is not therefore compelling evidence that the proposal
    would be acceptable.
20. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would cause some harm
    to the character and appearance of the area. Given that the development would not
    in itself be uncharacteristic, the harm would be relatively limited. It would also be
    localised. Nevertheless, the harm would be contrary to Policy DES1 of the DMP
    which includes requirements broadly for development to respect and make a
    positive contribution to the character of its surroundings.
Highway Safety
21. The development would be accessed from the A217 Reigate Road. Given speeds
    on this part of the road which is subject to a 50mph limit, the Council advises that
    visibility splays of 2.4m by 160m should be provided at the access.
22. The appellant has not disputed that this would be the appropriate visibility splay
    here. They suggest that the requested visibility splays could be secured by
    condition, but from the evidence before me, it is unclear that suitable visibility
    splays could be achieved, and certainly not within land that is within the control of
    the appellant and/or highway land and without a requirement to cross any third
    party land.
23. In light of the uncertainty around the achievability of visibility splays I am not
    satisfied that it would be reasonable or appropriate to defer requirements to
    demonstrate visibility to a planning condition, nor that such a condition would be
    reasonable or enforceable if third party land were affected.
24. Insofar as I am unable to determine that there would be suitable visibility at the
    access, the proposal would therefore result in potential for conflict between vehicles
    leaving the site and other users travelling along Reigate Road.
25. I acknowledge that the development would utilise an existing access which the
    appellant advises serves a working farm unfettered by condition. However, the
    proposal would introduce two reasonably large buildings to the site. While the
    appellant asserts that storage of agricultural produce would not, by itself, result in
    an increase in trip generation compared to outdoor storage or temporary bins or
    silos, I did not observe any such storage at my visit and given that the appellant
    advises that the development is required to provide storage which is not otherwise
    available, it seems to me that the proposal could well support increased agricultural

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6006496


     activity at the site in practice. Such activity could reasonably be expected to
     increase the use of the existing access by agricultural traffic in comparison to the
     current situation. Indeed, the appellant’s own evidence suggests that agricultural
     buildings used for storing machinery, hay and farm equipment can generate around
     25 daily trips. While this may well be seasonal and dependent on farming practices,
     I am not persuaded from the evidence that is before me in this appeal that the
     proposal would not result in a meaningful increase in the level of use of the access
     from Reigate Road.
26. The Local Highway Authority has commented on the appeal that concerns which
    had been raised about vehicles entering and leaving the site in forward gear have
    been addressed and I am satisfied that there would be adequate space within the
    site for turning.
27. Nevertheless, while the proposal may utilise an existing highway access, it has not
    been demonstrated that suitable standards of visibility could be achieved and I find
    that increased use of this access under the proposal would increase potential for
    conflict between vehicles exiting the appeal site and other users of Reigate Road.
28. I conclude that this would cause unacceptable harm to highway safety and the
    proposal would be contrary to the Framework insofar as its Policy TR6 states that
    development proposals should be refused if they would have an unacceptable
    impact on highway safety.
29. The Council’s reason for refusal also referred to conflict with Policy NHE3 of the
    DMP but this relates to protection of trees, woodland areas and natural habitats. I
    do not identify conflict with Policy NHE3 in respect of this reason for refusal.
    However, the proposal would be contrary to Policy TAP1 of the DMP which is not
    cited in the reason for refusal but which is referred to in the Council’s officer report
    and which includes requirements for development to provide safe and adequate
    access for all road users including with regard to visibility splays.
Whether Inappropriate Development
30. The appeal site is located within the Green Belt where the Framework provides that
    inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should
    not be approved except in very special circumstances. The Framework identifies
    that development is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in
    Policy GB7. These categories include development which is for agriculture,
    horticulture and forestry.
31. The Council has raised concern that there is insufficient information to demonstrate
    a need for barns of the size proposed. I also note a query over whether all of the
    land within the blue line on the location plan is farmed by the appellant and a
    suggestion that a parcel to the south is owned by Surrey County Council and
    farmed by a neighbouring property. However, the Council refers to previous
    applications on the appeal site as having established that it has been part of an
    agricultural unit for many years, and it has not provided any compelling evidence to
    demonstrate that the use of the buildings would not be for agriculture as the
    appellant indicates.
32. Moreover, the Framework does not specify any requirement that development for
    agriculture is ‘reasonably necessary’, and nor have I been directed to any local
    policy or guidance outlining such a requirement. The scale of the buildings would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006496


     appear to me to be generous relative to the suggested space requirements, but I
     am satisfied from the information before me that the indicated use for the storage of
     produce and housing of sheep as well as storage of equipment, fertiliser and
     pesticide would be development for agriculture. The proposal would therefore be a
     category of development that Policy GB7 of the Framework indicates is not
     inappropriate in the Green Belt.
33. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in
    the Green Belt. In accordance with the Framework, it should not therefore be
    regarded as harmful to the Green Belt or be required to demonstrate very special
    circumstances. The Council has not alleged conflict with any policy of the
    development plan in respect of Green Belt and nor do I identify any.
Biodiversity Net gain
34. Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (‘the Act’)
    outlines a general biodiversity condition which is deemed to apply to every planning
    permission granted and which effectively mandates a requirement for 10%
    biodiversity net gain (‘BNG’) unless exemptions or transitional provisions apply.
35. The appellant’s evidence indicates that the development would result in a net loss
    of 0.7 habitat units. While information submitted prior to the Council’s decision
    suggested that solutions to achieve 10% BNG could include enhancing retained
    farmland and planting native trees or orchard-type planting, the appellant clarified
    at appeal stage that the proposal does not seek to make an on-site contribution and
    nor would it be appropriate to do so as this is an existing working farm. Their
    evidence instead includes reference to credits, although supporting detail is limited.
36. Moreover, the Council notes that the site boundary adjoins the River Mole which is
    identified on the statutory main river map and which is considered to have at least a
    high distinctiveness. While the indicated development may be set apart from the
    riparian zone which is the area within 10m of each bank top, the Council highlights
    provision in the Statutory Biodiversity Metric User Guide that where a site boundary
    crosses into the riparian zone, both the riparian zone and the adjacent watercourse
    should be scoped into the BNG metric calculations which necessitates undertaking
    a River Condition Assessment. The riparian zone and watercourse have not been
    addressed in the appellant’s evidence or included in the BNG metric calculations. I
    have noted a suggestion in a letter dated 17 June 2025 from Roavr Group to the
    appellant that the red line boundary could be reduced. However, the plans that are
    before me in this appeal show the site boundary extending up to the River Mole.
    The appellant has not disputed that this relationship would necessitate assessment
    of river units in the calculation of BNG.
37. That said, while assessment of watercourse units would be likely to affect the BNG
    baseline, the position of the development well away from the riparian zone means
    that I would not expect the development to have any effect on this habitat.
38. Moreover, any permission granted would be subject to the statutory biodiversity
    gain condition and could not begin until a Biodiversity Gain Plan, which should
    include the pre-development biodiversity value of the on-site habitat, has been
    approved in writing. I am also mindful of the Government’s Planning Practice
    Guidance which advises that it would generally be inappropriate to refuse an
    application on grounds that the biodiversity gain objective will not be met.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6006496


39. In this case, given that the appellant indicates that BNG would be achieved through
    credits and in the absence of compelling evidence to suggest that purchase of
    credits would not offer a realistic option to achieve the mandatory BNG, I am not
    persuaded that the biodiversity gain condition would be incapable of being
    discharged nor that the biodiversity gain objective could not be met.
40. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal could make adequate provision for BNG
    to satisfy the requirements of Schedule 7A of the Act. It would also accord with
    Policy NHE2 of the DMP insofar as it requires that development is designed,
    wherever possible, to achieve a net gain in biodiversity.
Other Matters
41. The appellant indicates that they are disappointed in the time that the Council took
    to determine the application and that permission was refused. They also highlight
    errors in the Council’s reasons for refusal. However, these are not matters which
    alter my assessment of the planning merits of the proposal.
Planning Balance
42. I have found that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt and that it could make adequate provision for BNG. However, there is
    insufficient robust evidence to conclude that the proposal would not result in
    unacceptable harm to ecology through adverse effects on protected species and
    priority habitat. The proposal would also cause unacceptable harm to highway
    safety and some, albeit limited and localised, harm to the character and
    appearance of the area. The proposal is contrary to Policies NHE3 and DES1 of
    the DMP and I find taking these matters together that the proposal would conflict
    with the development plan when it is read as a whole.
43. Policy S5 of the Framework which concerns development outside settlements
    outlines certain forms of development which should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    The specified forms of development include development for agriculture.
44. However, part (2) of policy S5 indicates that the circumstances in which the
    benefits of approving development proposals are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects include where the proposal would fail to comply with
    one of the national decision-making policies which state that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. In this case, I note that
    Framework Policy N6 sets out that proposals which would entail the loss or
    deterioration of irreplaceable habitats, which would include ancient woodland,
    should be refused, unless there are wholly exceptional reasons and a suitable
    compensation strategy exists. I have been unable to determine that there would not
    be detriment to ancient woodland and have no compelling evidence that there
    would be wholly exceptional reasons or compensation for any loss or deterioration.
    In any event, I have identified that the proposal would fail to comply with
    Framework Policy TR6.
45. The proposal would additionally be contrary to national decision-making policies in
    the Framework requiring that adverse impacts on biodiversity are minimised and
    seeking consideration for landscape character and development that integrates
    with and enhances its surroundings.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6006496


46. On the other hand, I acknowledge support in the Framework for the sustainable
    growth of businesses in rural areas including through development and
    diversification of agricultural enterprises and development to maintain and enhance
    farm viability and sustainability and domestic food production. However, I consider
    that these benefits would be modest given the relatively limited scale of the
    proposal.
47. In my assessment, the limited benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the cumulative adverse effects. Policy S5 of the Framework does
    not therefore indicate that the development should be approved.
Conclusion
48. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan when it is read as a whole, and material considerations do not
    indicate that a decision contrary to the development plan should be reached. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Bowyer
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
