 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 29 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6006541
 Land to the r/o 21 Roselands Avenue, St Phillips Avenue, Eastbourne BN22 8NA
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Shaun Mitchell against the decision of Eastbourne Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 250652.
 •    The development proposed is demolition of store/garage and erection of one bedroom dwelling.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17
   August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
   2024 and all other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the
   Appellant and the Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal
   and I have taken the further representations received into account in my
   decision.

Main Issues
3. The main issues in this appeal are:
          •    The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the local
               area;
          •    Whether the proposal would create a satisfactory living environment for
               future occupiers, and
          •    Whether the proposal would harm the living conditions of neighbouring
               residents.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4. The appeal site comprises a small parcel of land, fronting the south eastern side of
   St Philip’s Avenue within a predominantly residential area. It currently comprises a
   single garage with hardstanding in front.
5. Although there is some variation in the pattern of development in the local area,
   there are predominantly well-spaced two storey semi-detached dwellings in the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6006541


     immediate vicinity. To the immediate south of the appeal site there is a three storey
     block of flats in generous grounds and to the north a terrace of two storey
     properties. Most of these properties sit on plots of comparable size and the regular
     and generous plot sizes of the residential development with good sized gardens
     and planting contributes to the well-spaced and verdant character and appearance
     of the local area.
6. The appeal proposal would replace the existing garage with a two storey, one
   bedroom dwelling. There would be vehicular and pedestrian access from St Philip’s
   Avenue leading to a parking area and bin storage area and a very small area of
   amenity space to the rear.
7. There is no issue with the principle of residential development within the built-up
   area of Eastbourne, and the efficient and effective use of urban land is to be
   encouraged in accordance with national and local policy objectives.
8. However, the proposed dwelling would be significantly smaller than the scale of the
   surrounding properties and would almost fill the full width of the small plot. Given its
   size in relation to the small dimensions of the plot, the dwelling would appear very
   cramped and an overdevelopment of the plot. Furthermore, there is a regularity and
   consistency to the pattern of housing development in the local area and the scale
   and design of the proposed dwelling would be visually discordant with the size,
   scale and spacing of the surrounding properties. I have taken into account that the
   proposed materials would seek to harmonise with the palette of materials in the
   local area, but this would not overcome the harm I have found from its small scale
   and cramped form which would detract from the more cohesive character and
   appearance of the surrounding residential area.
9. Given the very modest size of the plot, the proposed dwelling would dominate the
   site and would leave very limited opportunity for soft planting. It would appear
   visually incongruous in terms of its scale, plot size and plot coverage in relation to
   the pattern of surrounding development with their more generous plot sizes, good
   sized gardens and pattern of spacing.
10. I conclude that the proposed development would unacceptably harm the character
    and appearance of the local area. This would conflict with Policy D10A of the
    Eastbourne Core Strategy 2013 (Core Strategy) and in particular criteria 3 and 4,
    Policies UHT1 and in particular criteria a) and b), UHT4 and HO6 of the Eastbourne
    Borough Plan 2003 (Borough Plan) as well as Policy DP3 of the Framework, and in
    particular paragraph 1of that policy, all of which seek a high quality of design which
    responds to, integrates with and enhances the local context.
11. The Council has also referred to Policy D5 of the Eastbourne Core Strategy. It
    seeks to direct development towards sustainable location but appears to be
    primarily directed to the provision of affordable housing. As the provision of
    affordable housing is not relevant to the reason for refusal and this appeal, I have
    not referenced it further.
Living Environment: Future Residents
12. Given the small size of the plot and the proposed siting and size of the dwelling,
    there would be very limited provision of private amenity space to serve future
    occupants. The front area of the site is indicated on the submitted plans to provide
    a parking space and bin store and access to the house. Furthermore, given its

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6006541


     siting adjacent St Philips Avenue, this area of the site would be unlikely to provide
     useable private amenity space. There would be a side passageway on the southern
     side with a rear garden measuring no more than 2m in depth, on the basis of the
     figures provided by the Council.
13. The narrow strip of space at the rear of the site, given its small scale, would be very
    cramped, offering very limited usable amenity space for future residents. Although
    boundary treatments have not been specified, in order that these could be effective
    to prevent overlooking and loss of privacy for the future occupiers, the addition of
    fencing to the small amenity area, together with its very small size, would also
    create an oppressive sense of enclosure.
14. Given the constraints of the site in terms of its scale and the plot coverage of the
    proposed new dwelling, the proposal would not provide a satisfactory living
    environment for future occupiers, with particular regard to the provision of private
    outdoor amenity space. It would conflict with Policy D10A of the Core Strategy,
    Policy HO6 of the Borough Plan and Policies DP3 and P3 of the Framework in
    terms of securing a high standard of design which respects and enhances living
    conditions.
15. My attention has been drawn to an infill development in the vicinity which has been
    permitted with small gardens and limited outlook. Each proposal must be
    considered on its individual merits but in so far as the information has been made
    available to me, I have taken it into account. However, it does not persuade me to a
    different conclusion in respect of the provision of private amenity space in the
    proposal before me, given the harm I have concluded.
Living Environment: Existing Neighbouring Residents
16. There would be three roof lights along the elevation of the proposed dwelling facing
    northwards, one serving the bedroom, one over the staircase and one over the rear
    office room. Given that they would be set in the roof slope, and taking into account
    the siting of No 84 St Philips Avenue (No 84) in relation to the proposed dwelling, I
    do not consider that there would be any material harm to the living conditions of the
    neighbours to the north, through overlooking and loss of privacy. Furthermore, were
    no other matters of concern and planning permission to be granted, conditions
    could be imposed to control the form of the roof lights, in terms of the nature of the
    glazing and the extent to which they would be openable.
17. Given the distance between and the relationship between the existing dwelling to
    the north at No 84, I also do not consider that the proposed dwelling would have a
    material impact on the outlook from windows in the rear of the neighbouring
    property or its rear and side garden.
18. In terms of levels of light and overshadowing, I have limited technical information
    before me. The proposal would replace a garage with a two storey dwelling under a
    pitched roof, but taking account of the land levels and the relationship between the
    proposed dwelling and the existing house at No 84 and the size of its rear and side
    garden, I do not consider that the extent of potential overshadowing would justify
    withholding planning permission.
19. There is no window proposed in the rear elevation of the proposed new dwelling at
    first floor level. Furthermore, No 21 Roseland Avenue is sited a sufficient distance
    away from the proposed dwelling that I do not consider that there would be any

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision 6006541


     material harm to the living conditions of these neighbours in respect of overlooking
     and loss of privacy.
20. The proposed dwelling would be seen from some of the north facing windows in the
    northernmost wing of the flats at Sussex Court. However, given the distance
    between the proposed dwelling and the flats and the angle of view, I do not
    consider that there would be a material harm to the living conditions of the
    neighbours in Sussex Court with particular regard to outlook.
21. There would be a first floor window in the proposed dwelling facing southwards
    towards Sussex Court. This would be a secondary window to the one bedroom with
    the main window facing towards the front. The revised plan submitted at the appeal
    stage specifies that this window would be obscure glazed and fixed shut. There
    would also be two roof lights on the same elevation, one serving the bathroom and
    the other the rear office space. In order to protect the living conditions of the
    neighbours in the flats at Sussex Court, with particular regard to overlooking and
    loss of privacy and were no other matters of concern and planning permission to be
    granted, conditions could be imposed to control the form of the secondary window
    in the bedroom to align with the amended plan and for the roof lights, particularly in
    terms of the nature of the glazing and the extent to which they would be openable..
22. Subject to the imposition of conditions as set out above, I am satisfied that the
    proposal would not materially harm the living conditions of the existing neighbours,
    with particular regard to outlook, overlooking and loss of privacy as well as loss of
    light and overshadowing. There would be no conflict with Policy D10A of the Core
    Strategy, Policy HO6 of the Borough Plan and Policies DP3 and P3 of the
    Framework in terms of securing a high standard of design which respects and
    enhances living conditions.
Other Considerations
23. The further representations from the Appellant and the Council following the
    publication of the new Framework have raised whether a Flood Risk
    Assessment would be required under Policy F4 of the Framework. However, in
    the particular circumstances of this case and in view of the harm I have
    concluded under my main issues, this issue would not alter my assessment and
    decision. I have not therefore considered it necessary to seek further
    submissions in this specific regard as part of the appeal before me.

24. Neighbouring residents have raised concerns regarding parking issues and traffic
    congestion in the local area. There is no technical information before me, but the
    site lies within a residential area with some on-street parking available in the
    immediate vicinity. Given the small scale of the proposal with one off-street parking
    space provided within the site, I do not consider that concerns related to parking
    and highways matters would justify refusing planning permission. The Council did
    not raise such matters as a reason for refusal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
25. Although I have concluded that the living conditions of neighbouring residents
    would not be materially harmed, this does not outweigh my conclusions that the
    proposed development would unacceptably harm the character and appearance of
    the local area and would fail to provide a satisfactory living environment for future
    residents. Consequently, there would be conflict with the development plan policies


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
 Appeal Decision 6006541


     which are consistent with the Framework’s position of seeking a high quality of
     design which respects and re-enforces local character, as well as the living
     conditions of existing and future residents. As a result, I attach substantial weight to
     this conflict.
26. There is no dispute between the parties that the Council is unable to demonstrate a
    five year supply of deliverable housing sites, and that there is only a 1.4 years
    supply based on the most recent figures made available to me. There would be a
    modest social benefit in providing one additional housing unit in a generally
    accessible location and making efficient use of the land. Economic advantages
    would also arise from the construction and occupation of this dwelling. These
    benefits carry some weight in support of the proposal. I attach significant weight to
    the principle of housing delivery, and this includes in this situation where the
    housing supply is considerably short of requirements, but the benefits arising from
    a net addition of one unit would be relatively modest.
27. The Framework is clear at Policy S3 that there is a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development and that, as in this instance, Policy S4 should be applied
    when considering development proposals within settlements. Policy S4: 1 states
    that development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision making policies in the Framework.
    Policy S4:2 sets out some specific examples of where the benefits of approving the
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, including
    at Policy S4:2 c. where the proposal would fail to comply with one of the national
    decision making policies which states that development should be refused in
    specific circumstances.
28. I have already found that the proposal would conflict with Policy DP3 of the
    Framework and in particular paragraph 1, in so far as the proposal would not
    respond to its context and as a result would not integrate with and enhance its
    surroundings. Policy DP3:3 is clear that development proposals should be refused
    if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of this policy or relevant
    aspects of the principles of paragraph 2.
29. The adverse impacts I have concluded from the proposed development in terms of
    the harm to the character and appearance of the local area as well as the lack of a
    satisfactory living environment for future residents would substantially and
    demonstrably outweigh the benefits of permitting the scheme to proceed. The
    proposal is not therefore sustainable development for which there is a presumption
    in favour.
30. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, the
    proposals conflicts with the development plan as a whole and there are no
    considerations that would outweigh that conflict, including the Framework. The
    appeal is therefore dismissed.



L J Evans
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       5
