Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 July 2026
by E Worley BA (Hons) Dip EP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006656
School Road Business Park, School Road, Newton Abbot TQ12 2JU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Jamie Bartlett against the decision of Teignbridge District Council.
•    The application Ref is 24/00446/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the demolition of unit 3a, alterations to units 3, 6, 7, 8 and 9 and
     change of unit 3 from tattoo parlour to B2 General Industrial.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The Teignbridge Local Plan 2020-2040 (TLP) was adopted in May 2026, after the
       submission of the appeal. It replaces the policies in the Teignbridge Local Plan
       2013-2032 referred to by the Council in its refusal reason. I have therefore
       assessed the appeal proposal against the policies in the TLP. Opportunity was
       granted to both parties to comment on whether, and if so how, this adoption
       affected the proposal.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
       •   protected species;
       •   the living conditions of existing occupiers of the nearby dwellings and future
           occupiers of dwellings that might arise through the redevelopment of other
           parts of the wider site in the future; and
       •   housing supply.
Reasons
Protected species
4.     The appeal site, known as School Road Business Park, comprises a range of
       industrial buildings of varying sizes and designs, the majority of which are currently
       vacant and/or in a poor state of repair. It is located within Newton Abbot town
       centre, where the surrounding development includes residential and commercial
       uses as well as a school.
5.     The appeal proposal seeks the demolition of one of the units (3a) together with
       extensions and alterations to units 3, 6, 7, 8 and 9 as part of their refurbishment to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006656


       provide accommodation that is better suited to the operational requirements of
       modern businesses. Permission is also sought for the change of use of Unit 3 from
       a tattoo parlour to Use Class B2 General Industrial use.
6.     The proposed development includes significant works to the roofs of the buildings,
       alongside the demolition of unit 3a. Circular 06/20051 sets out that it is essential
       that the presence or otherwise of protected species, and the extent that they may
       be affected by the proposed development, is established before the planning
       permission is granted, otherwise all relevant material considerations may not have
       been addressed in making the decision. All wild birds are protected under the
       Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981; and all bat species are European protected
       species protected under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
       2017. A Preliminary Ecological Appraisal was not submitted with the planning
       application or the appeal.
7.     Natural England guidance2 sets out that a bat survey is required if a development
       is likely to negatively affect bats or their roost habitats, where the circumstances
       listed apply. These include situations where a site contains built structures that
       provide roosting opportunities for bats, such as buildings that have cracks,
       crevices and small openings, a roof that warms in the sun with a large roof space
       for flying or hanging tiles or timber cladding on south-facing walls; and the
       development site includes or is close to trees that provide commuting, foraging or
       roosting opportunities for bats. In addition, the advice indicates that a survey
       should be sought if a development proposal affects buildings that could support
       nesting birds. This may include a variety of types of buildings with gaps,
       overhangs, cavities and ledges.
8.     Thus, while the roofs of the buildings may comprise metal sheeting, fibre cement
       and/or shallow mono-pitch structures, they nevertheless contain features including
       gaps, crevices, eaves, cavities between building materials and roof structures
       which may be suitable for bats or birds. Moreover, such species frequently use
       buildings that are actively used for commercial, or industrial purposes, and are
       known to utilise urban environments for roosting, commuting and foraging.
       Accordingly, the buildings may therefore have some potential for bat roosting or
       bird nesting due to their construction. This, combined with the presence of mature
       trees in proximity to the buildings, suggests that there is a reasonable possibility
       that protected species, including bats or birds, could be present and affected by
       the proposed development. Consequently, in the absence of an appropriate
       survey, it has not been demonstrated the proposed development would not be
       harmful to any protected species, or that any such harm could be appropriately
       mitigated.
9.     I appreciate that the planning application was validated by the Council in the
       absence of a Bats and Birds in buildings Survey Report. My attention is also drawn
       by the appellant to the Council’s Planning Validation Guidance, which sets out that
       such surveys are required for applications involving the redevelopment of existing
       buildings involving specific works, unless located in highly urban areas. Even if the
       appeal site did fall within an area defined as such on the maps, this would not
       override the need for such surveys, having regard to relevant regulations and
       guidance in relation to protected species and the specific circumstances of the
1
  Circular 06/2005: Biodiversity and geological conservation - statutory obligations and their impact within the
planning system
2
  Bats: advice for making planning decisions, Natural England


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
Appeal Decision 6006656


         case. Moreover, notwithstanding the allocation of the site for residential
         development, the potential presence of protected species is a matter that must be
         appropriately assessed and addressed through the development process and
         would not necessarily prevent the site from being developed for housing. I have
         therefore reached my own conclusions based on the evidence before me.
10. Considering the above, I find that there is insufficient information to conclude that
    the proposal would not have a harmful impact on protected species. As such, it
    would fail to accord with the aims of Policy EN12 of the TLP which seek to protect
    legally protected species and Policy NANDP3 of the Newton Abbot Neighbourhood
    Plan 2016-2033, made June 2016 (NP), in so far as it indicates that development
    proposals should be accompanied by a biodiversity action and management plan,
    which should include details of mitigation measures and how the site is to be
    managed to maximise biodiversity.
Living conditions
11. The proposal includes the change of use of unit 3, which comprises 2 tattoo
    parlours across 2 floors, to a B2 General Industrial use. A B2 General Industrial
    use refers to industrial processes that, by their nature, have the potential to
    generate impacts such as that may result in impacts such as noise, vibration,
    odours, fumes, smoke, dust, and other emissions that may affect the living
    conditions of nearby occupiers. There are residential properties close to the appeal
    site, including flatted development immediately adjoining unit 3.
12. The appellant’s Noise Impact Assessment3 (NIA) concludes that the rating sound
    level would remain below the background sound level during the day and evening,
    resulting in a negligible likelihood of adverse noise impacts. However, the Council
    assert that, when applying acoustic feature corrections to the predicted noise
    levels, having regard to potentially impulsive and intermittent noise characteristics
    of a B2 use, which may involve handheld power tools or banging and hammering,
    the calculated rating level may change and be categorised as a Lowest
    Observable Effect Level and therefore become noticeable.
13. I am mindful of the appellant’s contention that penalties are not warranted in this
    case because the potential noise emanating from the site would be low, and the
    rating level remaining below background levels, having regard to factors including
    the construction of the building and configuration of openings, boundary
    treatments and potential uses of the surrounding industrial buildings. However, the
    appellant’s justification for not imposing the penalties does not appear to be
    particularly robust, as the end user is unknown and the potential effects cannot
    therefore be reliably assessed or definitively ruled out.
14. Nevertheless, the Council say that even when applying the corrections, the
    proposal would result in a rating level which could be categorised as a Lowest
    Observable Effect Level. While the Council has raised concerns as to whether the
    conditions suggested by the Environmental Health Officer would be enforceable
    and reasonable, no such concern is raised regarding those put forward by the
    appellant, which it suggests would assist with noise mitigation. On that basis it
    appears that noise effects could be mitigated, subject to the imposition of suitable
    planning conditions to agree a noise management plan and restrict operating
    hours, and no harm to living conditions would arise.
3
    Noise impact assessment for Jamie Bartlett by ACT Acoustics dated 13 August 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6006656


15. In light of the foregoing considerations, I find that the proposed development would
    not harm the living conditions of existing occupiers of the nearby dwellings or
    future occupiers of dwellings that might arise through the redevelopment of other
    parts of the wider site in the future. Accordingly, it would not conflict with the aims
    of Policies GP1, H12, EC1 and DW2 of the TLP which seek to achieve sustainable
    development which, among other things, safeguards the living conditions and
    amenity of current and future occupiers of the area.
Housing supply
16. The land forms part of a larger site identified as the Hopkins Lane Opportunity
    Area, which Policy GC10 of the TLP sets out is allocated for approximately 20
    homes. There is therefore an expectation that it will come forward for housing in
    the plan period. While the Council acknowledge that refurbishment of the existing
    units to support their occupation for business purposes would not prevent the
    delivery of housing on the site in the future, concern is expressed that the proposal
    would potentially hinder and likely delay the comprehensive redevelopment of the
    site and reduce its capacity to deliver the planned number of homes. Further, the
    introduction of a B2 General Industrial use, which may be incompatible with future
    residential development on the remainder of the site, could further impede housing
    delivery.
17. With the exception of unit 3, the proposal relates solely to alterations to the
    existing units, the use of which would remain unchanged. While I recognise the
    proposed enhancement works would be likely to make the buildings more
    attractive to future occupiers, there is nothing to suggest the buildings would not
    benefit from permitted development rights for the extension or alteration of a
    commercial, business or service establishment4, which would make them more
    attractive to potential occupiers.
18. The allocation of the wider site for residential development does not prevent the
    continuation of the existing uses at the site or automatically preclude investment in
    or refurbishment of existing buildings in policy terms. While I note the appellant’s
    intention that the site will continue to operate as an industrial estate for the
    foreseeable future, there is no certainty that this would remain the case for the
    longer term. As such, and in the absence of evidence that the refurbishment would
    hinder future residential redevelopment, to prejudice the delivery of the allocated
    housing site, the proposal, in so far as it relates to alterations to the existing
    buildings, cannot be assumed to conflict with Policy GC10.
19. However, the proposed change of use of unit 3, to an alternative business use,
    would fail to contribute to housing delivery and would therefore conflict with the
    aims of Policy CG10. That said, given the limited scale and location of the unit, on
    the edge of the site, and having regard to the flexibility inherent in Policy CG10, in
    terms of the number of units anticipated to be delivered, the proposal would be
    unlikely to prejudice the comprehensive redevelopment of the wider allocation in
    principle. Furthermore, for the reasons given above, the proposal would not
    generate activity that would adversely affect the living conditions of future
    occupiers of residential units on the wider site so as to preclude its development
    for such purposes.


4
 The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) Schedule 2, Part 7,
Class H


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
Appeal Decision 6006656


20. Consequently, while the proposed change of use, to a use other than the allocated
    residential use, would not strictly accord with Policy CG10, it would be unlikely to
    have a significant effect upon the overall number of units sought to be delivered or
    density of residential development across the wider site overall. I therefore
    conclude that the proposed development would not have an adverse effect on
    housing supply, and in that regard would not conflict with the aims of Policy CG10
    of the TLP.
Other Matters
21. The proposal would deliver benefits through the redevelopment of the existing
    business park, facilitating the provision of modern business units of a range of floor
    areas, which would contribute positively to the local economy. As such, it would
    accord with relevant policies in that regard, including Policy EC1 of the TLP in so
    far as it supports business development including the expansion or intensification
    of an existing business or employment site within a settlement, and Policy
    NANDP9 of the NP, which welcomes the delivery of workspace within the town
    which supports and encourages new business creation. The site is also in a
    location whereby it is accessible without the need to travel by car. Substantial
    weight is given to the economic benefits of proposals for commercial development
    which allow businesses to invest, expand and/or adapt, in accordance with Policy
    E2 1. a. of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework).
22. I recognise the redevelopment of the existing buildings on the site, some of which
    are in a poor state of repair, would offer benefits in terms of the character and
    appearance of the site and the area as a whole, which is welcomed by the Council,
    and to which I attribute moderate positive weight.
23. Furthermore, the proposal may be compliant with various other provisions of the
    development plan, including in terms of design and parking provision, however, the
    absence of harm or conflict with other relevant development plan policies is of
    neutral weight and does not weigh in favour of the proposal.
24. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies therein. In applying Policy S4, circumstances in
    which the benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects, include situations where the development
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.
25. National decision-making Policy N2 1. f. of the Framework sets out that, to
    contribute positively to the natural environment, and support nature’s recovery,
    development proposals should, among other things, minimise any adverse impacts
    on biodiversity. In the absence of an appropriate survey to establish the presence
    or otherwise of protected species, it is not possible to fully assess the impact of the
    proposed development on biodiversity, including protected species, which is a
    matter of primary importance. As such, in the absence of any evidence to
    demonstrate the proposal would not give rise to harm in that regard, the proposal
    would conflict with Policy N2 of the Framework. Thus, the benefits of approving the
    development are therefore substantially outweighed by adverse effects in this


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6006656


       case, and the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in favour of
       sustainable development set out in Policy S3 of the Framework.
26. While I note the appellant’s frustration with the way in which the Council dealt with
    the planning application, the Council’s conduct during the application process is
    not determinative to the planning merits of the case.
Conclusion
27. For the reasons set out, I have found that the proposed development would not
    have an adverse effect on housing supply, nor would it cause harm to the living
    conditions of the occupiers of the existing or potential future nearby residential
    properties. However, it has not been demonstrated that it would avoid or mitigate
    harm to protected species. Accordingly, it would conflict with the development plan
    as a whole and material considerations, including the provisions of the Framework,
    have not been shown to carry sufficient weight to indicate that a decision should
    be taken otherwise than in accordance with it.
28. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



E Worley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
