Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6006409
1 Blewitts Cottages, New Road, Rainham RM13 8SL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Ghulam Ahmed against the decision of the London Borough of Havering
    Council.
•   The application reference is P1390.25.
•   The development proposed is a change of use from a storage unit to a workshop.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are the effect on the character and appearance of the area; the
   effect on the living conditions of the residents of 2 Blewitts Cottages and Roma
   Cottage with regard to noise; and the effect on the living conditions of the residents
   of 1 Blewitts Cottages with regard to the provision of amenity space.
Reasons
3. The proposal would allow for the sale and repair of motorbikes from within the
   garage to the rear of this property. The use has already commenced. The
   application form suggests that the use would fall within Use Class E. However, the
   proposal is for both the repair of motorbikes and the sale of motorbikes. This
   represents two uses. The selling and/or displaying of motor vehicles, including
   motorbikes, would be a sui generis use outside of Use Class E. Even if the repair
   element represents an industrial process that can be carried out in a residential
   area without detriment to its amenity as required by Use Class E, if pared with a sui
   generis use, the use overall would fall to be considered as sui generis. As it has not
   been demonstrated that one use is ancillary to the other, I have assessed the
   proposal on this basis.
4. The description of development suggests that the garage was a storage unit. No
   information has been provided with regard to the lawful use of the building.
Character and appearance
5. With regard to the character and appearance of the area, despite the residential
   properties on the corners with Dunedin Road and New Road, Cherry Tree Lane
   has a commercial character in the vicinity of the site. There is a commercial garage
   opposite with high metal fences and to the north there is an industrial style building
   with a high concrete wall. The side of the appeal property has an industrial

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6006409


     appearance, having a high palisade fence and steel gate. Although the council’s
     report makes reference to an enforcement case relating to fencing, it is not clear if
     this relates to this fence; or whether the matter has been resolved. As the fence
     does not form part of the proposal and the council have not indicated that changes
     to it are being pursued, I have assumed that it would remain.
6. The use results in little outward change to the character and appearance of the
   area. When the gate is open, which was the case during my visit, there are views
   into the yard which had a number of motorbikes in it. This increased the
   commercial appearance of the site. However, given that the appearance of the
   property is unlikely to change significantly should this appeal fail, I am not satisfied
   that the use is harmful to the character of Cherry Tree Lane.
Living conditions of adjoining residents
7. Very little information has been provided with regard to the previous lawful use of
   the garage or previous noise levels associated with it. No measurements or
   calculations have been provided with regard to the noise levels that result from the
   repair of motorbikes in the garage. Similarly, there is no evidence as to the noise
   that results from the comings and goings of customers, described as being up to
   ten a day. It is not clear whether these visitors drive into the site. If looking to buy a
   motorbike, it seems likely that customers would want to see and hear the bike
   running but no information in this regard has been presented.
8. The appellant describes that the workshop activity is limited and does not operate
   at a scale comparable to a commercial garage. It is suggested that the activity is
   contained entirely within the existing garage and the activity is not considered to
   generate excessive noise, disturbance or traffic beyond what could reasonably be
   expected within a residential setting. The site already benefits from access, and it is
   suggested that the use does not create significant additional vehicle movements.
9. The scale of the operation has been described to the council’s officer and is
   recorded in their report. It sets out that the equipment used consists mainly of hand
   tools with occasional use of a drill or air compressor for tasks such as inflating
   tyres. The workshop is used solely for bike repairs and related work. There can be
   up to ten appointments a day lasting up to 30 minutes with the hours of operation
   being Monday - Saturday between 10:00am and 6:00pm.
10. Although noise levels along Cherry Tree Lane are high, it cannot be concluded, on
    the basis of the information submitted, that the repair of motorbikes; the starting
    and running of bike engines; or the noise levels generated by customers arriving
    and leaving, would not be significantly greater than the lawful use of this property. A
    noise report would be necessary to assess the background noise; and measure or
    calculate the noise resulting from the current use. It would also be necessary to
    identify any noise increases in the adjoining gardens and at the faces of habitable
    room windows in the neighbouring properties, including the accommodation within
    1 Blewitts Cottages.
11. The garage door and the area outside it are directly adjacent to the garden of the
    neighbouring residential property, number 2 Blewitts Cottages. Although there is a
    high fence between and the noise environment is not quiet, without a noise
    assessment, I am not persuaded that the use would not result in unacceptable
    noise and disturbance for those residents when in their garden. The same is the
    case with regard to the property behind, Roma Cottage. Floor plans have not been

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision: 6006409


     provided, but there is a first floor window very close to the boundary which may be
     a habitable room in 2 Blewitts Cottages. There is also a first floor window to the
     rear of 1 Blewitts Cottages. It would need to be demonstrated that noise from the
     garage and the area outside it, would not harm the living conditions of residents
     when in their property.
12. As no information has been provided, I am not satisfied that the living conditions of
    adjacent residents would not be harmed as a result of noise and disturbance.
13. The council are also concerned about the loss of amenity space for the residents of
    1 Blewitts Cottages. No information has been provided with regard to the internal
    layout of the property although the council advise that it is split into two flats. What
    is clear is that the space left to the side of the property would offer residents very
    little in terms of useable amenity space and it would be of a very poor quality given
    its narrow form and the dominance of the palisade fencing.
14. If the garage and parking area were in use for domestic purposes by the residents
    of 1 Blewitts Cottages, the flats would have a much greater level of amenity,
    including access to the land behind the garage. It is not clear however whether this
    was historically the case before this use commenced. The information provided is
    not sufficient to allow a full assessment of the living conditions of the residents of 1
    Blewitts Cottage with regard to amenity space. However, it has not been
    demonstrated that this relationship would be acceptable with regard to noise and
    disturbance.
15. I am mindful that no objections have been received from the neighbouring
    residents. However, despite this, based on the limited information presented and
    the lack of a noise assessment in particular, it has not been demonstrated that the
    use does not result in unacceptable harm to the living conditions of the adjacent
    residents. The proposal would therefore be at odds with Policies 7 and 34 of the
    Havering Local Plan 2021 and Policy D14 of the London Plan 2021. It would also
    conflict with the National Planning Policy Framework which seeks to ensure a high
    standard of amenity for existing occupiers.
Other matters
16. Whilst the appellant considers that the workshop activity is limited and does not
    operate at a scale comparable to a commercial garage, as an application has been
    made, I have assumed that the intensity of use and the type of use, requires
    consent. The proposal would result in a formal use that would not be restricted to
    being used by the current owner or being associated with the residential use of 1
    Blewitts Cottage. As no conditions have been suggested to require such ties, it
    must be considered as a separate and distinct use.
17. The appellant considers that the proposal allows the building to remain in
    productive use without the need for further development or expansion and that this
    aligns with sustainable planning principles which support the efficient use of
    existing structures. I acknowledge the benefits of a more efficient use of land and
    the benefits of economic activity, both of which are supported by the Framework.
18. Although no conditions have been suggested, I have considered the potential for
    conditions to control the use and the times of operation. However, in the absence of
    a noise assessment, I am not satisfied that such conditions would adequately
    protect the living conditions of the residents that adjoin this garage. I conclude that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision: 6006409


     the matters in favour of the proposal are not sufficient to outweigh the potential for
     harm to the living conditions of the residents of 1 and 2 Blewitts Cottages and
     Roma Cottage with regard to noise and disturbance. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
