Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by Robert Naylor BSc (Hons) MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6006632
Land at Five Oaks, Lewes Road, Laughton, East Sussex BN8 6BJ
•      The appeal is made under section 174 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the 1990 Act) as
       amended.
•      The appeal is made by Mr. Stephen Mouland against an enforcement notice issued by Wealden
       District Council.
•      The notice was issued on 17 February 2026.
•      The breach of planning control as alleged in the notice is without planning permission, change of use
       of the Land from use as a sand school and equestrian use to use as a domestic garden land.
•      The requirements of the notice are:
       (i) Stop using the Land as domestic garden land.
       (ii) Remove all domestic items, furniture, goods, chattels and paraphernalia from the Land.
•      The period for compliance with the requirements is four months after this notice takes effect.
•      The appeal is proceeding on the grounds set out in section 174(2) (f) and (g) of the 1990 Act (as
       amended).

Formal Decision
1.       The enforcement notice is quashed.
The Enforcement Notice
2.       In accordance with section 173(1) of the 1990 Act (as amended), an enforcement
         notice must state, ‘the matters which appear to the local planning authority to
         constitute the breach of planning control’ and it must be stated in such a way that it
         ‘enables any person on whom a copy of it is served to know what those matters
         are’ (section 173(2)). In other words, the allegation must be clear.
3.       The enforcement notice is targeted against an alleged change of use of land from
         a sand school and equestrian use to use as a domestic garden area. At the site
         visit it was apparent that the sand school and buildings such as stables and barns
         associated with an equestrian use were still in situ, alongside a partially complete
         raised timber deck, a swimming pool, balustrade and fencing, the subject of a
         separate appeal1. Part of the land also appeared domestic in character, with other
         sections appearing as fallow land.
4.       The appellant raises concerns in respect to the accuracy of the plan attached to
         the notice, given that it does not specifically identify the location of the alleged
         breach to use as a domestic garden, but encompasses the entire site owned by
         the appellant. This provides confusion in respect to exactly which piece of land the
         alleged breach relates.
5.       Consequently, I have concerns on whether the notice is a valid one and, if not,
         whether it is capable of correction. Pursuant to section 176 of the 1990 Act (as


1
    PINS Ref: 6006631

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6006632


       amended), I have the power to correct any defect, error or mis-description,
       provided I am satisfied there will be no injustice to either party.
6.     I find that there is confusion pertaining to the exact location of land used for
       domestic purposes, thus, it is unclear what sections would need to change in order
       to restore the land and thus comply with the notice. The description of the alleged
       breach and the requirements of the enforcement notice are therefore imprecise,
       and there is no additional information attached to the notice to provide clarification.
       Furthermore, given the vague nature of the plan, this does not assist in these
       matters either. A correction of the notice and/or the plan could potentially broaden
       the scope of the notice resulting in injustice to the appellant.
7.     For the reasons given above, I conclude that the notice does not specify with
       sufficient clarity the alleged breach of planning control or the land where the
       breach of planning control is alleged to have taken place. There are also
       ambiguities within both the allegation and the required steps to be carried out. I
       find, therefore, that the enforcement notice, as issued, is invalid. Accordingly, it is
       directed that the enforcement notice is quashed.
Overall Conclusion
8.     For the reasons given above, I conclude that the enforcement notice does not
       specify with sufficient clarity the land where the breach of planning control is
       alleged to have taken place.
9.     It is not open to me to correct the error in accordance with my powers under
       section 176(1)(a) of the 1990 Act (as amended), since injustice would be caused
       were I to do so. The enforcement notice is invalid and will be quashed.
10. In these circumstances, the appeal on the grounds (f) and (g) set out in section
    174(2) of the 1990 Act (as amended) do not fall to be considered.

Robert Naylor
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
