Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 May 2026 by A Morrison MTCP MRTPI
Decision by Martin Seaton BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007395
57 Lock Road, Broadheath, Altrincham, WA14 4HQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by John Quinn against the decision of Trafford Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 117662/HHA/25.
•   The development proposed is access to a proposed drive for single vehicle parking.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for access to a proposed
   drive for single vehicle parking at 57 Lock Road, Broadheath, Altrincham WA14
   4HQ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 117662/HHA/25, and the
   plans submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
              Location Plan, Reference TQRQM25320115453167, 16 November 2025
              Site Plan, Reference TQRQN25320123844544, 16 November 2025
              Proposed Plan, 11 October 2025
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall not be brought into use until
              pedestrian visibility splays of 2m x 2m have been provided each side of the
              vehicular access measured from and along the highway boundary. Such
              splays shall be within the red line of the site and shall thereafter be
              maintained free from obstruction exceeding 0.6m above the level of the
              adopted public highway.
     4)       The dropped kerb hereby approved shall be constructed to utilise and retain
              the existing kerb stones.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. In processing the application, the Council amended the description of development
   from that entered on the application form. There is no evidence before me that the
   appellant agreed to a revised description in writing, and I am satisfied that the use

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007395


        of the original description in the banner heading and formal decision above is
        appropriate. However, I have removed wording from the original description that
        does not describe development.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. There have been some layout and subsequent changes to
   incorporate paragraphs into a policy-style format, as well as minor relevant
   alterations to the ways in which heritage matters are considered. However, there
   are no substantive changes in relation to the assessment of transport impacts as
   concerns highway safety. I am satisfied that, having reviewed the relevant changes,
   they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main issue or indeed
   the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since the parties would not therefore be
   prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
             •   The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                 the area, including whether it would preserve or enhance the character or
                 appearance of the Linotype Conservation Area; and
             •   The effect of the proposed development on highway safety, having particular
                 regard to visibility.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and appearance, including the CA
6. The Council’s evidence indicates that a previous planning permission from June
   20181 included the creation of a vehicular access and a parking space in the same
   position as the appeal proposal. My attention has not been drawn to any material
   physical changes to the site or its surroundings since that permission was issued,
   including in respect of highways conditions and considerations.
7. The appeal site is within the Linotype Conservation Area (the CA). The statutory
   duty set out in Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
   Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires special attention to be paid to the desirability of
   preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a Conservation Area.
8. The CA comprises a purpose-built 19th-century housing estate built for employees
   of the Linotype & Machinery Company Ltd factory. Having regard to its Character
   Area Appraisal (CAA), the CA’s special interest and significance stems
   predominantly from the large-scale survival of the original terraced estate plan
   form, across which are a distinctive variety of architectural styles. In relation to
   boundary treatments, the CAA notes the absence of a common historic pattern,
   with front gardens presently variously remaining open or enclosed to differing
   degrees by a variety of walls, fences and hedging. Vehicle parking mainly takes
   place on the roadside across the CA, although a number of corner properties
   benefit from off-street parking within their curtilages.
9. The appeal property occupies an irregularly shaped corner plot at the end of a
   ‘Style Six’ terrace and retains the principal architectural characteristics associated

1
    Council’s reference: 93955/HHA/18


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007395


     with that house type. It features a very shallow and open front garden, while its
     curved side and rear garden, located adjacent to the junction of Bemrose Avenue
     and Lock Road, is enclosed by timber panel fence set within concrete plinths and
     posts, with a tall evergreen hedge positioned behind. The CA’s Conservation Area
     Management Plan (CAMP) describes solid timber fences as inappropriate to the
     area.
10. Reflecting the CAA’s findings, I observed Lock Road to be characterised by a range
    of typically low front and side boundary treatments, including walls and fences.
    Where hedges are present, they are generally also of a modest height. Open or
    partially open frontages are also common throughout the CA, including at some
    corner plots where vehicular accesses have been formed to serve small driveways.
    Against this backdrop, the utilitarian fence and large hedge at the appeal site
    appear anomalous within the street scene and neither individually nor cumulatively
    make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the CA.
11. The proposed parking space, to be located alongside the gable end of the appeal
    property within the side garden, would require the partial removal of the section of
    fence and hedge that currently fronts Lock Road, set behind a shallow grass verge.
    This limited opening up of the frontage, including hard surfacing of the part of the
    current verge, would not appear out of keeping with the mixed surrounding
    streetscape. Nor would it disrupt any consistent pattern of boundary treatment or
    result in the loss of an enclosure feature that adds to the overall quality of the area.
12. The proposal would not involve the conversion of a front garden to form a driveway,
    and it would not conflict the aspirations of the CAMP in this respect. I acknowledge
    that part of the established hedge alongside the highway junction would be
    removed, but no evidence has been provided to demonstrate that it benefits from
    any statutory protection. Moreover, the resulting increase in openness along this
    boundary would be more consistent with, and sympathetic to, the prevailing
    character of the locality than the existing arrangement.
13. I have been referred to guidance in the Trafford Design Code Supplementary
    Planning Document (TDC), adopted in 2024, as representing a change in
    circumstances since the previous permission. Due to its individual width and
    configuration within the terrace and wider streetscene, the appeal site is inherently
    a different layout to its neighbouring properties. Nevertheless, by virtue of its
    positioning to the side of the dwelling, adjoining its established garden, and set
    back from the pavement edge, the proposed single parking space would not appear
    visually dominant within the site frontage. Read as one of a number of small
    driveways on corner-positioned plots in the CA, it would also not be contextually
    inappropriate within the locality.
14. On this basis I conclude that the proposed development would not be harmful to
    the character and appearance of the area, and would preserve the character and
    appearance of the Linotype Conservation Area. It would thus accord with the
    requirements of the Act, together with Policies JP-P1 and JP-P2 of the Places for
    Everyone Joint Development Plan Document 2022 – 2039 and Policies R1 and L7
    of the Trafford Local Plan Core Strategy 2012 (Core Strategy). Taken together,
    amongst other things, these policies require development to be of a contextually
    appropriate design that is reflective of local distinctiveness, and to conserve and
    preserve the historic environment, including conservation areas.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007395


15. It would furthermore accord with the TDC, CAA, CAMP, the Council’s Guide for
    Designing House Extensions & Alterations SPD and the Framework, all of which
    seek that development integrates with its surroundings, including by
    complementing the distinctively positive qualities of a conservation area.
Highway safety
16. The proposed access to the 3.1 metres width parking space would be positioned on
    Lock Road, close to its junction with Bemrose Avenue and a short distance north of
    the nearby mini-roundabout. Due to the absence of turning space within the site,
    vehicles would not be able to enter and leave in a forward gear, necessitating a
    reversing manoeuvre either into the property or from the property onto the highway.
17. During my site visit, I observed that vehicle speeds were influenced by the
    prevalence of on-street parking, the closely spaced street pattern with regular
    junctions, and the presence of the mini-roundabout. Collectively, these features
    appeared to have a considerable traffic-calming effect, with speeds generally
    remaining well below the 30mph speed limit. I also noted traffic passing by the site
    to be relatively infrequent. While I recognise this was only a snapshot in time, it
    supports the contention that Lock Road mainly functions for local access, this being
    consistent with its situation between Lawrence Road and Weldon Road, both of
    which appear to accommodate through traffic. In addition, I noted that the opposite
    end of short Bemrose Avenue connects with Weldon Road, indicating that
    movements through its junction with Lock Road are likely to be particularly
    infrequent.
18. The Council’s Highways consultation response refers to the TDC’s specified
    minimum 3.3 metres width for single driveways and states that visibility splays are
    required to be provided within the adopted highway in accordance with Manual for
    Streets as well as pedestrian visibility splays of 2 metres x 2 metres. Although the
    Council’s delegated report further notes that the proposal would be located closer
    than the normally required 10 metres from a road junction, there is no evidence
    before me that this concern was raised in the Highways consultation response.
19. The proposed plans do not demonstrate highway visibility splays, nevertheless, due
    to the positioning of the appeal dwelling and retained part of the boundary
    treatment as shown, it is evident that only limited splays would be able to be
    achieved in either direction. However, owing to the road configuration around the
    mini-roundabout, there is no oncoming traffic along the nearside of Lock Road that
    runs perpendicular to the proposed access. During my site visit, I observed that
    adequate visibility would be available towards the far side of the carriageway,
    allowing drivers emerging from the site to see vehicles exiting the roundabout and
    travelling north along Lock Road, and vice versa.
20. In relation to southbound traffic on Lock Road, double yellow lines are in place at
    the corners of the junction with Bemrose Avenue, preventing on-street parking
    immediately to the north of the proposed access and thereby maintaining visibility
    at the junction. These restrictions would also enhance intervisibility between drivers
    approaching from the north and vehicles emerging from the access. Furthermore,
    there are examples of driveways serving nearby properties along this section of
    road that similarly do not provide space for vehicles to turn within the site. Drivers
    accessing properties in the area could therefore reasonably be expected to be
    familiar with such conditions, and therefore the potential for a reversing manoeuvre.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007395


     The Council has provided no evidence that any of the existing off-street parking
     spaces within the Conservation Area have resulted in highway safety concerns.
21. Overall, having careful regard to the local highway conditions, the low traffic
    volumes and vehicle speeds observed during my site visit, and the fact that a single
    vehicle would be expected to enter and leave the appeal site only infrequently, I am
    satisfied that the likelihood of conflict with other highway users would be low and
    therefore would be acceptable.
22. In respect of the modest shortfall in the width of the parking space against the TDC
    standard, I am mindful that the SPD provides guidance rather than prescriptive
    requirements. As no harm has been identified arising from this deficiency, it would
    not be unacceptable on this basis alone.
23. In reaching a view based on the individual circumstances of this case, I recognise
    the Council’s concern that highway visibility splays have not been demonstrated but
    I am also mindful that the National Planning Policy Framework sets out that
    permission should only be prevented or refused on highways grounds if there
    would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety. For the reasons set out, I
    conclude that the proposed access would not lead to an unacceptable impact on
    highway safety in this specific instance. No conflict would therefore arise with Policy
    L7 of the Core Strategy and the Framework in so far as relates to highway safety.
Conditions
24. The Council has suggested two conditions in addition to the statutory
    commencement condition, the first of which concerns requiring compliance with the
    approved plans. I agree that a condition specifying the approved plans is necessary
    to provide certainty. The second amounts to an informative concerning the need to
    gain further approval under Section 184 of the Highways Act 1980 and does not
    therefore meet the tests of conditions as are set out in the Framework.
25. A condition requiring standard pedestrian visibility splays is necessary in the
    interests of highway safety, to which I am satisfied can be provided as specified,
    based on the approved plans. Finally, a condition requiring the incorporation of the
    existing kerb stones to the new access is necessary in the interests of the
    preservation of the character and appearance of the CA.
Conclusion and Recommendation
26. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed subject to the conditions set out.

A Morrison
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
27. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed, subject to the conditions listed.

Martin Seaton
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
