Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by L N Hughes BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007771
Church View, Wilsthorpe Road, Braceborough PE9 4NX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr B Morris against the decision of South Kesteven District Council.
•    The application Ref is S26/0117.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a detached bungalow.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the area, with particular regard to the preservation or enhancement
       of the Braceborough Conservation Area.
Reasons
3.     The appeal site comprises a triangular part of the garden of the dwelling of Church
       View. A large field lies to its east on the other side of Wilsthorpe Road, with
       dwellings bordering its other extents. The proposal is for a single storey, two
       bedroom dwelling with an attached garage and new driveway off Wilsthorpe Road,
       with associated landscaping, parking, and ecological enhancements.
4.     The South Kesteven District Council Local Plan 2011-2036 (‘the LP’) Policy SP3
       supports infill development in settlements subject to various criteria and being in
       accordance with all other relevant LP Policies. I concur with the Council that its
       criteria (a) to (c) would be met, as the dwelling would be within a substantially built
       up frontage and within the main built up part of the settlement, and would not
       unacceptably impact on neighbouring amenity.
5.     However, although it would not extend the pattern of development beyond the
       existing built form as required by criterion (d), that criterion also requires
       development to be in keeping with the character of the area and sensitive to the
       setting of adjacent properties. The prevailing grain of the nearby development
       comprises detached dwellings within substantial grounds. The location and
       position of the proposed dwelling would contrast with this context, being rather
       cramped within its plot.
6.     Although these overall plot sizes are not fully perceptible from the public realm, the
       new dwelling would be closer to its host than the relationship between other
       nearby detached dwellings, which would be noticeable due to the new driveway
       opening in that location. Moreover, the site is prominently positioned on entering

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007771


       and exiting the village. The dwelling’s position significantly forwards of the building
       line of the three dwellings to the south, would create undue dominance in the
       streetscene, and draw attention to this smaller plot size. This would be despite its
       single storey form and a lower height than its host, appropriate materials, and
       enhanced landscaping. In particular, at present when travelling northwards,
       Church View appears as the final dwelling before reaching open countryside. The
       prominent position of the new dwelling would change this open relationship, and
       impacting the view of the mature trees to the north.
7.     I have taken account of the examples of recent permissions for individual new
       dwellings in Braceborough, but their site contexts appear markedly different. Two
       are conversions, and one is a grand dwelling set back from the road within a
       spacious plot, such that they do not lead me to a different conclusion with regard
       to the impact of the appeal proposal within its own streetscene context.
8.     The site lies within the Braceborough Conservation Area (CA), and so I have a
       statutory duty under section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to pay special attention to the desirability of
       preserving or enhancing its character or appearance. The Framework Section 16
       also requires that great weight should be given to the conservation of designated
       heritage assets. The LP Policy EN6 broadly reiterates the Framework guidance,
       whereby the Council will seek to protect and enhance heritage assets and their
       settings.
9.     The significance of the CA arises from its historic village origins and architectural
       interest. The Grade I listed Church of St Margaret lies at its heart, dating from the
       C14th with later additions and alterations, and is notable for its landmark medieval
       tower with broach spire. The CA includes several Grade II listed farmhouses
       dating from the C17th, indicating the historic significance of the settlement’s links
       with the church. It also includes some open fields, including that directly opposite
       the appeal site.
10. Church View itself dates from the early 1980s, with the majority of the Wilsthorpe
    Road dwellings dating from the second half of the C20th, and so do not hold
    historic significance being set away from the historic village core. The church tower
    is clearly visible from Wilsthorpe Road alongside the appeal site, being a
    significant view, but the appeal dwelling would not impede the appreciation of this.
    Nor would it block the significant view north towards East Glen River, but it would
    impact upon this broader vista as identified above.
11. The Council’s Officer Report concludes that the significance of the CA would be
    retained, as the proposal would not impede these two significant views. The
    Conservation Officer’s consultee response did not fully conclude whether
    significance would be harmed, but recommended a repositioning of the building to
    be in line with the existing buildings in order to accord with the Framework
    paragraph 215. That paragraph requires any less than substantial harm to the
    significance of a CA to be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal,
    which is also reiterated by the LP Policy EN6.
12. On the basis of the proposal’s impact to this gateway to the CA, I do find there
    would be less than substantial harm to the significance of the CA as a designated
    heritage asset, albeit this would be at the lowest end of that spectrum of harm to
    which the Framework paragraph 212 requires that I give great weight. I address



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007771


         the proposal’s benefits in my overall planning balance below, and so reserve
         judgement about compliance with the Framework in this regard.
13. Overall, the proposal would cause significant harm to the character and
    appearance of the area, and so would conflict with the LP Policy SP3(d) as
    outlined above, and also with Policy DE1. That Policy requires development
    proposals to make a positive contribution to the local distinctiveness and character
    of the area, to not have an adverse impact on the streetscene or settlement
    pattern, and to be of an appropriate scale and massing. There would also be
    conflict with elements of the Design Guidelines for Rutland and South Kesteven
    Supplementary Planning Document, with relation to consistent building lines,
    scale, and being sensitive to the setting of adjacent properties.
Other Matters
14. The proposed design would provide a range of energy efficiency measures, which
    I give minor weight in favour. The proposed lighting strategy is not itself a benefit,
    acting rather as suitable mitigation for the new proposal.
15. The Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) calculations identify there would be in excess of
    10% BNG on site, based on new planting and other habitat enhancements to the
    area of existing garden which would be retained. However, the Small Sites Metric
    User Guide1 states that habitats created within private gardens should only be
    recorded as ‘urban - vegetated garden’ or ‘urban - unvegetated garden’, and also
    that newly planted trees sited within private gardens should not be counted. This is
    on the basis that post-development private gardens have no public access, and
    biodiversity net gains cannot be legally secured. Although not further clarified in
    the Guide, this is generally because of enforceability matters, and conflict and
    pressure from future owners, such that 30 year maintenance cannot be
    guaranteed. The Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan (HMMP) does not
    reference any legal agreement which could overcome this issue.
16. Nonetheless, the Planning Practice Guidance2 advises that it would generally be
    inappropriate for decision makers to refuse an application on the grounds that the
    biodiversity gain objective will not be met. This is therefore a matter which could be
    clarified through the standard biodiversity gain condition were I to allow the
    appeal. However, this does mean that at this stage and without certainty over the
    extent of on-site provision, I only take account for delivery of the statutory 10%
    BNG. In conjunction with the site’s small size and baseline, I therefore give this
    minor weight in favour.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
17. The Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year housing land supply, with supply being
    at 4.07 years. As such, Paragraph 11(d) of the National Planning Policy
    Framework ('the Framework') (2024) requires granting permission unless one of
    two criteria are met. Criterion (i) identifies where the application of the Framework
    policies that protect areas or assets of particular importance provides a strong
    reason for refusing the proposed development, with footnote 7 including the CA as
    a designated heritage asset.



1
    Statutory Biodiversity Metric User Guide (Defra, February 2024, Last updated: July 2025).
2
    Paragraph: 019 Reference ID: 74-019-20240214.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   3
Appeal Decision 6007771


18. Although I found above that the proposal would cause harm to the CA, this would
    be at the lowest end of the spectrum. In considering the public benefits against this
    in accordance with the Framework paragraph 215 and the LP policy EN6, I find the
    heritage harm would not provide a strong reason for refusing the development.
19. The Framework Paragraph 11(d) criterion (ii) thus requires granting permission
    unless any adverse impacts of doing so would significantly and demonstrably
    outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the Framework taken
    as a whole, having particular regard to key policies for directing development to
    sustainable locations, making effective use of land, securing well-designed places,
    and providing affordable homes.
20. In support of the proposal, Braceborough is identified as a ‘smaller village’ within
    the LP Policy SP2 settlement hierarchy, and the site is a sustainable location
    where small infill is supported in principle. The Framework seeks to significantly
    boost the supply of homes, and so supports the provision of an additional open
    market dwelling. The appellant identifies that it would make efficient use of under-
    utilised garden land, albeit the land is not previously developed. Paragraph 73
    identifies that small and medium sized sites can make an important contribution to
    meeting the housing requirement of an area, and gives specific support to the
    development of windfall sites. Overall, I give moderate weight to the benefit of a
    new dwelling. There would also be small-scale economic and social benefits
    associated with the construction and occupation of the dwelling, to which I give
    minor weight. The Framework also supports energy efficiency measures and BNG.
21. However, the Framework paragraph 131 identifies that the creation of high quality,
    beautiful and sustainable buildings and places is fundamental to what the planning
    and development process should achieve, and that good design is a key aspect of
    sustainable development. There would be conflict with paragraph 135, which
    amongst other matters, requires developments to be visually attractive as a result
    of good architecture and layout, sympathetic to local character and history,
    including the surrounding built environment and landscape setting, and to maintain
    a strong sense of place. The proposal would therefore not secure a well-designed
    place. Paragraph 139 identifies that development that is not well designed should
    be refused.
22. Taking the policies of the Framework as a whole, I find that the adverse impacts of
    granting permission would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits in
    this case. Accordingly, the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development as a material consideration outlined at
    paragraph 11 of the Framework. I have already identified that there would be a
    development plan conflict with Policies SP3 and DE1.
23. The development would therefore conflict with the development plan as a whole,
    and with the Framework. With no other material considerations indicating
    otherwise, for the reasons given above I conclude that the appeal is dismissed.


L N Hughes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
