Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 July 2026
by N Unwin BSc (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007163
Prince William Inn, Beacon Lane, Dalton, Lancashire WN8 7RU
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
     •     The appeal is made by Mr Richard Lowe of Cuerden Developments against the decision of
           West Lancashire Borough Council.
     •     The application Ref is 2024/0224/FUL.
     •     The development proposed is described as the: conversion and restoration of the former Prince
           William public house to form a single dwelling. Demolition of existing structures and re-use of
           volume to form a single detached dwelling on land formerly used as a beer garden/children's
           play area.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the conversion and
   restoration of the former Prince William public house to form a single dwelling.
   Demolition of existing structures and re-use of volume to form a single detached
   dwelling on land formerly used as a beer garden/children's play area at Prince
   William Inn, Beacon Lane, Dalton, Lancashire WN8 7RU in accordance with the
   terms of the application, Ref 2024/0224/FUL, subject to the conditions in the
   attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an opportunity
   to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework in my
   decision.
3. The description of development in the heading above has been taken from the
   planning application form. However, on the appeal form a different wording has
   been entered. Neither of the main parties has provided written confirmation that a
   revised description of development has been agreed. Accordingly, I have used the
   one given on the original application.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
           •    Whether the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the
                Green Belt having regard to the Framework; and
           •    The effect of the proposed development upon the host property as a non-
                designated heritage asset and the character and appearance of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007163


Reasons
Whether the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt
5. The fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping
   land permanently open; and that the essential characteristics of Green Belts are
   their openness and their permanence.
6. The Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to
   the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special circumstances.
   Development is considered inappropriate save for a number of exceptions, set out
   within Policy GB7, which includes the redevelopment of previously developed land,
   which would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
7. Policy GN1 of the West Lancashire Local Plan (2013) (the Local Plan) and
   Supplementary Planning Document Development in the Green Belt (2015) (the
   SPD) require development within the Green Belt to be assessed against national
   policy.
8. The appeal site is located within the Green Belt and formed of a former public house
   including outbuildings, hard surfacing and former beer garden associated with it.
   The proposal would convert the former public house to a dwelling and erect a new
   dwelling within the former beer garden.
9. The Framework’s definition of previously developed land is land which has been
   lawfully developed and is or was occupied by a permanent structure and any fixed
   surface infrastructure associated with it, including the curtilage of the developed
   land. However, it should not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage should be
   developed.
10.Whilst the former beer garden is somewhat overgrown, it is well related to the public
   house, adjacent to the north-east of the main building with no physical separation of
   the two and as such its functional and visual relationship to the pub remains legible.
   The beer garden contains a former play area and was likely utilised by customers of
   the pub, forming a functional part of the commercial premises. As such, on the
   evidence before me, I see no reason why it should be excluded from the definition of
   previously developed land. Therefore, the proposal would form the redevelopment
   of previously developed land.
11.The proposal involves the partial demolition of the former pub and outbuildings and
   other structures within the appeal site. The volume lost through demolition is
   effectively replaced by that of the new dwelling, thus mitigating the effect of the
   proposal on openness. The Council’s submissions confirm that the proposal would
   at the least preserve the existing openness of the Green Belt and that they raise no
   concerns about the impact on openness. I see no reason to disagree.
12.The Framework states that one of the essential features of the Green Belt is its
   openness. Openness is the absence of development notwithstanding the degree of
   visibility of the land in question from the public realm. Openness has both spatial
   and visual aspects. As such, the proposal would not cause substantial harm to the
   openness of the Green Belt.
13.The proposal would involve the redevelopment of previously developed land and
   would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt. It would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007163


    therefore not be inappropriate development within the Green Belt and there is no
    need to consider whether the site is grey belt.
14.For the reasons set out above, the appeal site is previously developed land, and the
   proposed development would meet the requirements of Framework Policy GB7 1.e.
   and Local Plan GN1. As such, it would not be inappropriate development within the
   Green Belt.
Character and appearance
15.The area surrounding the site is rural in nature, with dense mature vegetation lining
   the highway punctuated periodically by the built environment. The buildings within
   the area primarily comprise small clusters of sizeable, detached, well-proportioned
   dwellings formed of brick walls and slate roofs. This sporadic pattern of
   development contributes to the area’s rural character.
16.The former public house, despite its current dilapidated state, appears an imposing
   and impressive building when viewed from Beacon Lane, traditional in its design
   and materials. The Council identify the building as a non-designated heritage asset
   with its significance derived from its architecture. There have been a number of
   unsympathetic additions which detract from its original form and design. A large
   parking area adjacent to Beacon Lane dramatically increases the built environment
   of the site, detracting from the rural character of the area.
17.The proposal would remove extensions that detract from the building, better
   revealing its original historic fabric, form, and architecture, benefitting the
   significance of the non-designated heritage asset. The parking area would be
   significantly reduced with part of it replaced with open green space, contributing to
   the rural character of the area.
18.Whilst the design of the new dwelling located within the former beer garden is
   contemporary, it would primarily utilise traditional materials and roof forms to reflect
   that of the surrounding built environment, such as the former pub. The dwelling
   would comprise multiple elements with different roof levels to replicate the pattern of
   historic additions and extensions observed in other traditional buildings within the
   area. This additionally serves to break up the visual bulk of the proposed dwelling in
   addition to being built into the slope, further reducing its profile.
19.Whilst large, the proposed dwelling would reflect the scale of the converted former
   pub and many of the other large, detached properties in the area. The proposed
   dwelling would be set back from the former public house, reflecting the spacious
   relationship of dwellings within the area. Further, this separation serves to preserve
   the setting of the non-designated heritage asset, maintaining its dominance when
   viewed from the street scene.
20.Whilst the existing site is overgrown and limited in development, mature vegetation
   along the boundary with Long Hayes Lane and Beacon Lane would screen the
   proposed dwelling, with the former public house obscuring it further from Beacon
   Lane. As such, the proposed dwelling would preserve the character and appearance
   of the area and the significance of the non-designated heritage asset through
   development within its setting.
21.For the above reasons, the proposal would not harm the character and appearance
   of the area including the significance of the non-designated heritage asset. It would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007163


    therefore not conflict with Policy GN3 of the Local Plan which requires development
    to be of high-quality design and have regard to the historic character of the local
    landscape.
Other Matters
22.I acknowledge third party comments regarding the continuation of the use of the site
   as a public house. Nonetheless, the application was accompanied by a Public
   House Viability Assessment, with the Council assessing this, concluding that the
   conversion of the public house to a dwelling is acceptable in this respect. I see no
   reason to disagree.
Conditions
23.I have considered the conditions suggested and I have had regard to the
   Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. As a result, I have amended some of
   the suggested conditions for consistency, enforceability, clarity and reasonableness
   and not imposed others.
24.For certainty, I have set out the timescale for the commencement of development. A
   condition is also necessary, for certainty and enforceability, requiring that the
   development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans.
25.A condition is imposed requiring details of surface water drainage in the interests of
   flood management.
26.A Construction Method Statement is required prior to the commencement of
   development to ensure that the impact surrounding residents and road safety is
   minimised.
27.Conditions requiring the development to be carried out in accordance with the
   Updated Dusk Survey Results report and the Method Statement for Great Crested
   Newts in the interests of safeguarding protected species. Conditions requiring the
   provision of bird boxes and hedgehog highways are additionally necessary to
   safeguard protected species. Additional conditions involving reasonable avoidance
   measures for mammals and amphibians during the construction period would
   duplicate much of these requirements and therefore additional conditions in this
   regard would be unnecessary.
28.A condition requiring a tree protection plan and arboricultural method statement is
   required prior to the commencement of development to protect trees during the
   construction phase.
29.Conditions requiring the submission of landscaping and lighting details are required
   in the interests of the character and appearance of the area and the natural
   environment.
30.Rhododendron and Himalayan balsam (invasive species) were identified on site by
   the initial Preliminary Ecological Assessment (PEA), but not by the updated PEA.
   Given the absence of these in the latest PEA, a condition requiring the submission
   of a scheme to deal with them would be unnecessary and unreasonable.
31.The Council has also suggested a condition requiring no demolition shall take place
   until an appropriate bat licence has been obtained. I have no doubt that a mitigation
   license would not be issued on the basis of the evidence that is before me.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007163


    Furthermore, it is not for me to determine whether the legal tests for a license would
    be met as this would duplicate the function of another regulatory body and would be
    contrary to the well-established principle that non-planning regimes are assumed to
    operate effectively. As such, I have not imposed the condition.
32.Given there is an existing paved access to the appeal site, a condition requiring the
   paving of an access five metres into the site would be unnecessary and
   unreasonable.
33.The proposal includes a small parking area which the appellant’s submission implies
   would be utilised by the local cricket club. The proposal is acceptable without this
   requirement and therefore, a condition requiring the carpark and entrance are solely
   for the use of the cricket club would be unnecessary.
Conclusion
34. For the reasons given above the appeal is allowed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007163


Schedule of Conditions

    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.
    2) The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with
       details shown on the following plans:
          • 4136-22-10 (Location plan);
          • S23011-BF No. 1 (Existing basement floor plan);
          • S23011-GF No. 1 (Existing ground floor plan);
          • S23011-1F No. 1 (Existing first floor plan);
          • S23011-EL No. 1 (Building elevations);
          • 4136-22-01 B (Proposed in conversion plans and elevations);
          • 4136-23-30G (Proposed plans and elevations - planning app);
          • 4136-22-11A (Existing site plan); o4136-23-31B (Proposed site plan -
              planning app);
          • 4136-24-34 (Proposed site section and street scene);
          • Tree Constraints Plan (Dec 2021);
          • Drainage Plan - 4136-24-35.
    3) No development above ground level shall take place until a strategy for separate
       foul and surface water drainage of the development, including any necessary
       attenuation measures, and timetable for its implementation, has been submitted
       to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The surface water
       drainage strategy must take account of the National standards for sustainable
       drainage systems (SuDS) (July 2025) or any subsequent replacement
       standards. The drainage scheme shall be completed in accordance with the
       approved details and retained and maintained thereafter.
    4) No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until a
       Construction Method Statement has been submitted to, and approved in writing
       by the local planning authority. The statement shall include measures to control
       noise, vibration, dust, emissions, and site lighting, and details of wheel washing
       facilities. The approved Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to
       throughout the construction period for the development.
    5) The development shall only be carried out in accordance with all of the
       recommendations for mitigation and compensation set out in the Updated Dusk
       Survey Results report.
    6) The development shall only be carried out in accordance with all of the
       recommendations for mitigation and compensation set out in the Method
       Statement for Great Crested Newts.
    7) No site clearance, preparatory work or development shall take place until a
       scheme for the protection of the retained trees (the tree protection plan) and the
       appropriate working methods (the arboricultural method statement) in
       accordance with paragraphs 5.5 and 6.1 of British Standard BS 5837: Trees in
       relation to design, demolition and construction - Recommendations (or in an
       equivalent British Standard if replaced) has been submitted to and approved in
       writing by the local planning authority. The scheme for the protection of the
       retained trees shall be carried out as approved.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007163


    8) Notwithstanding the details shown on the approved drawings, no part of the
       development shall be occupied until full details of both hard and soft landscaping
       works have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority.
         The approved landscaping works shall be implemented and completed prior to
         the occupation of the development.
         Any trees or shrubs planted or retained in accordance with this condition which
         are removed, uprooted, destroyed, die or become severely damaged or become
         seriously diseased within 5 years of planting shall be replaced within the next
         planting season by trees or shrubs of similar size and species to those originally
         required to be planted.
    9) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until details of bird
       boxes to include number, type and location as well as timing of installation, have
       been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
       works shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details and
       implementation programme and retained thereafter.
    10) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until details of
        hedgehog highways to include number, type and location have been submitted
        to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The works shall be
        carried out in accordance with the approved details and implementation
        programme and retained thereafter.
    11) No external lighting shall be installed at the site until a scheme detailing the
        proposed lighting has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
        planning authority. The submitted details shall include details of the lighting
        specification, lux levels and a light spillage plan, to minimise any adverse impact
        of lighting on any wildlife. All external lighting shall be installed and maintained in
        accordance with the approved details.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
