Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by S Ramsden BSc (Hons) MA MA IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007713
90A Park Road, Teddington TW11 0AN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Clement against the decision of Richmond Upon Thames London
     Borough Council.
•    The application reference is PA26/0565.
•    The development proposed is the construction of outbuilding and pergola in front garden. New bifold
     doors at front ground floor level.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the Construction of
       outbuilding and pergola in front garden. New bifold doors at front ground floor
       level, at 90A Park Road, Teddington TW11 0AN in accordance with the terms of
       the application, Ref PA26/0565, , and drawing Nos 1783-1 A; 1783-2 A; 1783-3 A;
       1783-4 ; 1783-5; and 1783-6, subject to the following conditions:
         1) The development must be carried out in accordance with the provisions of
            the Fire Statement received by the Council on 19 February 2026 and
            retained as such thereafter.
         2) The outbuilding hereby permitted shall not be used other than as
            accommodation incidental or ancillary to the use of the existing dwelling
            house as such and shall not be used as a separate self-contained dwelling.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development used above is taken from the Council’s Decision
       Notice. It more accurately describes the development than that given on the
       planning application form and is the basis on which the Council made their
       decision. I have determined the appeal on the same basis.
3.     However, reference to “retrospective” has been omitted from the description of
       development above as it is not a form of development. The application form
       confirms that the development has been undertaken, which I was able to observe
       at my site visit. I have determined the appeal on that basis.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007713


Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the host property and surrounding area, including the ash tree bordering the
       appeal site.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site comprises part of a two-storey, end of terrace property, which has
       been subdivided into flats. The front elevation of the appeal property has a
       prominent two-storey gable feature, and distinctive half-timbered detailing. The
       terraced properties have long front gardens with a uniform high brick boundary
       wall to the street frontage. The area to the front of the appeal property consists of
       the front garden of 90A Park Road and a pathway to the front doors of the flats,
       which are separated by a high fence.
7.     Adjoining the short terrace, of which the appeal property forms a part, is a
       matching terrace, with similar materials and detailing. The pair have a consistent
       appearance, which contribute positively to the surrounding streetscape. This is
       chiefly through the high brick boundary wall and gates to the street frontage, as
       well as the distinctive half-timbered detailing of the upper floors of the terraces,
       which is visible over the boundary wall.
8.     The surrounding area has a residential character, and the immediate streetscape
       is characterised by predominately two storey houses, set back from the roadway
       behind boundary walls, fences and hedges. Although suburban in nature, a
       preponderance of trees, bushes and hedges to the front gardens contribute a
       verdant quality to the streetscape.
9.     The outbuilding, and to a lesser extent the pergola, has resulted in a reduction in
       the size of the front garden, which already contains a shed. However, both new
       structures are offset from the two-storey gable to the front elevation, which
       remains the prominent feature of the façade. Additionally, the impact of the
       outbuilding on the wider terrace is reduced by its end of terrace location and the
       high boundary treatments between adjoining front gardens.
10. From the street, the structures are largely obscured by the high front boundary wall
    to the terraces. Whilst limited sections of the eaves of the outbuilding can be seen
    in some views, it is further obscured by vegetation to the front gardens. The
    structures, therefore, do not distract unduly from the prominent distinctive features
    of the terraces, such as the half-timbering, as they contribute to the character of
    the streetscape and surrounding area.
11. The second reason for refusal, as set out on the Decision Notice, concerns the
    absence of drawings of the bi-fold doors and the resulting difficulty in assessing
    their effect on the character and appearance of the appeal site. A drawing has now
    been provided and the Council raises no objection in relation to the design of the
    doors. As the size, appearance and siting of these doors complements the
    building, I agree with that position.
12. The outbuilding and pergola are partially beneath the raised canopy of an ash tree,
    the trunk of which is in a neighbouring property. The tree is visible in views along
    the street and, along with other trees in the vicinity, makes a positive contribution
    to the character and appearance of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007713


13. A detailed arboricultural report has not been submitted. However the outbuilding
    has no substantial foundations and, whilst there may be some localised ground
    compaction, it is limited in area and unlikely to be of a scale which would have a
    significant adverse impact on the ash tree. Similarly, given their limited number
    and size, the localised foundations for the three supporting posts of the triangular
    pergola are unlikely to have a significant impact on the root zone of the tree.
14. Accordingly I find that the proposed development would be unlikely to have an
    adverse impact on the health and longevity of the ash tree bordering the appeal
    site, and hence the development would not impact on the character and
    appearance of the area.
15. The second reason for refusal, as set out on the Decision Notice, concerns the
    absence of drawings of the bi-fold doors and the resulting difficulty in assessing
    their effect on the character and appearance of the appeal site. A drawing has now
    been provided and the Council raises no objection in relation to the design of the
    doors. As the size, appearance and siting of these doors complements the
    building, I agree with that position.
16. Given these specific circumstances, I find that the structures do not harm the
    character and appearance of the host property and surrounding area. Accordingly,
    I find no conflict with Policy 28 of the Richmond upon Thames Local Plan: 2024 to
    2039 (the Local Plan), which seeks to deliver high quality design that is responsive
    to local context. Similarly the development is not contrary to the Council’s House
    Extensions and External Alterations Supplementary Planning Document, 2015,
    which has the same aims.
17. The development is unlikely to have an impact on the ash tree bordering the site
    and I therefore find no conflict with Policies 28 and 42 of the Local Plan, which
    seek to ensure that the character of places is maintained and to protect trees.
Other Matters
18. Concerns have been raised regarding the planning status of the existing shed to
    the front garden. However, this structure does not form part of the current
    application and is not the subject of this appeal.
Conditions
19. I have considered the Council’s list of suggested conditions, in light of advice in the
    Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. Where necessary and in the interests
    of precision and brevity I have amended the wording of conditions
20. As the works have already been undertaken there is no need to include the
    standard time condition for commencement of development.
21. To ensure that the development incorporates the necessary fire safety measures I
    have attached a condition requiring that the development is in accordance with the
    submitted Fire Safety statement.
22. It is also necessary to impose a condition limiting the use of the outbuilding in
    accordance with the terms of the application.
23. The Council has suggested a condition requiring that future works to the
    outbuilding are undertaken in matching materials. However, such works may not


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007713


       constitute development, and therefore such a condition would not pass the tests of
       being reasonable or enforceable.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

S Ramsden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
