Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Jonathan Edwards BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007705
Forge Garage, Church Road, Churchill, Oxfordshire OX7 6NJ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr R, Mr P-M and Mrs C Scavuzzo against the decision of West Oxfordshire
       District Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/01974/FUL.
•      The development proposed is erection of 2 No dwellings and associated works following demolition
       of existing buildings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of
         2 No dwellings and associated works following demolition of existing buildings at
         Forge Garage, Church Road, Churchill, Oxfordshire OX7 6NJ in accordance with
         the terms of the application, Ref 25/01974/FUL, subject to the conditions in the
         attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The appeal site is in Churchill Conservation Area (the CA) and it is near to several
         listed buildings. In line with statutory duties1, I have paid special regard and
         attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance
         of the CA and of preserving the listed buildings and their settings.
3.       A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
         published in August 2026 and after the appeal was lodged. I have considered the
         main parties comments on the Framework in my assessment.
Main Issues
4.       Having regard to the Council’s refusal reasons and the aforementioned statutory
         duties, I consider the main issues are (i) the effect of the development on the
         character and appearance of the area, including whether it would preserve or
         enhance the character or appearance of the CA, (ii) the effect of the development
         upon the significance and setting of other heritage assets, (iii) whether the
         development would provide satisfactory living conditions having regard to its
         proximity to an existing play area and the quality and quantity of garden space,
         and (iv) whether the proposal would lead to the unacceptable loss of an
         employment site. If I find the development would be unacceptable in any of these
         regards, it follows to consider whether any other factors justify allowing the appeal.


1
    Sections 72(1) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007705


Reasons
Effect on the character and appearance of the area and the CA.
5.     The rear part of the appeal site currently contains a line of buildings used for
       vehicle servicing and repairs with a parking area to the front. The Forge, a stone
       built residential property and guest house lies to the side of the parking area . A
       residence called Well End lies on the opposite side of the car park. This group of
       buildings is surrounded on 3 sides by playing fields. These include Langston
       Memorial Fountain on the land to the side of The Forge. Nearby and on the other
       side of the appeal site is the Church of All Saints with its churchyard demarked by
       a stone wall. On the opposite side of the road and nearly opposite the access to
       the site is a public house called The Chequers. Otherwise, the properties on
       Church Road and elsewhere in the village appear to be all residences, many of
       which are constructed of stone and with pitched roofs.
6.     The CA covers most of the buildings within Churchill and the playing fields. Its
       significance is partly due to the age and architectural interest and quality of many
       of its stone buildings as well as features such as stone boundary walls and grass
       verges. Churchill has an attractive, quintessential Cotswold village appearance
       and character that is readily appreciated from the roads and the playing fields.
7.     The buildings on the appeal site are not prominent as they are set back from
       Church Road. Even so, they are visible from the highway through a wide vehicular
       access and across the car park. Also, they are seen from the playing fields to the
       rear. The garage buildings are unusual to the village as they are not constructed of
       stone, as they have corrugated sheet roofing rather than slates or tiles and as they
       are low and squat in form. Their removal would have an acceptable effect on the
       qualities of the CA as they do not contribute positively to the character and
       appearance of the area.
8.     Like the existing garage, the proposed dwellings would be positioned towards the
       rear of the appeal site, although they would project further forward towards Church
       Road. The houses would have a noticeable effect on the locality as they would be
       seen from the highway and from the playing fields above a proposed drystone wall
       on the rear site boundary.
9.     The dwellings would be constructed from stone with steeply pitched slate roofs.
       They would also be 2 storeys high and of a traditional style. Therefore, the
       buildings would be more in keeping with other nearby residences compared to the
       existing garage. Moreover, the rear elevations of the houses and the stone wall on
       the rear boundary would appear more sympathetic and compatible with the area in
       views from the playing fields. As such, the proposal would have a positive effect on
       the character and appearance of the CA.
10. Concern is raised that the houses would look cramped. However, unlike the
    existing garage buildings, the dwellings would not stretch across the whole width
    of the plot as a space would be retained on the land behind The Forge. Also, the
    houses would be detached with a small gap in between and they would be set off
    the rear boundary as they would both have back gardens. The proposed unit on
    plot 2 would have a fairly narrow frontage but in these regards it would be similar
    to a property called Sanctuary Cottage that lies opposite The Forge. For these
    reasons, I find the proposal would not appear as unusual overdevelopment.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007705


11. Therefore, I conclude the development would have an acceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the area. Also, it would preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the CA and so it would accord with the statutory duty.
    In these respects, the development would accord with policies OS2 and OS4 of
    the West Oxfordshire Local Plan 2018 (the LP). Amongst other things, these
    policies look for development to respect the intrinsic character of small villages and
    to conserve areas of historic, architectural and environmental significance.
Other heritage assets.
12. The Church of All Saints is a grade II* listed building. It represents a fine example
    of ecclesiastical architecture that is fully appreciated from the churchyard, the
    playing fields and local roads. Also, its attractive and visually impressive tower is a
    landmark seen from parts of the area surrounding the village.
13. The development would be set away from the church with Well End and some
    mature trees in between. However, the proposed houses would affect the setting
    of the church as they would be seen in the same views from parts of the playing
    fields. The dwellings would not meaningfully obstruct sight of the church and they
    would not detract from its immediate presence or appearance. In any long distance
    views, the proposed houses would be read as part of the group of residences
    within the village that are served by the church. Therefore, the proposal would
    preserve the setting and the significance of the Church of All Saints.
14. Well End is a grade II listed building originating from the mid-19th century but with
    later additions. Its significance in relation to this appeal lies with its age and its
    vernacular architecture as well as its proximity to the Church of All Saints and the
    church yard. The appeal development would be on land adjacent to Well End and
    so it would affect its setting. However, the houses would not obstruct the main
    view of Well End from Church Road and they would not interrupt the visual
    relationship between Well End and the church. As such, the development would
    not harm the setting nor the significance of Well End.
15. The Chequers is a grade II listed building dating from the late 18th and early 19th
    centuries. In relation to this appeal, its significance lies with its age, traditional
    architectural features and pleasing symmetry to its front elevation. There would be
    minimal intervisibility between the appeal development and the pub and so any
    effect on the listed building’s setting would not be detrimental to its significance.
16. Langston Memorial Fountain is a grade II listed building dating from 1870. Its
    significance lies with its distinctive architecture and presence within the playing
    fields as well as its historic commemoration value. The appeal development would
    be largely screened in views of the fountain by The Forge and so it would have
    only a minor effect on its setting. The appreciation of the listed building would be
    unaffected and so its significance would be preserved.
17. I am referred to other listed buildings within the village including Corner House and
    Fountain House and West Cottage. These are grade II listed buildings that gain
    their significance from their age, architecture and aesthetic value as traditional
    stone cottages. The appeal development would not be seen with or from these
    properties and so it would not affect their settings or significance.
18. The Forge is not a listed building but it is an attractive stone property with
    interesting features such as a rounded side projection. It is also in a prominent

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007705


       location in the village and so it is of sufficient aesthetic and architectural interest to
       be treated as a non-designated heritage asset (NDHA) as claimed by the
       appellants.
19. The appeal development would be seen immediately to the side of The Forge in
    views from Church Road and it would sit in front of The Forge in views from parts
    of the playing field. As such, the proposal would affect the setting of the NDHA.
    However, the incongruous appearance of the garage buildings currently detracts
    from The Forge whereas the proposed houses would be more compatible and
    complementary to its form and style. Also, the garage and a nearby mature tree
    already partially block views of the NDHA from the playing fields. As such, the
    proposal would not unduly obscure sight of any important aspect of the NDHA
    from adjoining land. Overall, I find the development would lead to a modest
    enhancement to the setting and the significance of The Forge.
20. For these reasons, I conclude the appeal scheme would avoid harm to the setting
    and the significance of any heritage asset. Indeed, it would enhance the immediate
    setting and the significance of The Forge as a NDHA. In these regards, the
    proposal would accord with my statutory duty and LP policies OS2 and OS4 and
    the requirements to conserve the significance of historic buildings and their
    environments.
Living conditions.
21. The rear boundary to the back gardens of the proposed houses would lie near to
    an area containing play equipment. The Council is concerned that noise from this
    play area would cause disturbance to the residents of the dwellings. In support of
    this concern, reference is made to the Fields in Trust Guidance for Outdoor Sport
    and Play, Beyond the Six Acre Standard (the original FiT Guidance). This states
    there should be at least 5m separation between a local area of play activity zone
    and the boundary of dwellings. The Council claim the gap between the edge of the
    appeal site and the edge of the equipped play area is only 2m.
22. However, the original FiT Guidance does not form part of the adopted
    development plan. Also, I have been provided with a copy of a document entitled
    Fields in Trust Standards Creating Great Places For All that is dated 2024 and
    which supersedes the original FiT Guidance. Page 27 of the later document states
    the separation buffer zones guidance has been removed. Therefore, the 5m
    separation distance standard as set out in the original FiT Guidance is not
    determinative in my assessment of this issue.
23. According to a sign on the associated fencing, the equipped play area should only
    be used for children aged 7 and under. I would envisage children at play could
    lead to noise that would be heard at the proposed residences. However, this is
    likely to occur only during daylight hours, especially with equipment aimed at
    younger children. Also, it is fair to expect residents to tolerate a level of noise from
    play near to their homes, be it due to activities on playing fields or nearby gardens.
    Moreover, I would anticipate the proposed stone wall would provide a level of
    noise mitigation and it would prevent intrusive overlooking from the play equipment
    onto the back gardens. Consequently, I find the play area would not lead to
    unsuitable living conditions at the proposed houses.
24. Concern is also raised by the Council to potential noise effects from activities on a
    football pitch on the playing fields. However, this is an unlit, grass pitch and so its

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007705


       use is unlikely to disturb residents of the proposed houses at night time. Also, the
       pitch is set away from the appeal site and so associated daytime recreational
       activities are unlikely to cause significant disturbance to future occupiers.
25. Part 11.11 of the West Oxfordshire Design Guide 2016 (the WODG), states that
    rear gardens should be at least as large as the ground floor footprints of the
    associated dwellings. The appellants claim the proposed gardens would meet this
    requirement. However, it would seem from figure 7.5 from the appellants’ appeal
    statement that the calculated garden sizes include passageways to the sides of
    the dwellings as well as parts of the rear gardens where bin stores and a bike
    store would be located. As such, I tend to favour the Council’s position that the
    useable back garden areas would be smaller than the footprint of the houses and
    so the proposal would not accord with the referred to WODG guidance.
26. Even so, the back gardens would provide sufficient outdoor space for residents to
    sit outside and for domestic activities such as drying clothes and gardening. The
    gardens would be of a shape and size to allow only a limited range of play
    activities. However, as an alternative, residents of the houses would have good
    access to the recreational opportunities provided by the adjacent playing fields.
    Therefore, the identified minor shortfall against the WODG guidance in itself does
    not demonstrate the proposed back gardens would lead to unsatisfactory living
    conditions, even if the houses were occupied by families with children.
27. The back gardens would only be overlooked from the upper floor rear windows in
    each of the proposed dwellings. This is a typical relationship found with many
    houses that lie side by side. As such, the back gardens would provide a suitable
    level of privacy for future occupiers.
28. Therefore, I find the proposed development would provide acceptable living
    conditions when having regard to its proximity to an existing play area and the
    quality and quantity of garden space to serve each of the houses. I find no conflict
    with LP policies OS2 and OS4 that seek to ensure development is compatible with
    adjoining uses and avoids harm to living conditions in residences.
Whether the proposal would lead to the unacceptable loss of an employment site.
29. The current garage serves as a place of employment. LP policy E1 states that
    non-employment uses on employment sites will be refused except in specified
    circumstances. These include where it is demonstrated the premises are not
    reasonably capable of being used or redeveloped for employment purposes or
    where a site is unsuitable for employment uses on amenity or environmental
    grounds. The justification to the policy explains the loss of existing employment
    sites may undermine the sustainability of rural communities.
30. The garage is currently occupied and evidently capable of being used for
    employment purposes. Even so, the appellants claim the buildings are
    sub-standard in terms of energy efficiency and that they require upgrading works.
    It is stated the deficiencies with the buildings means it may not be possible to let
    the premises on a long term lease once the current lease expires in 2028.
31. However, there is only limited information before me on the level of works required
    to upgrade the buildings. Also, it has not been shown that the costs of such works
    would make it unviable to continue an employment use. The justification to
    LP policy E1 states that where there is a potential issue of viability, a robust

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007705


       marketing exercise should be undertaken to show a continuing employment use
       has been fully tested. No such exercise has been carried out. Moreover, the lack
       of marketing means there is little evidence to show the site cannot be redeveloped
       for other employment purposes.
32. The current use of the premises has the potential to generate noise that may affect
    residents at nearby residences. However, the current business has operated from
    the garage for a significant period and there is no evidence to suggest it has in the
    past or currently harms living conditions by reason of noise and disturbance. As
    such, the appeal property is not obviously unsuitable for employment uses in these
    respects. Furthermore, there is little evidence to suggest the premises would be
    utilised for a more disruptive employment use in the future.
33. The appellants claim there are plentiful places of employment at nearby towns.
    However, the proposal would lead to the loss of one of the limited number of
    employment premises in Churchill. Representations from interested parties
    indicate the garage is a valued local service. As such, the development would
    undermine the sustainability of a rural community as it would increase the
    likelihood of local residents travelling away from the village.
34. For these reasons, I conclude the proposal would lead to the unacceptable loss of
    an existing employment site. In these regards, it would be contrary to LP policy E1.
Other considerations.
35. The site lies within the Cotswolds National Landscape (the NL). However, the
    development would be located on a site that already accommodates buildings and
    within the built up extent of the village. The proposal would cause no harm to the
    landscape and scenic qualities of the NL. As such, it would meet the duty under
    Section 245 of the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 to seek to further the
    statutory purposes of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the NL.
36. Due to its historic uses, the site may contain ground contamination. However, a
    condition could be imposed to ensure this is identified and dealt with appropriately
    so as to ensure no pollution to the environment or hazard to residents.
37. The proposal would include sufficient off-road parking spaces. The proposed
    houses are likely to generate a minor level of vehicular traffic that would not
    prejudice highway safety. Vehicles associated with the construction of the
    development would be able to leave the highway and enter the site given the wide
    access point. The level of construction traffic would be modest given the scale of
    the proposal and so it would not cause a highway safety problem.
38. The provision of just 2 houses would avoid unacceptable pressure on local
    services. The front windows of the dwellings would tend to overlook the front of
    The Forge rather than any private garden area. Any lighting associated with the
    houses would not cause excessive nuisance to any nearby residents. Part of the
    appeal site would be left vacant and there is concern that a further scheme to
    include an additional house would be submitted. However, I am charged with
    considering the specific appeal proposal and not any potential future scheme.
39. The Council refers me to other appeal decisions where the Inspectors have
    considered the issue of the loss of an existing employment site. However, the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007705


       circumstances of those cases are different to the current proposal and so I am not
       bound to arrive at the same conclusion as the other appeal Inspectors.
40. None of the above factors provide reason to refuse planning permission. As such,
    they fail to influence my overall assessment.
Points in support of the proposal and planning balance.
41. I have found the development would not accord with LP policy E1 and so it would
    conflict with the development plan when read as a whole. It follows to consider
    whether other factors justify granting planning permission contrary to the LP.
42. Churchill is defined as a village in the LP. The appeal site lies within the settlement
    as it contains buildings and it is adjacent to other properties. As such, policy S4 of
    the Framework dictates the proposal should be approved unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects.
43. I have already identified that the development would have a positive effect on the
    character and appearance of the CA. As such, it benefits from the support as set
    out under part 2 of policy HE6 of the Framework. Moreover, the development
    would enhance the setting and significance of The Forge as a NDHA. These
    benefits attract significant weight in support of allowing the appeal.
44. The Framework requires local authorities to identify a supply of deliverable sites to
    provide at least 5 years’ worth of housing against their housing requirement. The
    evidence indicates the Council is only able to demonstrate about 4.38 years’ worth
    of supply and so there is an evidenced need for more housing. The proposal would
    make a minor addition to the housing stock but policy H07 of the Framework states
    the benefits in these respects should be afforded substantial weight.
45. The proposal would create additional homes through the sensitive redevelopment
    of commercial premises within a settlement. As such, it gains support from
    part 1(d) of policy L2 of the Framework, particularly as the houses would be
    consistent with the overall street scene and they would provide acceptable living
    standards for residents. The benefits in these regards attract substantial weight.
46. The inclusion of solar panels would ensure the development is able to draw from
    renewable energy sources. In light of part 2 of policy CC2 of the Framework, the
    benefits in these regards attract substantial weight.
47. The proposal would lead to employment during construction and residents may
    support local facilities and businesses. However, I find that any economic
    advantages of the scheme would be undermined by the loss of an existing place of
    employment. Even so, the identified benefits overall attract very substantial weight
    towards allowing the appeal.
48. Policy HC6 of the Framework looks to resist the loss of key community facilities
    unless specific circumstances exist. However, part 2 of this policy is clear in stating
    that key community facilities do not include car garages. I am taken to no part of
    the Framework that resists the loss of employment premises.
49. Part 2 of policy S4 of the Framework sets out the circumstances where the
    benefits of approving development within settlements are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects. These include where there would be substantial
    adverse impact in relation to safeguarding of land for particular of uses as set out

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007705


       in the development plan. The proposal would be contrary to LP policy E1 as it
       would not safeguard an existing employment site. The harm that would be caused
       through the loss of employment and removing the villagers’ access to a local car
       services garage is significant but it is not of substantial weight. The benefits of the
       proposal when taken together are of very considerable weight and they are not
       substantially outweighed by the adverse effects of the proposal.
50. Consequently, the development gains support from policy S4 of the Framework
    when read as a whole. This support provides sufficient justification to allow the
    appeal and to grant planning permission contrary to the development plan.
Conditions
51. I have had regard to the list of conditions as suggested by the Council. Where
    appropriate I have made amendments to the wording in the interests of precision
    and to avoid unnecessary details and pre-commencement requirements.
52. Condition 2 lists the approved drawings and it is imposed in the interests of clarity.
    Condition 3 is required to protect living conditions at nearby dwellings. Condition 4
    is needed to ensure any contamination of the site is appropriately remediated.
    Condition 5 will ensure the development is served by appropriate surface water
    drainage that avoids an increase of flooding elsewhere.
53. Condition 6 is imposed to ensure the development is of a satisfactory appearance.
    I have combined 2 suggested conditions to form condition 7, which is needed for
    the same reason and to enhance biodiversity on the site. Condition 8 is imposed to
    support local wildlife. Condition 9 is needed to ensure the development provides
    appropriate parking facilities. A condition on parking within the curtilage of each
    dwelling would be unreasonable as the approved plans show parking spaces
    outside of the proposed residential plots. Condition 10 is required to minimise the
    use of natural resources and to ensure compliance with LP policy OS3.
54. The Council suggests a condition that would remove a range of permitted
    development rights from the proposed houses. However, part 2c of policy DM6 of
    the Framework states that such conditions should not be used unless there is clear
    justification to do so. Some of the permitted development rights the Council seek
    to remove would not allow any alterations to the houses in any event as they
    would lie within the CA. In other cases, the referred to permitted development
    rights impose stricter restrictions for properties in conservation areas compared to
    those outside such areas. The Council’s submissions fail to show how the
    permitted development rights that would apply to the proposed dwellings could
    lead to development that would be harmful to the character and appearance of the
    CA or the setting and significance of any of the nearby listed buildings. As such,
    there is no clear justification to impose the condition as suggested by the Council.
Conclusion
55. The proposal would conflict with the development plan but material considerations
    indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, I conclude the appeal should be allowed.

Jonathan Edwards
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007705


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 24-032 01B, 23-032 02A, 23-032 03,
              24-032 100E, 24-032 101D and 24-032 102D
     3)       Demolition or construction works hereby permitted shall take place only
              between 8.00am to 6.00pm on Mondays to Fridays, between 8.00am and
              1.00pm on Saturdays and they shall not take place at any time on Sundays
              or on Bank or Public Holidays. There shall be no deliveries to the site related
              to any aspect of the construction process outside of these hours.
     4)       Apart from the demolition of the existing buildings, no development hereby
              permitted shall commence until a site investigation of the nature and extent of
              any contamination of the site has been carried out in accordance with a
              methodology which has previously been submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. The results of the site investigation shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority before
              any construction works or ground excavations have commenced. Also, if any
              significant contamination is found during the site investigation, a report
              specifying the measures to be taken to remediate the site to render it suitable
              for the development hereby permitted shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority before any construction works or
              ground excavations have commenced. Any remediation scheme as approved
              by the local planning authority shall be fully implemented in accordance with
              the approved timetable of works and before the development hereby
              permitted is first occupied. On completion of the works the developer shall
              submit to the local planning authority written confirmation that all works were
              completed in accordance with the agreed details.
              If, during the course of development, any contamination is found which has
              not been identified in the site investigation, additional measures for the
              remediation of this contamination shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The remediation of the site shall
              incorporate the approved additional measures.
     5)       Apart from the demolition of the existing buildings, no development hereby
              permitted shall commence until a surface water drainage scheme has been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              scheme shall include results of soakage tests carried out at the site to
              demonstrate the infiltration rate. Three tests should be carried out for each
              soakage pit as per BRE 365, with the lowest infiltration rate (expressed in
              m/s) used for design. The details shall include a management plan setting
              out the maintenance of the drainage asset. The approved drainage scheme
              shall be fully provided prior to the first occupation of the development hereby
              permitted and thereafter it shall be maintained in accordance with the
              approved management plan.
     6)       Notwithstanding the details as shown on the approved plans, no construction
              works above ground level shall commence until a schedule of materials
              (including samples) to be used in the elevations and roofs of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007705


              development has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The development shall be constructed in the approved
              materials and shall be retained as such thereafter. Where natural stone walls
              are proposed, no part of any such wall shall be constructed until a sample
              panel has been erected on the site that has been approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. Thereafter, all natural stone walls shall be built in
              compliance with the approved sample panel.
     7)       Notwithstanding the details as shown on the approved plans, no construction
              works above ground level shall commence until a scheme for hard and soft
              landscaping of the site, including the means of enclosure and the materials to
              be used for hard surfacing has been submitted to and approved by the local
              planning authority. The scheme shall include an implementation timetable.
              The approved scheme shall be completed in accordance with the approved
              timetable. If at any time in the five years following planting, any tree, shrub,
              hedge, plant or grassed area shall for any reason die, be removed, damaged,
              felled or eroded, it shall be replaced by the end of the next planting season.
              Replacement trees, shrubs, hedges, plants and grassed areas shall be of the
              same size and species as those lost.
     8)       All the measures and features listed below shall be implemented in full before
              the development hereby approved is first occupied or brought into use, and
              all the features shall thereafter be permanently retained and maintained for
              the stated purpose of biodiversity conservation.
              i)    At least 3 swift bricks to be incorporated into the north elevation of the
                    permitted house on plot 1 and at 1m intervals;
              ii) At least 2 house martin nest cups to be installed under the eaves on the
                    north elevation of the permitted house on plot 2;
              iii) At least 1 bat box as shown in photographs 14 and 15 of the Ridgeway
                    Ecology Phase 1 Bat & Nesting Bird Survey dated 6 February 2025, to
                    be integrated into the south or east elevation wall of each of the houses
                    hereby permitted (at least 2 boxes in total); and
              iv) Hedgehog gaps to be incorporated into new boundary features.
     9)       The car parking areas and associated vehicular turning space as shown on
              the approved plans shall be constructed before the first occupation of the
              development hereby permitted and thereafter these areas shall be retained
              and used for no other purpose.
     10)      No dwelling hereby approved shall be occupied until the measures to ensure
              a maximum water consumption of 110 litres use per person per day have
              been provided for that dwelling and the measures shall be retained in
              perpetuity thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
