Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 24 June 2026
by Claire Coles MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6007200
Outside no. 100 and Swiss Cottage Station entrance, Avenue Road, London NW3
6HY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2025/5809/P.
•    The development proposed is ‘the removal of an existing InLink Unit, and the deployment of a
     replacement Street Hub 3 Unit’.

Appeal B Ref: 6007199
Outside no. 100 and Swiss Cottage Station entrance, Avenue Road, London NW3
6HY
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2026/0074/A.
•    The advertisement proposed is ‘the removal of an existing InLink Unit, and the deployment of a
     replacement Street Hub 3 Unit.’


Decision
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The addresses in the banner headings are taken from the application forms which
       differ from that on the decision notices. I am satisfied that the addresses in the
       banner headings accurately reflects the address of the proposed development.
4.     In the banner headings above, I have taken the description of development from
       the original application forms, respectively. The pair of appeals relate to the same
       overall proposal. They differ only in that Appeal A is for planning permission to
       replace an existing InLink Unit with a Street Hub 3 Unit which incorporates digital
       panels. Appeal B is for advertisement consent for the display of advertisement
       panels on either side of the Street Hub 3 unit. I have considered each part of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007200


       proposal on its individual merits. However, to avoid duplication I have dealt with
       the two parts of the proposal together, except where otherwise indicated.
5.     In respect of the advertisement appeal (Appeal B), the Town and Country Planning
       (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 makes it clear that
       advertisements should be subject to control only in the interests of amenity and
       public safety, taking into account cumulative impacts. Regard does not need to be
       had to the development plan. I have taken relevant policies into account as a
       material consideration, however, they have not, by themselves, been
       determinative for this appeal. The Council has not raised any concerns with
       regards to the advertisement on public safety grounds, and I have no reason to
       disagree.
6.     In August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published. I have consulted with the main parties in respect of the implications of
       the revisions to the Framework for this appeal and I have taken the responses into
       account in making my decision.
Main Issues
Appeal A
7.     The main issues are:
•     whether the proposal would achieve an appropriate level of community safety and
      security at the locality;
•     the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
      area;
•     the effect of the proposed development on pedestrian and highway safety; and
•     whether appropriate provision is made for maintenance.
Appeal B
8.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisement on visual amenity.
Reasons
9.     The appeal site comprises an area of the footway on the east side of Avenue
       Road. The footway in this location is wide and the area around the proposal
       encompasses a cycle path, bike racks, road signage, tree, bin, traffic lights and
       CCTV cameras. There is currently an InLink Unit on the site.
10. The proposed development would replace the InLink Unit with a Street Hub 3 Unit
    which would be wider and taller than the InLink Unit with larger advertisement
    displays on both sides of the Hub. In addition to providing advertisement displays,
    the communication hub would also provide free Wi-Fi and phone calls with
    charging facilities, wayfinding/mapping services, local information provision, 999
    emergency service and safety buttons.
       Community safety and security (Appeal A)
11. The supporting text to Policy C5 of the Camden Local Plan (CLP) states that
    careful consideration should be given to the design and location of street furniture
    or equipment to ensure they do not obscure public views or create spaces that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007200


       would encourage anti-social behaviour. CLP Policy C5 is expressly intended to
       make Camden a safer place and to improve things from a crime perspective, fear
       of crime and anti-social behaviour. It requires developments to demonstrate that
       they have incorporated design principles which contribute to community safety and
       security and to promote safer streets and public areas.
12. The Metropolitan Police have raised objection to the proposed development. The
    appeal site falls within the policing ward of Primrose Hill where anti-social
    behaviour and theft from the person were listed as two of the top recorded crimes
    for the month of November 2025. The police have raised objection to the proposal
    as the openness of the Hub and its orientation and location close to the cycle lane
    would leave mobile phones on display by users of the communication facility
    vulnerable to theft. The cycle lane also provides a direct route for rapid approach
    and escape by offenders on bicycles. The appellants ‘Street Hub Anti-Social
    Behaviour Management Plan’ Version 3 states that advice from police will always
    take precedence. The Police objection is therefore given substantial weight.
13. The Street Hub 3 is of a solid design with no permeability and is wider than the
    existing InLink Unit. The proposal would be of sufficient size to enable a person to
    loiter behind and remain relatively hidden from passers-by. Given that the police
    identify concealment opportunities as a factor contributing to offending patterns in
    the area, the increased potential for concealment is a valid concern as the
    additional scale of the proposal compared to the existing makes it easier to hide
    behind increasing the potential to commit crime. People could also walk out from
    behind the Street Hub 3 Unit into the road giving little to no warning to road users
    and posing a collision risk.
14. No site-specific measures have been proposed to address the risks arising from
    concealment due to the wider structure or the location of the proposed
    development adjacent to the cycle lane and as a result, the proposal would fail to
    address the identified risks to the users of the facility.
15. I note the benefits of the proposed Hub include the ability to provide free calls.
    However, it is also noted that the free call facility on some of the existing units
    have created a honey pot effect for anti-social behaviour and crime as the free
    calls were being used for illegal activities. The larger scale of the proposed Hub
    and the greater potential for concealment, together with the abuse of the free call
    facility for illegal activities and the proximity of the proposal to the cycle lane in an
    area where theft from the person is one of the top rated crimes means I can only
    give limited weight to the claimed public benefit of the free calls.
16. It is also noted that the other public benefits of the Hub (free public wifi, USB
    charging, wayfinding assistance and an emergency services button) are currently
    provided by the InLink Unit. The appellant contends that the proposed Hub would
    improve these facilities, although it has not been demonstrated how they would be
    improved and as they are already provided, I therefore attach these benefits
    limited weight and they would not outweigh the harm I have identified around crime
    and community safety.
17. In conclusion, I have not been provided with sufficient evidence to demonstrate the
    proposal would provide an acceptable level of community safety and security at
    this location. As a consequence, the proposal fails to accord with Policy C5 of the
    CLP.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007200




Character, appearance and amenity (Appeals A and B)
18. Policy D1 of the CLP requires all development to be of the highest standard of
    design and to respect the character, setting, form and scale of neighbouring
    buildings, its contribution to the public realm and impact on wider views and vistas.
19. Policy D4 of the CLP aims to reduce visual street clutter, reducing the number of
    objects on the street, rationalising their location and limiting the palette of
    materials. Free standing signs and signs on street furniture will not normally be
    permitted where they contribute to visual and physical clutter and create a
    hindrance to movement along the pavement or pedestrian footway.
20. The proposed development would be larger in scale than the existing InLink Unit.
    The design of the Street Hub 3 Unit would be standard with the Hub appearing to
    have the primary function of a free-standing advertising panel with the other
    communication features as secondary. The standard design of the Hub would not
    directly respond to the individual site characteristics, however, it is also
    acknowledged the existing InLink Unit is of a standard design.
21. The existing InLink Unit, together with the nearby bike racks, road signage, tree,
    bin, traffic lights and CCTV cameras cumulatively amount to negative aspects in
    the street scene and excessive pavement clutter. Despite this, as the proposal
    would be a replacement for the existing InLink Unit, the proposal would not add
    additional pavement clutter.
22. The scale of the proposed development would be larger than the existing unit but
    would occupy a similar position on the street scene. When viewed in the context of
    the surrounding street furniture and the undoubtedly busy nature of the street, I do
    not consider the increase in size would materially alter how the unit would be
    received in the street scene.
23. The large, illuminated screens would draw attention to the presence of the
    proposal within its setting, especially in the absence of other illuminated
    advertising displays within the immediate vicinity of the site. However, as a
    replacement of an existing feature of a similar nature, the proposal would not add
    to the number of digital displays or have any significant additional impact beyond
    that of the existing Unit.
24. I have had regard to the fact the Council only permitted the InLink Unit as part of
    an overall package to reduce the number of Kiosks and that significant weight was
    given to the reduction in size of the footprint of the kiosk to the InLink Unit by 75%.
    Whilst the proposal would be larger than the InLink Unit, the number of units would
    not increase, and I do not consider the additional scale would significantly harm
    the character or appearance of the wider area.
25. In conclusion, the proposal would not harm the character or appearance of the
    area and Appeal A would comply with Policies D1 of the CLP. For the same
    reasons the advertisements forming Appeal B would not adversely affect visual
    amenity and would comply with policy D4 of the CLP.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007200


Highway, pedestrian and public safety (Appeal A)
26. Policy T1 of the CLP aims to promote walking in the Borough and improve the
    pedestrian environment by supporting high-quality public realm improvement
    works, and promote high-quality footpaths and pavements that are wide enough
    for the number of people expected to use them.
27. Policy C6 of the CLP expects spaces, routes and facilities between buildings to be
    designed to be fully accessible and so that people can move through streets and
    places as easily and safely as possible.
28. The proposed Street Hub 3 would be sited in the same location as the InLink Unit,
    however, the proposed development would be wider and take up more space on
    the pavement that the existing unit, further restricting the width of useable and
    unobstructed pavement. No pedestrian count has been provided by either party in
    support of their case, although the proposed unit would lie on a busy commercial
    street close to an underground station and set of traffic lights where pedestrian
    volumes are likely to be high. Despite this, I have not been provided with
    substantive evidence that the additional width of the Street Hub 3 compared with
    the InLink Unit would negatively impact on pedestrian flow.
29. In conclusion, the proposed development would comply with policies T1 and C6 of
    the CLP as the proposal would have no significant impact on highway and
    pedestrian safety. Policy A1 is also referenced, however, this relates to the quality
    of life of occupiers, communities and neighbours with particular regard to privacy,
    outlook, sunlight, daylight, overshadowing etc. I have not found harm to occupiers,
    neighbours or communities in these respects from the proposed development and
    have not identified conflict with policy A1.
30. The Council has referred to policy G1 in its decision notice, however, I consider
    this relates to providing high-quality employment and housing and is not directly
    relevant to the appeal.
Maintenance (Appeal A)
31. The Council refers to the absence of a legal agreement to secure a maintenance
    plan and is of the view that in the event that the appeals are allowed, a legal
    agreement is necessary to secure future management and maintenance.
32. The appellant has submitted a Management, maintenance and operational
    strategy as part of the ‘Street Hubs Beyond Connection’ document. The Council
    has not sufficiently demonstrated why a planning condition to ensure that the
    development was maintained and managed in accordance with the document (or
    any other document) would be deficient. Planning Practice Guidance indicates that
    conditions should be used in preference to legal agreements where appropriate.
    That would be the case here.
33. In relation to Appeal B, standard condition 3, set out in Schedule 2 of the
    Advertisement Regulations, requires that an advertisement displayed, and any site
    used for the display of advertisements, shall be maintained in a condition that does
    not impair the visual amenity of the area. For these reasons, it has not been
    sufficiently demonstrated why it would be necessary to secure maintenance
    through a legal agreement.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007200


34. In conclusion, it has not been sufficiently demonstrated as to why a legal
    agreement is required to secure the maintenance and management of the Unit.
    Whilst it is important to secure a maintenance plan in order for the proposal to
    comply with policies D1, A1, C6 and T1 of the CLP, if the appeal were to be
    successful, the maintenance plan could be secured by condition. The Council have
    referenced policy G1 in its decision, but I do not consider it to be directly relevant
    to the case.
Other Matters
35. I note the location of the proposed Street Hub 3 would not be within the West End
    Project and no street improvement project has been identified in this location. I
    have assessed the proposal based on the merits of the case at this point in time.
36. I have been directed towards appeals which have been allowed for the
    replacement of existing InLink Units with the Street Hub 3, as in this case. Whilst
    the proposals maybe the same, the context within which the proposals would be
    located differs at each location, including the assessment of crime risk. Each case
    must be assessed on its own merits, and it has not been sufficiently demonstrated
    that other locations share the same combinations of site characteristics or levels of
    opportunistic street crime as identified in this case. I am therefore unable to make
    any direct comparisons between appeals.
37. I note the location of the proposed development close to Belsize Conservation
    Area. As the site is not located within the Conservation Area, s72(1) of the
    Planning(Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 does not apply.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
38. Policy CO1 of the Framework gives substantial weight to the benefits of
    maintaining or improving mobile coverage, capacity, reliability and resilience in
    relation to electronic telecommunications networks. Policy HC4 of the Framework
    gives substantial weight to new or improved public service infrastructure or
    community facilities where development would make a demonstrable contribution
    towards promoting good health or supporting social interaction. I have also had
    regard to the appellants arguments relating to technological need, network
    modernisation and their wider upgrade programme. These considerations weigh
    materially in favour of the proposed development. However, the site is already
    occupied by an existing InLink Unit which provides a number of similar public
    benefits. Furthermore, in the absence of site-specific measures that would address
    the concerns relating to opportunistic theft in an area identified as being
    vulnerable, and whilst I attach substantial weight to the benefits identified above,
    they do not outweigh the harm I have found to community safety and security.
Appeal A
39. I conclude that in respect of Appeal A the proposed development would fail to
    provide an acceptable level of community safety and security, contrary to policy C5
    of the CLP and would conflict with the development plan in this respect. This harm
    is significant and outweighs compliance with other development plan policies and
    the benefits identified. Appeal A is therefore dismissed.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007200


Appeal B
40. I conclude that in respect of Appeal B, as the advertisement would depend upon
    the installation of the Street Hub 3 Unit and Appeal A is dismissed, Appeal B must
    also be dismissed.



Claire Coles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
