Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026
by K Craddock BA (Hons) MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007315
1/3 Park Lane, Macclesfield, SK11 6TJ
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Anita Mo against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
• The application Ref is 25/4211/FUL.
• The development proposed is the conversion, alterations and extension of outbuildings to provide
  residential accommodation for the proprietors of the restaurant.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     From my site visit it appeared the proposed development is part-retrospective. I
       have made my determination upon the plans submitted.
3.     The Council’s reason for refusal refers to the current occupiers of the dwelling. It is
       not clear from the evidence or my site visit whether there are any current occupiers
       residing in the outbuildings and, therefore, my decision has focussed on the effect
       of the proposed development on future occupiers.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
     a) the effect of the proposed development with particular regard to contaminated
        land;
     b) whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living conditions
        for future occupiers, with particular regard to noise, odour, dust and
        environmental disturbance; and
     c) whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living conditions
        for future occupiers of the proposed dwelling, with particular regard to privacy.
Reasons
Contaminated land
5. The appeal site is located within and adjacent to areas of potentially contaminated
   land. The Council have drawn my attention to the industrial history of the wider area
   and its prioritisation for further inspection under Part 2A of the Environmental
   Protection Act (1990). The appeal has not been accompanied by a contaminated
   land report. No evidence has been provided to establish whether the appeal site

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007315


     would be affected by contaminated land, or whether it would require any
     mitigation/remediation. Therefore, I cannot be convinced that the proposed
     development would ensure the future occupiers of the proposed dwelling would be
     protected from pollution.
6. Without this information, the proposed development fails to comply with Policy
   SE12 of the Cheshire East Local Plan Site Allocations and Development Policies
   Document (SADPD) (2022) which seeks, amongst other things, for new
   development to be located and designed to mitigate pollution, including
   contaminated land, for the life of the development.
Living conditions: noise, odour, dust and environmental disturbance
7. The outbuildings extend off the rear elevation of the Chinese restaurant and front
   onto the service yard. The access to the service yard is located to the side of the
   restaurant and serves the front and rear elevations of a collection of buildings. The
   yard has a cluttered and commercial feel. The front elevation of the appeal
   outbuildings faces onto the service yard. On the other side of the outbuildings is a
   warehouse, which also faces into the yard with a roller shutter access. The
   remainder of the service yard enclosed by the rear elevations of the other
   businesses, the most noticeable of which is the Indian restaurant positioned
   immediately opposite the outbuildings.
8. At the time of my site visit there were multiple cars and vehicles parked in the yard
   along with evidence of industrial and commercial paraphernalia, and strong odours
   emanating from the Indian restaurant. The Chinese restaurant was closed but
   would have the potential to exacerbate the olfactory effect during operating hours.
9. The proximity of these commercial uses to the proposed residential
   accommodation would not create an acceptable level of amenity for the future
   occupants. The nature of activities evident from the businesses currently in
   operation would give rise to odour, noise, dust and general levels of disturbance.
   This would be exacerbated by the opening hours of the nighttime businesses.
10. No evidence has been provided to demonstrate how the appellant might protect the
    proposed development from any of the identified sources of pollution.
11. I acknowledge there are several apartments nearby with a relationship to the
    service yard. The apartments located above 3-5 Samuel Street do not have direct
    access to the service yard. Windows and Juliet balconies are evident overlooking
    the yard, however, being located towards its northern end, they are removed from
    the main sources of pollution and disturbance that would affect the proposed
    development. Flats 113a), b) and c) Park Green are accessed from the northern-
    most corner of the service yard, albeit this is via a narrow passageway. These
    dwellings have a very limited relationship with the service yard and the sources of
    pollution and disturbance therein, compared to the proposed development.
12. For the above reasons, the proposed development fails to comply with Policies
    SD1 and SD2 of the Cheshire East Local Plan Strategy (CELPS) (2017) and
    Policies GEN1, HOU10, HOU12 and ENV15 of the SADPD (2022) which seek,
    amongst other things, that development proposals should result in quality living
    environments, must not cause unacceptable harm to the amenities of future
    occupiers due to environmental disturbance or pollution and must demonstrate how


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007315


     adverse impacts shall be mitigated against to achieve positive relationships with
     neighbours properties.
Living conditions: privacy
13. All windows serving habitable rooms in the proposed residential accommodation
    would be located on the front elevation facing into the service yard. They would
    look directly onto the rear elevation of the Indian restaurant, which is two storeys
    high. There are six window openings serving the restaurant and 1no. semi-glazed
    door providing access to a balcony, all at first floor. At ground floor are two non-
    glazed doors.
14. Whilst the SADPD sets standards for distances between buildings to protect
    privacy, it only specifies the front-to-front and back-to-back distances between
    residential and non-residential dwellings. In the case of this appeal, the front
    elevation of the proposed residential accommodation would look onto the rear
    elevation of the Indian restaurant. Whilst I have not been provided with a policy
    directly specifying front-to-back distances, it could be reasonably expected they
    would need to be similar to the distances adopted under Policy HOU13 to
    effectively safeguard privacy.
15. The distance between the proposed windows and the Indian restaurant falls
    substantially below the adopted space standards and therefore the proposed
    development would result in an unacceptable level of privacy for the future
    occupiers.
16. I acknowledge that several of the windows serving the restaurant are small and
    obscure glazed and two of the larger windows are currently boarded up. This
    situation could change in the future, particularly with regard to the boarded-up
    windows and, in any event, the potential for overlooking remains from the balcony,
    the glazed door and the third large window.
17. For these reasons, the proposed development would fail to comply with Policy SE1
    of the Cheshire Local Plan Strategy (2017) and Policies GEN1 and HOU13 of the
    Site Allocations and Development Policies Document (2022) which seek, amongst
    other things, to ensure buildings are fit for purpose and achieve appropriate privacy
    for new residential properties.
Other Matters
18. The appeal site is close to a collection of listed buildings fronting onto Park Lane.
    Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires the decision maker, in considering whether to grant planning permission
    for development which affects a listed building or its setting, to have special regard
    to the desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special
    architectural or historic interest which it possesses. Due to the existing setting of
    the appeal site, its relationship to the listed buildings and the lack of visibility
    between them, I am satisfied that the proposed development would have a neutral
    effect on the setting of the listed buildings.
19. Where the proprietor of a business seeks to reside in ancillary accommodation
    associated with the business, a more flexible approach to living conditions and
    amenity standards may be appropriate. Traditionally this was the case with flats
    above shops and pubs and continues to form the living arrangements for some


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007315


     modern businesses. The rooms above the restaurant, which the appellant advises
     now comprise holiday rental accommodation, may have performed this function in
     the past. The location of these rooms, separated from the buildings on the opposite
     side of Park Green, the service yard and commercial activities therein, would have
     been capable of providing a markedly different standard of amenity for the
     occupants.
20. I acknowledge that living ‘on site’ may provide benefits to the appellant, particularly
    where working long or late hours may be involved. However, the quality of
    environment would not be suited to a residential use, especially outside the
    operating hours of the Chinese restaurant when the proprietor should be able to
    enjoy a quality standard of living conditions. The operational hours of the
    surrounding commercial premises and their activities would be outside the control
    of the appellant and present a high level of risk for pollution and disturbance across
    an unspecified range of days and times.
21. As part of the appeal the appellant has introduced the concept of an elderly relative
    living in the proposed development. It is unclear from the evidence whether this is
    covered within the description of development as being for the proprietor of the
    restaurant. Age is a protected characteristic. The Public Sector Equality Duty
    (PSED) at section 149 of the Equality Act 2010 requires me to have due regard to
    advancing equality of opportunity. Whilst I am mindful of the appellant’s evidence
    with regards to their relative, it has not been demonstrated that their needs cannot
    be met by a less harmful scheme. Therefore, the PSED considerations do not
    outweigh the harm that I have identified, and following careful consideration of
    these matters, I am satisfied that the impact of dismissing this appeal is
    proportionate and justified.
22. The appellant has referred to a scheme for forty apartments believe to be located
    opposite the appeal site; however, I have not been provided with full details of such
    a scheme and cannot provide further comment. In any event, each case must be
    determined on its own merits.
23. Similarly, any potential redevelopment of the town centre would be assessed on its
    own merits and against the relevant policies.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons set out above, having regard to the development plan as a whole
    and all other material considerations, I conclude that the appeal is dismissed.



K Craddock
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
