Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 August 2026
by Elaine Moulton BA (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007630
16 Hobart Street, Leicester LE2 0JS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Girach & Mrs Kathuria against the decision of Leicester City Council.
•    The application Ref is 20260070.
•    The development proposed is the change of use from house (Class C3) to house in multiple
     occupation (7 persons) (sui generis).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development set out above is taken from the application form. I
       have, however, omitted the words ‘retrospective application for’ as it does not
       describe an act of development.
3.     The Council cited Policy Ho10 of the emerging Leicester Local Plan 2020-2036
       (LP) in its decision notice. Following the Council’s decision, the LP was adopted
       replacing the Core Strategy (July 2014) and the City of Leicester Local Plan
       (January 2006). Therefore, I have determined this appeal in accordance with the
       new LP and note that Policy Ho10 has been renumbered Ho11.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026 during the appeal process. However, as the policy content of the
       Framework, insofar as it relates to this case, has not significantly changed, there is
       no requirement for me to seek further submissions from the main parties. I am
       satisfied no party would be prejudiced if I determine the appeal accordingly.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the character of the area, with
       regards to the balance and mix of housing and the living conditions of
       neighbouring occupiers.
Reasons
6.     16 Hobart Street is a mid-terraced property situated in a well-established
       residential area. It is currently in use as a licensed House in Multiple Occupation
       (HMO). Approval is sought for the use of the property as a 6-bedroom, 7-person
       HMO.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007630


7.       LP Policy Ho11 relates to HMOs and states that planning permission will be
         granted for such a use where the proposal will not have an adverse impact on the
         character of the area, and a mixed and balanced community can be maintained. In
         addition, it requires that the existing proportion of HMOs and other non-family
         housing within the area does not amount to a significant concentration.
         Accordingly, the policy does not prohibit additional HMOs, rather, it sets out the
         circumstances in which such development will be acceptable.
8.       In the absence of any policy-defined threshold or prescribed assessment area,
         whether there is a significant concentration of HMOs is a matter of planning
         judgement based on the evidence before me.
9.       The appeal site is within an area that is subject to an Article 4 Direction (A4D)
         which prevents houses being converted to small scale HMOs, which are for up to 6
         persons, without the benefit of planning permission. As the development relates to
         a 7-person HMO, planning permission is required regardless of the A4D.
         Nevertheless, the A4D indicates that the site is in an area where HMOs have been
         identified as being problematic.
10. The Council has carried out a Review1 of A4Ds. Appendix C of the Review
    indicates that the appeal site is within a part of the Stoneygate ward where
    between 15 to 20% of the total housing stock are HMOs. In my judgement, this
    amounts to a significant concentration of HMOs and indicates the community in
    which the appeal site is located has become unbalanced. Accordingly, the
    development conflicts with LP Policy Ho11 as it would contribute to an existing
    over concentration of HMOs in the local community.
11. There is limited evidence that the appeal property, or nearby HMOs, have
    generated a significant number of complaints relating to noise, disturbance or anti-
    social behaviour. Nevertheless, occupants of HMOs are likely to lead more
    independent lifestyles than members of a single household. As a result, comings
    and goings, visitor activity and general day-to-day movements are likely to occur at
    varying times of the day and evening. This would typically generate a higher
    degree of activity and associated noise than would arise from a family dwelling.
    When experienced alongside noise and disturbance arising from the concentration
    of HMOs in the area, such activity could harm the living conditions of other
    members of the community.
12. Reducing the occupancy from 10 to 7, as now proposed, would lessen the level of
    activity associated with the appeal property. However, there is no compelling
    evidence before me to indicate that the reduction would be sufficient to overcome
    the broader concerns arising from the significant concentration of HMOs in the
    area. Consequently, I am not persuaded that the development would avoid harm
    to the living conditions of the wider community.
13. I therefore conclude that the development would have a harmful effect on the
    character of the area in terms of the balance and mix of housing. Furthermore,
    when considered cumulatively with other HMOs in the area, it would adversely
    affect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. Accordingly, the
    development conflicts with LP Policy Ho11, which seeks to ensure that HMOs do
    not have an adverse impact on the character of the area and that mixed and
    balanced communities are maintained.
1
    Review of Article 4 Directions relating to Conversion of Houses (Class C3) to Class C4 Small Houses in Multiple Occupation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
Appeal Decision 6007630


Other Considerations
14. The appeal site is located within the South Highfields Conservation Area (CA). As
    such, I have had regard to the statutory duty to pay special attention to the
    desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of that area, as
    set out at section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas)
    Act 1990. The significance and special interest of the CA, insofar as it is relevant
    to this appeal, derives from the historic and townscape value of the 19th century
    terraced housing within it.
15. The development does not include any external alterations to the appeal property.
    It is also a residential use and therefore the nature of activity on the appeal site
    would be similar albeit more intensive. Consequently, I find that the development
    has a neutral effect and, as such, preserves the character and appearance of the
    CA, a conclusion which I note was also reached by the Council.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
16. Policy S4 of the Framework outlines that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework.
17. The development provides an HMO which, arguably, is a more effective use of
    land. The occupants would benefit from adequate internal space and good access
    to public transport and would be within convenient walking and cycling distance of
    services and facilities. There would also be economic benefits through the
    occupiers contributing to the local economy.
18. However, I have found that the development would contribute to an existing
    concentration of HMOs within the area and would therefore be contrary to an
    objective of the Framework to provide for an appropriate mix of accommodation for
    the local community. It would also generate noise and disturbance which is
    contrary to the Framework objective of ensuring that development is appropriate
    for its location.
19. I therefore find that when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    in the Framework, the benefits of approving the development would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
20. As such, the material considerations do not indicate that in this case the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan. The
    development conflicts with the development plan when considered as a whole.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

Elaine Moulton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
