Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by S Ramsden BSc (Hons) MA MA IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6007883
217 Colney Hatch Lane, Colney Hatch, Barnet, London N10 1AP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Dr Sally Paynter against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Barnet.
•    The application reference is 25/5055/RCU.
•    The development proposed is the change of use from single family dwellinghouse to an HMO Use
     Class C4.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development used above is taken from the application form.
       The Planning Statement confirms that the proposed house in multiple occupation
       (HMO), which has three bedrooms, would be for occupation by up to four
       individuals. That occupation limit was included in the Council’s description, and I
       have determined the appeal on the same basis.
3.     The application form also states that the appeal site has been in use as a HMO for
       several years and some evidence to that effect has been provided. I am therefore
       considering the proposal retrospectively. It is not, however, the function of this
       appeal to determine whether any existing use as a HMO has become established
       through the passage of time.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.
5.     A Borough-wide Article 4 Direction is in place, withdrawing permitted development
       rights for the change of use from dwelling houses (Use Class C3) to small-scale
       HMO (Use Class C4), in order to facilitate acceptable HMOs and manage negative
       impacts.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
       •      whether the site is suitably located for use as a HMO, having regard to the
              development plan and the effect on the supply of family housing; and,
       •      the effect of the development on highway and pedestrian safety, with
              particular regard to car parking.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007883


Reasons
Location
7.     Both the London Plan (2021) and the Barnet Local Plan (the Local Plan) (2025)
       recognise the role HMOs play in providing an appropriate mix of housing types,
       and that they are an important source of low cost, private sector housing for
       students, those on lower incomes and those seeking temporary accommodation.
       However, Policy HOU04 of the Local Plan supports proposals for new HMOs only
       where certain criteria are met, including that it is demonstrated they meet an
       identified need and that they are easily accessible by public transport, cycling and
       walking.
8.     Policy HOU02 of the Local Plan seeks to deliver a mix of dwelling types to meet
       the Borough’s housing needs. The supporting text identifies that a priority for the
       Council is protecting the stock of family houses, which will help to encourage
       families, and growing households, to remain in the Borough. The appeal site is a
       three bedroom dwellinghouse, and change of use to a HMO would result in the
       loss of a family dwelling.
9.     Whilst the appeal property is currently being used as a HMO, that is not, of itself,
       confirmation that there is an identified need for HMOs in this part of the Borough.
       Conversely, no substantive evidence has been submitted that there is not a need
       to protect the existing stock of family houses in the area, as identified in the Local
       Plan.
10. Consequently, no compelling evidence has been presented to demonstrate a need
    for HMO accommodation in line with Policy HOU04, and the loss of a family
    dwelling would undermine the Council’s strategic approach which otherwise
    prioritises meeting needs for family housing, as articulated in Policy HOU02 and
    the supporting text to Policies HOU02 and HOU04.
11. In terms of accessibility, despite the proximity of bus stops, the site has a Public
    Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL) rating of 2, which is classified as poor. Also
    the site is not in close proximity to a station or town centre location, with access to
    a wider range of services and facilities. The site is not, therefore, located in an
    area which is easily accessible by public transport, cycling and walking.
12. The HMO may comply with other requirements, such as internal space standards
    or licensing requirements, and would not lead to an over-proliferation of such
    properties in the area. However, those are separate criteria in Policy HOU04 and
    the Policy requires that all the relevant criteria are met. Therefore, that does not
    negate the requirement to demonstrate a specific need for HMOs in this location,
    to ensure that an appropriate mix of housing types and tenures is maintained
    across the Borough.
13. In the absence of satisfactory evidence of need, the development would not be
    suitably located for use as a HMO, having regard to the development plan and the
    effect on the supply of family housing. It conflicts with Policies HOU02 and HOU04
    of the Local Plan, which taken together support the strategic aim of the provision of
    an appropriate mix of housing types and tenures in the Borough.
14. The development is not supported by Policy H9 of the London Plan as it would
    result in the loss of a family dwelling which itself meets local housing needs. It



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007883


         would, therefore, conflict with Policy D3 of the London Plan which requires that
         development is of the most appropriate form and land use of a site.
15. Both the Council’s Residential Design Guidance Supplementary Planning
    Document (2016) and the Sustainable Design and Construction Supplementary
    Planning Document (2016) are cited on the decision notice, in the reason for
    refusal relating to the location of the appeal site. The development is not contrary
    to the Council’s Residential Design Guidance SPD with regards to matters relating
    to location, such as impacts on amenity and character of the street. It is not
    immediately clear how the Sustainable Design and Construction SPD relates to
    the location of development and it has not been determinative in this issue.
Highway safety
16. The appeal site is not within a controlled parking zone (CPZ) and there is no on-
    site parking provision. The site has a PTAL rating of 2, indicating overall it has
    poor access to public transport.
17. There do not appear to be any parking restrictions on the street immediately in
    front of the appeal property. However its location on a curving section of the
    dualled B550, on the approach to a busy interchange with the North Circular,
    means that parking of vehicles in that location would be unlikely to be a realistic or
    safe proposition. It is therefore likely that any car parking provision would be
    sought in the nearby residential side streets.
18. Policy T4 of the London Plan states that development proposals should not
    increase road danger, and the accompanying text of Policy TRC03 of the Local
    Plan states that in order to determine the suitability of parking arrangements, the
    Council promotes the use of the parking survey methodology set out in the
    guidance produced by the London Borough of Lambeth1 (the Lambeth
    Methodology).
19. The Council’s parking standards indicate a maximum requirement of one parking
    space for a 3+ bed unit in a PTAL 2 area. Whilst there is no specific indication of
    parking requirements for HMOs, the use of the appeal property by up to three
    independent households, albeit of limited sizes, would likely generate a greater
    demand for on-street car parking than its use as a single family dwelling.
20. The appeal site is currently occupied as a HMO, and evidence has been submitted
    that at three specific times, during a two week period, ample spare capacity for on-
    street parking was observed. However, that has not been quantified and the
    Lambeth Methodology has not been followed. The parking evidence also appears
    to relate only to the Colney Hatch Lane frontages, without including the residential
    side streets which are closer to the appeal site.
21. At my site visit I observed that whilst there appeared to be some spare capacity for
    on-street parking it was limited in nature. I also observed that due to the width and
    nature of the residential side streets, pavement parking was prevalent, with
    consequential risks for highway and pedestrian safety.
22. These observations of the parking conditions are only a snapshot of parking at
    those particular times. Nevertheless, given the limited spare capacity observed
    and the potential highway safety issues resultant from increased demand for on-

1
    Lambeth Council Parking Survey Guidance Note: Lambeth Transport Parking Survey Methodology.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6007883


       street car parking, it has not been adequately demonstrated that parking
       associated with the HMO use would avoid any unacceptable risk to highway and
       pedestrian safety.
23. In the absence of a car parking survey, in line with the Lambeth Methodology,
    based on the evidence before me, it has not been demonstrated that the HMO use
    does not cause harm to highway and pedestrian safety, with particular regard to
    car parking. The development, therefore, conflicts with Policy TRC03 of the Local
    Plan, and Policies T4 and T6.1 of the London Plan, which taken together seek to
    ensure that there is appropriate levels of car parking for a development, and
    development does not increase road danger.
Other Matters
24. The Council’s reasons for refusal refer to impacts of the development on the
    character and amenity of the area. However, the Council has clarified that its
    concerns in that regard relate to the principle of the change of use and its effect on
    the mix of housing, which is considered above, rather than other, externally visible
    indicators of the change of use. No external alterations are proposed and the
    Officer’s Report states that the development is not considered to detract from the
    character and appearance of the area or to adversely impact the amenity of
    neighbouring occupants, in comparison to a single family dwelling. Given the main
    road location and the limited size of the HMO, I see no reason to disagree with the
    Officer’s Report. That is, however, a neutral consideration which does not
    outweigh the identified conflict with the development plan.
25. Drawing on the conclusions reached above, there is no clear evidence of any
    benefit in terms of housing mix or optimising the use of the site. Nor does the
    evidence before me establish that the HMO use meets the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community or avoid unacceptable impact on highway
    safety. Therefore, in the circumstances of this case, any benefits are substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the revised Framework and the development does not benefit
    from the presumption in favour of sustainable development.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above, and having regard to other matters, the appeal
    should be dismissed.

S Ramsden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
