Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by E Fawcett BA (Jt Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007776
Wrights Upholstery, Claremont Street, Burnley, Lancashire BB12 0HG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Khalid Mahmood of Horizon Properties NW Ltd against the decision of
     Burnley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is FUL/2025/0464.
•    The development proposed was described on the application form as “change of use and conversion
     of existing building to form student accommodation comprising 48 No. studio style bedrooms”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The application form originally described the proposal as providing 48 studio-style
       bedrooms. However, during the determination of the planning application, the
       scheme was amended to provide 24 studio bedrooms. The proposal also includes
       external alterations to the building, including an increase in the height of the rear
       wall and roof. I have therefore determined the appeal on the basis of the
       description set out in the Council’s decision notice: change of use to student
       accommodation (sui generis) comprising 24 studio bedrooms with associated
       external alterations, including increasing the rear extension’s roof height. This
       description more accurately reflects the proposal before me and the appellant’s
       submissions. I am satisfied that no party would be prejudiced by adopting this
       description.
3.     An amended site plan was submitted as part of the appeal which revises the layout
       and markings of the proposed front car parking area to identify one accessible
       parking space. Having regard to relevant case law, I am satisfied that the changes
       are not substantial. The Council and interested parties have had an opportunity to
       comment on the revised plan during the appeal, and the Council refers to this
       amendment in its statement. Given this and the limited nature of the change, I am
       satisfied that no party would be prejudiced by accepting the amended plan.
4.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007776


Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposed development would provide adequate living
                conditions for future occupants, with particular reference to communal
                indoor and outdoor space;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the
                occupants of nearby residential properties in particular relation to noise; and
           •    whether the proposed development would provide an acceptable level of
                parking provision, including disabled parking.
Reasons
Living Conditions of Future Occupants
6.     The appeal proposal would provide 24 individual studio rooms intended for student
       occupation. Each unit would contain combined sleeping and living
       accommodation, including a kitchen area, with separate bathroom facilities. The
       development would not provide any meaningful internal communal facilities, with
       the only shared internal areas comprising circulation space within the corridors and
       stairwells and bicycle storage facilities. Externally, a long and relatively narrow
       yard area is proposed alongside the building, incorporating bin storage and an
       access point to the accommodation.
7.     The individual units would meet the Nationally Described Space Standards,
       however the development is proposed as student accommodation falling within the
       sui generis use class and not self-contained housing under use class C3.
       Consequently, the accommodation would provide little opportunity for residents to
       interact and socialise within the building. The studio units would combine living,
       studying and sleeping functions within a single room, leaving little space for
       residents to host visitors or gather socially. Furthermore, the absence of dedicated
       communal facilities such as shared lounges, study spaces or social areas would
       significantly reduce opportunities for informal interaction between occupants.
       Given that the accommodation is intended for students, many of whom may be
       living away from home and in an unfamiliar environment, communal facilities can
       play an important role in fostering social interaction, community cohesion and
       resident wellbeing. The lack of such facilities would therefore limit opportunities for
       social engagement and could contribute to feelings of isolation amongst
       occupants.
8.     Although the yard area to the side of the building is identified as communal
       amenity space, its form and layout would significantly limit its functionality. The
       space is relatively narrow and would also accommodate bin storage and access to
       the secondary entrance, reducing the area available for meaningful use as a place
       for occupants to sit-out, gather or interact. In addition, its close proximity to several
       ground-floor studio windows would create potential conflicts between occupants
       seeking to use the space for socialising and those seeking privacy and quiet
       enjoyment of their accommodation. The constrained dimensions of the yard would
       make it difficult to accommodate seating or larger groups of residents, and its
       attractiveness and usability would be further reduced during periods of poor
       weather, particularly during the winter months. Consequently, while the space


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007776


       could support limited informal use, it would not provide a realistic substitute for
       dedicated internal communal facilities, nor would the nearby public open space.
9.     Taking these factors together, the proposal would fail to provide adequate
       communal space to meet the needs of future occupants. The absence of internal
       shared facilities, combined with the limited functionality and usability of the
       external area, would result in a form of student accommodation that provides
       insufficient opportunities for social interaction. This would lead to a substandard
       living environment for future residents and would be detrimental to their overall
       quality of accommodation and wellbeing.
10. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would fail to provide adequate
    living conditions for future occupants. It would therefore conflict with Policy SP5 of
    Burnley’s Local Plan (2018) (the Local Plan) which seeks to ensure, amongst other
    things, that proposals do not result in unacceptable conditions for future users and
    occupiers of the development.
Living Conditions of Neighbouring Properties
11. The appeal property comprises a large vacant commercial building situated within
    a predominantly residential area characterised by 2-storey terraced dwellings. The
    nearest neighbouring properties front onto Mitchell Street and Claremont Street,
    the latter providing the principal access to the proposed development.
12. The proposal would accommodate up to 24 students within self-contained studio
    units. The scale and nature of this occupation would differ materially from that
    associated with a typical dwelling in the surrounding area. Given the number of
    residents and the independent nature of the accommodation, the proposal is likely
    to generate a greater frequency of arrivals and departures throughout the day and
    evening. Furthermore, student occupants are more likely to engage in social
    activities that result in movements to and from the site during late evening and
    early morning periods, including on weekdays. Consequently, the pattern and
    intensity of activity associated with the development would be notably different
    from that typically experienced within the surrounding residential context.
13. As the proposal does not include any internal communal facilities where residents
    could congregate in significant numbers, the potential for noise arising from
    organised social activity within the building would be limited. In addition, the
    relatively small size of the individual studio units would restrict the ability to
    accommodate larger gatherings within private rooms. On this basis, noise
    generated from activities occurring within the building itself is unlikely to give rise
    to significant harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
14. Notwithstanding the above, the occupation of the building by up to 24 residents
    would inevitably increase activity associated with movement to and from the site.
    Whilst it would not be reasonable to assume that all residents would be arriving or
    departing simultaneously, the cumulative effect of 24 independently occupied units
    means that such movements are likely to occur regularly, including during
    unsociable hours. This is particularly relevant given the site's location within a
    residential area where background noise levels are likely to be lower during the
    evening and overnight periods. As a result, neighbouring occupiers would be more
    likely to experience noise arising from residents entering and leaving the building,
    talking outside, waiting for transport, or interacting with one another upon arrival.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007776


15. Furthermore, although the external area to the side of the building is limited in size
    and would not function as a substantial communal amenity space, it nevertheless
    provides an area where residents could gather, including during anti-social hours.
    Any such activity, especially during late evening or early morning hours, has the
    potential to generate noise that would be readily perceptible to nearby residents.
16. Whilst a noise assessment, secured by condition, could identify and mitigate noise
    transmission arising from activities within the building itself, I am not satisfied that it
    would be capable of adequately addressing the effects of noise generated
    externally. I note that the Council’s Environmental Protection Team raises no
    objections to the proposal. Nevertheless, I have considered the effect of the
    proposal on living conditions of neighbouring residents based on the evidence
    before me. Taken together, the pattern of comings and goings and the potential for
    outdoor congregation would likely give rise to an unacceptable level of noise.
    As such, the proposal would materially harm the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers and this harm could not be satisfactorily mitigated through the use of
    planning conditions.
17. I conclude that the proposed development would result in an unacceptable harmful
    effect on the living conditions of the occupants of nearby residential properties.
    It therefore conflicts with Local Plan Policy SP5 which, amongst other things,
    seeks to ensure that there is no unacceptable adverse impact on the amenity of
    neighbouring occupants or adjacent land users.
Parking Provision
18. The appeal property is located within the urban area, close to local shops and
    other facilities including several bus routes providing access into Burnley town
    centre. The proposal includes 5 on-site parking spaces, 1 of which would be an
    accessible space, together with a secure internal cycle store. In addition, each
    studio room would contain a lockable storage cupboard capable of
    accommodating a bicycle. The surrounding area contains a substantial amount of
    terraced housing, where residents are generally reliant on on-street parking due to
    limited off-street provision. A nearby school and medical centre are also likely to
    generate parking demand within the locality.
19. The Local Plan does not contain specific parking standards for student
    accommodation of the type proposed. Although standards for halls of residence
    have been referenced, these relate to Class C2 development and are not directly
    applicable to the appeal scheme. Nevertheless, the proposal would provide
    significantly fewer parking spaces than would be required under those standards.
    No mechanism has been proposed to restrict residents from owning or bringing
    cars to the site. However, the likely occupants would be students, a group that
    typically exhibits lower levels of car ownership than the general population.
    Furthermore, the site's accessible location, close to regular public transport
    services and local shops and facilities, means that future residents would not be
    dependent on private vehicles to access the university campus or meet day-to-day
    needs.
20. The limited level of on-site parking is likely to result in some demand for on-street
    parking. However, whilst parking pressure already exists in the surrounding area,
    particularly close to the terraced properties, the evidence before me does not
    demonstrate that any overspill parking generated by the development would be so


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007776


       severe as to result in unacceptable impacts. There are opportunities for parking
       within the surrounding road network, including to the front of undeveloped land or
       less dense development. Moreover, there is no substantive evidence that any
       additional on-street parking demand would prejudice the free flow of traffic, or
       otherwise give rise to highway safety concerns. Consequently, I am satisfied that
       any overspill parking associated with the proposal could be accommodated within
       the surrounding area, and would not result in a material harm to highway safety.
21. The Council has confirmed that the amended plan, which introduces an accessible
    parking space, addresses its concerns regarding the absence of disabled parking
    provision. The inclusion of a dedicated accessible parking space would improve
    accessibility for disabled residents and would ensure that the needs of disabled
    road users are appropriately accommodated, in line with the requirements of Local
    Plan Policy IC3.
22. Taking the above into account, I conclude that the proposed development would
    provide an acceptable level of parking provision, including disabled parking. It
    would therefore comply with Policy IC3 of the Local Plan which seeks to ensure,
    amongst other things, that development provides adequate car parking,
    appropriate to its nature and scale, taking into account whether any
    under-provision might cause or exacerbate congestion, highway safety issues or
    on-street parking problems, and should, wherever practicable, accommodate the
    need of disabled road users.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
23. The proposal would provide an appropriate level of parking provision to serve the
    development, but it would fail to provide adequate living conditions for future
    occupants and would cause harm to the living conditions of the occupants of
    nearby residential properties. It therefore conflicts with the development plan taken
    as a whole.
24. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
25. The proposed development would bring a building back into use and improve its
    overall character and appearance. Policy L2 of the Framework indicates that
    substantial weight should be given to the benefits where a proposal would make
    better use of vacant and underutilised buildings.
26. Policy H07 of the Framework also states that substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the
    evidenced accommodation needs of the community, including students, as
    identified through needs assessments prepared for the area of the local planning
    authority and other relevant evidence. There is no substantive evidence before me
    which identifies such a need for additional student accommodation, although I
    accept it would add generally to the overall supply of homes in line with the aims of
    the Framework. Whilst the appellant has made reference to Policies HO1 and
    HO5, these are plan-making policies which the Framework indicates should not be
    used when making decisions on development proposals.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007776


27. Economic benefits would also arise during the construction phase although these
    would be short term. There would be further economic benefits from future
    expenditure by occupiers of the proposed units. Whilst the proposal would provide
    24 studio rooms, these would be for individual occupation and therefore benefits
    through expenditure would likely be small and therefore attract a correspondingly
    small amount of weight.
28. However, in re-using the vacant building and providing additional housing, the
    proposed accommodation would conversely conflict with other policies of the
    Framework, including HO9 relating to the standard of accommodation for students
    and P3 in respect of the living conditions of neighbours. Taken together, I find the
    benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies of the Framework.
    As such, Policy S4 of the Framework does not point to permission being granted in
    this instance.
29. Consequently, there are no material considerations, including the Framework, to
    suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to all
    relevant matters, the appeal should be dismissed.

E Fawcett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
