Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by MG Garrard LLB (Hons), PGDip.LP, Solicitor
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007202
2 Park Farm, Park Road, Westoning, Central Bedfordshire MK45 5LA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Graham Honour against the decision of Central Bedfordshire Council.
•    The application Ref is CB/25/03531/FULL.
•    The development proposed is a hay store.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a hay store at 2 Park
       Farm, Park Road, Westoning, Central Bedfordshire MK45 5LA in accordance with
       the terms of the application, Ref CB/25/03531/FULL, subject to the following
       condition:
       1) The hay store hereby permitted shall accord with the following approved plan:
          2025044-SU-001-A.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal relates to development that has already been carried out. I saw the
       hay store in place during my site visit and have determined the appeal on that
       basis. I am satisfied that the hay store I observed accords with the development
       shown on the submitted plan. As ‘retrospective’ describes the timing of the
       application rather than the act of development, I have omitted that word from the
       description of development above.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published in August 2026. The main parties were given an opportunity to comment
       on the implications of the revised Framework for the appeal, and I have taken
       those comments into account in reaching my decision. References to the
       Framework in my decision are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is:
           •    Whether the development is inappropriate development in the Green Belt
                having regard to the Framework, any relevant development plan policies
                and taking account of the effect of the development on openness and the
                purposes of including land within the Green Belt.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007202


Reasons
Inappropriate development
5.       The Framework sets out that development in the Green Belt is inappropriate
         subject to a number of exceptions. Policy GB7 1.f.iv provides that the provision of
         appropriate facilities (in connection with the existing use of land or a change of
         use), including buildings, for, amongst other things, outdoor sport and outdoor
         recreation, is not inappropriate development, provided that the impact on the
         openness of the Green Belt is minimised and there would not be a significant
         conflict with the Green Belt purposes. Policy SP4 of the Central Bedfordshire Local
         Plan 2015-2035 (Adopted July 2021) (CBLP) indicates that development proposals
         within the Green Belt will be assessed in accordance with government guidance
         contained in the NPPF1 and NPPG.2
6.       The appeal site is in established equestrian use, with stables, paddocks, a
         ménage and associated hardstanding, and the Council accepts that the hay store
         is associated with that use. The keeping and exercising of horses is an outdoor
         activity that, in my view, amounts to outdoor recreation for the purposes of Policy
         GB7 1.f.iv. It is unclear why the Council concludes that the proposal falls outside
         Policy GB7 1.f.iv simply because it takes the form of a building. That policy
         expressly provides for appropriate facilities, including buildings, in connection with
         outdoor recreation.
7.       The hay store is located within the corner of one of the paddocks, opening onto an
         area of hardstanding. It is a modest structure whose purpose is the storage of hay
         to support the equestrian use. Therefore, I find that it constitutes an appropriate
         facility for outdoor recreation within the meaning of Policy GB7 1.f.iv of the
         Framework.
8.       The site is contained by surrounding residential, equestrian and farm-related
         development. Although the hay store adds built form, minimising impact on
         openness does not require land to remain entirely free from development.
9.       Visually, the dark timber hay store sits comfortably within its equestrian setting and
         is seen against the nearby built form, including the rear elevations of properties on
         Manor Close and their associated domestic paraphernalia. Given its modest scale,
         appearance and relationship to the existing use, it is not visually intrusive and
         causes no material harm to visual openness.
10. Spatially, the low single-storey building occupies a very small part of the site and
    supports the existing equestrian use without materially increasing activity. Its
    simple form gives it a limited physical presence, so it does not materially diminish
    spatial openness.
11. The hay store is associated with an established equestrian use within a well-
    contained site on the edge of the settlement. It does not represent urban sprawl,
    result in material encroachment into the countryside, contribute to the merging of
    towns, affect the setting or special character of an historic town, or conflict with
    urban regeneration objectives.



1
    National Planning Policy Framework
2
    National Planning Practice Guidance


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6007202


12. Accordingly, the impact on the openness of the Green Belt is minimised and the
    development does not conflict with the Green Belt purposes to any material
    degree, and certainly not to a significant extent.
13. For these reasons, I find that the development is not inappropriate development in
    the Green Belt having regard to the Framework, any relevant development plan
    policies and taking account of the effect of the development on openness and the
    purposes of including land within the Green Belt. Accordingly, it also complies with
    Policy SP4 of the CBLP with regard to its stipulation that development proposals
    within the Green Belt will be assessed in accordance with the government
    guidance contained in the NPPF and NPPG.
Other Matters
14. Concerns have been raised about the retrospective nature of the development and
    alleged breaches of planning control. Policy DM8.2 of the Framework indicates
    that where consideration is being given to an application for retrospective planning
    permission, if it is concluded based on evidence that the unauthorised
    development was intentional, that fact should be given substantial weight in
    considering whether to grant planning permission.
15. The appellant’s evidence indicates the hay store was moved to its current location
    to avoid the paddock becoming muddy through repeated access to the store.
    There is no substantive evidence before me that the development was carried out
    intentionally to avoid planning control. Therefore, I give limited weight to the fact
    that the development has already taken place.
Conditions
16. No conditions were suggested by the Council. I have imposed a condition requiring
    accordance with the approved plan. A commencement condition is unnecessary
    because the development has already been carried out. Although the Council’s
    landscape officer sought additional planting, the decision report found this
    unreasonable given the scale and location of the hay store, and I have no reason
    to disagree. No other conditions are necessary.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above, the development is not inappropriate development in
    the Green Belt and complies with the development plan as a whole. There are no
    other material considerations of sufficient weight that indicate a decision should be
    made otherwise than in accordance with it. The appeal is therefore allowed.

MG Garrard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
