Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 31 July 2026
by G Sylvester BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007272
46 North Trade Road, Battle TN33 0HS
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Robert Regan against the decision of Rother District Council.
•      The application Ref is RR/2025/1747/FULL was refused by notice dated 5 December 2025.
•      The development proposed is the part-demolition of No.46 and subsequent erection of 5no.
       detached dwellings, construction of access drive and associated scheme of hard and soft
       landscaping.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.       An application for a partial award of costs was made by Mr Robert Regan against
         the decision of Rother District Council. This application is the subject of a separate
         decision.
Procedural Matters
3.       The main parties have commented on the relevance of the revised National
         Planning Policy Framework ("the Framework"), published on 17 August 2026, to
         their respective cases in this appeal. I have considered those comments in
         reaching my decision. All references to the Framework are to the revised version
         unless indicated otherwise.
4.       The appellant submitted an amended first floor plan for the proposed 4-bed chalet
         style dwellings showing additional obscure glazing to bedroom windows and an
         amended site plan showing retained hedgerows and additional planting. They also
         submitted updated versions of the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal, Biodiversity
         Net Gain (BNG) Feasibility Assessment and Metric, and BNG Reservation
         Certificate.
5.       Given the nature of what they show, the amended drawings and updated
         documents do not amount to a substantial change to the appeal scheme. The
         updated documents have been subject to consultation with a County Council
         Ecologist, and the District Council has confirmed that it is no longer defending
         refusal reason number 3. I have read those documents and see no reasons to
         reach a different conclusion. In having regard to the relevant appeal procedural
         guidance1, I am satisfied that I can take those drawings and documents into


1
    Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England. For appeals relating to applications dated on or before 31 March 2026.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007272


         account without causing prejudice to anyone. On that basis, I have dealt with the
         appeal on the basis of what is shown in those revised drawings and documents.
6.       For the purposes of determining whether the proposed development triggers the
         need for affordable housing under relevant policies, the main parties dispute
         whether the appeal site exceeds 0.3 hectares in area. Whilst this matter was not
         recorded in the Council’s decision notice, it has been a continual dispute between
         the parties that has continued up to and including the final comments stage of the
         appeal, with both parties having had the opportunity to address it through their
         submissions in the interests of fairness. In reaching a decision on this appeal I
         have taken account of the responses received and I have included it amongst my
         main issues.
Main Issues
7.       The main issues in this appeal are:
            •    The effects of the proposed development on the character and appearance
                 of the area, with particular regard to its location within The High Weald
                 National Landscape (“the HWNL”).
            •    Whether the proposed development would make adequate provision for
                 affordable housing.
            •    Whether the proposed development would use land efficiently.
            •    The effect of the proposed development on the mix of housing within the
                 local area.
Reasons
Character and appearance, including the HWNL
8.       The appeal site lies within the HWNL, which was formerly known as The High
         Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)2. In determining this appeal, I
         shall have regard to my duty3 to seek to further the purpose of conserving and
         enhancing the natural beauty of national landscapes. The High Weald AONB
         Management Plan 2024-2029 (“the HWMP”) describes the HWNL as one of the
         best-preserved medieval landscapes in north-west Europe, with a natural beauty
         derived from its essentially rural and small-scale landscape character.
9.       The HWMP identifies the core character components of the HWNL as including
         the rurality, naturalness and tranquillity of its landscape, dispersed historic
         settlements and late medieval villages and market towns, with Battle being the
         largest by population. The HWMP identifies the verdant character of settlements
         as being a key characteristic, including substantial soft landscaping. The
         objectives of the HWMP, include the protection of the distinctive character and
         landscape settings of towns, and enhancing architectural quality.
10. The HWMP sets out ‘actions’ to achieve those objectives, including promoting the
    use of the High Weald Housing Design Guide (“the HWDG”), pursuing landscape
    led approaches and prioritising the delivery of new housing primarily through
    small-scale development consistent with AONB character.


2
    All designated Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty in England became National Landscapes in November 2023.
3
    Section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 as amended by the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decision 6007272


11. The appeal site comprises of an undeveloped and overgrown parcel of land in a so
    called ‘backland’ position behind a row of dwellings that front onto North Trade
    Road, and between them and the dwellings further to the north along Vale Road.
    The character of the area is residential suburban, comprising a mixture of
    detached bungalows, chalet style dwellings and two storey dwellings of varying
    styles.
12. Those fronting North Trade Road mostly occupy generous plots and the spaces
    between them allow some limited views of the countryside to be obtained from the
    road. However, several backland style developments served by private roads and
    cul-de-sac type developments are also visible in those same views. They appear
    indicative of expansion of this part of the town over the years through incremental
    residential infilling.
13. This would be expected to continue with the building out of an extant planning
    permission4 for a row of 4 relatively tightly spaced bungalows in a cul-de-sac
    layout on a backland site behind the dwellings fronting North Trade Road and
    adjoining the appeal site to the northeast (“the 2024 planning permission”).
    Therefore, it is reasonable to treat the baseline position of the appeal site as being
    a modestly sized parcel of overgrown land more or less surrounded on all sides by
    residential properties.
14. In that context, the appeal site’s spaciously verdant condition, the appreciation of
    which is largely restricted to private views from nearby properties within the garden
    scene, contributes little to the built-up suburban character and appearance of the
    area. There is no public access to the appeal land and no part of it is contiguous
    with the open land forming the town’s setting. Accordingly, the appeal site does not
    contribute to the core character components of the rural landscape and scenic
    beauty of the HWNL, and I note that the Council reached a similar conclusion.
15. Nevertheless, the HWDG emphasises the need for the settlement pattern and
    design of new development to reflect the characteristics of the HWNL, which in this
    instance includes the immediate surroundings to the appeal site. The HWDG is not
    supportive of new cul-de-sac style development. However, the numerous cul-de-
    sacs and backland housing sites off North Trade Road form part of the established
    character of the area in this part of the HWNL. I note that the Council and the
    Inspector for an earlier dismissed appeal scheme5 for a row of 8 semi-detached 3-
    storey dwellings reached similar conclusions.
16. The proposed development would functionally and visually relate more to North
    Trade Road than to Vale Road. This is because the proposed access would join
    North Trade Road, and the proposed dwellings would front onto the access road.
    The proposed dwellings would be visible from Vale Road, on elevated land above
    the boundary hedgerow that lines the south side of the road. However, the
    distances of separation between them would be sufficient to avoid them being
    prominent in views from Vale Road.
17. Interested parties consider the scheme to be an overdevelopment of the land.
    However, the appeal scheme’s backland position and the pattern of its cul-de-sac
    layout would be in-keeping with the general pattern of development in the area.


4
    RR/2023/1698/P
5
    APP/U1430/W/24/3345193


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007272


       This includes some tightly spaced backland dwellings and the tighter spaces that
       exist between Numbers 40-44 North Trade Road.
18. The collective massing of the roof forms of the proposed dwellings would be visible
    from North Trade Road, through gaps between the frontage dwellings. However,
    they would not loom above the existing properties that front onto the road. This is
    because the ridge heights of the proposed 4-bed dwellings would be comparable
    to Number 44 and in the region of 2 metres lower than the ridgeline of Number 46
    North Trade Road. As such they would largely assimilate into the mixed roofscape
    in the street scene.
19. The Council describes the proposed 4-bed chalet style dwellings as architecturally
    poor due to effects of the first floor dormer windows on the privacy of future
    occupants. Privacy and effects on living conditions are addressed within my other
    matters below. However, there is considerable variety to the built forms and
    detailed designs of dwellings in the vicinity of the appeal site, with no strong
    vernacular or design uniformity. In that context, the appearances of the proposed
    dwellings, which would reinforce the variety of the building styles in the area,
    would be acceptable. Roof dormers are a characteristic of the area.
20. Furthermore, the appeal scheme would also relate strongly to the bungalows
    approved on the adjoining land. The sizes and shapes of their footprints would be
    very similar, as would their layouts and respective densities. The proposed chalet
    style dwellings would not be significantly taller than the approved bungalows.
    Together they would create a consistent row of 9 relatively narrow fronted
    dwellings with deep flanks and ridgelines running from front to rear. The visible
    transition in roof levels between them would not be abrupt or discordant and there
    would be a visual affinity between them.
21. The proposed dwellings would be expected to obscure some limited views of the
    backdrop of trees that are currently glimpsed from North Trade Road between the
    roofs of the frontage dwellings. However, they would not obscure or negatively
    affect characteristic views across the mosaic of small-scale fields and woodland
    beyond the built-up area of the town, which are amongst the key components of
    the HWNL.
22. The proposed development would be at odds with DG2 of the HWDG which states
    that cul-de-sac arrangements are to be avoided as they are uncommon in the
    HWNL. However, considered in the round, it complies with DG1 and DG5 of the
    HWDG, and the Battle Design Guidelines, insofar as they require development to
    respond to its setting, feel genuinely integrated into the settlement and reflect the
    typical character, grain and form of the part of the town in which they would be
    situated.
23. Consequently, I am satisfied that the urbanising effect of the proposed
    development would be in-keeping with the character and appearance of this part of
    the town. It would be contained within the built-up area of the town and would not
    harm its landscape setting. For those reasons, I conclude on this main issue that
    the proposed development would cause no harm to the character or appearance
    of the area, or the landscape and scenic beauty of the HWNL.
24. As such, it would be consistent with Policies OSS4, BA1 and EN3 of the Rother
    Local Plan Core Strategy Adopted September 2014 (“the CS”), Policy DEN1 of the
    Rother District Council Development and Site Allocations Local Plan, Adopted

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007272


         December 2019 (“the DaSA”), and Policies HD5 and HD6 of the Battle Civil Parish
         Neighbourhood Plan 2019-2028, Made in October 2021 (“the NP”). Together,
         those policies seek to ensure that development contributes positively to the
         character of a site and its surroundings, including maintaining the essential
         physical form, local distinctiveness, character and setting of the town of Battle.
25. It would also be consistent with Policy EN1 of the CS, Policy DEN2 of the DaSA
    and Policy HD4 of the NP insofar as development should seek to protect and
    wherever possible enhance the landscape and scenic beauty of the HWNL, having
    particular regard to the impacts on its character components, including the visual
    character of settlements, as set out in the HWMP.
26. For the same reasons, the proposal would accord with Policies DP3, N2 and N4 of
    the Framework insofar as they require development proposals to respond to their
    context and integrate with and enhance their surroundings, avoid harm to the
    statutory purposes and special qualities of a Protected Landscape.
Affordable housing.
27. In the town of Battle, Policy DHG1 of the DaSA expects 35% on-site affordable
    housing on schemes of 10 or more dwellings or sites of 0.3 hectares or more,
    subject to scheme viability. Policy HD3 of the NP states that housing
    developments will be expected to deliver affordable housing in accordance with
    the Policy DHG1. Those policies seek to secure affordable housing to meet the
    housing needs of different groups and contribute to the achievement of mixed and
    balanced communities.
28. The appellant has calculated the area of the appeal site as covering 0.297 of a
    hectare. The Council has calculated it as covering 0.312 of a hectare. The
    Planning Practice Guidance6,7 states that applicants for planning permission will
    need to submit a location plan showing the application site edged clearly with a red
    line on the location plan, and it should include all land necessary to carry out the
    proposed development (e.g. land required for access to the site from a public
    highway, visibility splays, landscaping, car parking and open areas around
    buildings).
29. For the purposes of Policy DHG1 the appellant’s final comments include a
    screenshot showing how the area of land edged by a series of blue coloured dots
    was measured, including calculations. However, excluded from those calculations
    is the land required to provide parking spaces (and access to them) between the
    front wall of Number 46 and the highway, which are shown to be within the land
    edged red on the submitted drawings. Also excluded is land required for visibility
    splays as part of the works to upgrade the site access, which are shaded red on
    the submitted drawings. The appellant’s evidence contains no explanation why
    those areas of land are excluded from the appellant’s calculations of the site area.
30. Based on the evidence before me, if those areas of land were included within the
    appellant’s calculations, the land necessary to carry out the proposed
    development, and thus the area of the appeal site, is highly likely on the balance of
    probabilities to exceed 0.3 hectares. Accordingly, it follows that the appeal scheme


6
    Paragraph: 023 Reference ID: 14-023-20140306
7
    Paragraph: 024 Reference ID: 14-024-20140306


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           5
Appeal Decision 6007272


       should seek to secure the proportion of affordable housing that is targeted by
       Policies DHG1 and HD3.
31. There is nothing to indicate that affordable housing was a matter of dispute in the
    earlier appeal scheme for 8 dwellings. However, full details of that case are not
    before me, and I was not party to the evidence placed before that Inspector. As
    such, that appeal scheme is of limited relevance to my consideration of this main
    issue.
32. For those reasons I conclude on this main issue that the failure to secure
    affordable housing would be contrary to Policies DHG1 and HD3 the requirements
    of which are set out above. It would also be contrary to Policies HO7 and HO8 of
    the Framework insofar as they require development proposals to meet the needs
    of those groups requiring affordable housing, including through meeting
    development plan requirements for affordable housing, as part of creating mixed
    and balanced communities.
Whether land would be used efficiently.
33. The Council is seeking a minimum density of 30 dwellings per hectare, including a
    greater proportion of smaller housing units. However, it has not referred me to any
    local policies or guidance that set numerical standards for density that would apply
    to the appeal scheme. Policy OSS4 of the CS states that the density of
    development should be appropriate to its context, having due regard to key design
    principles.
34. Policies L2 and L3 of the Framework seek to ensure that development uses land
    effectively and efficiently. Within settlements residential development should
    contribute to an increase in density, except where there is clear justification that
    this is either inappropriate or not possible, taking account of the existing character
    of an area in accordance with Framework Policy DP3.
35. The Council refers to 30 dwellings per hectare being lower than the minimum
    densities in Policy L3(2.c.) of the Framework. However, there is nothing of
    substance before me to indicate that the appeal site is within a reasonable walking
    distance of a well-connected station (applying the definitions in the Framework’s
    glossary at Annex B).
36. It is appropriate for the Council to seek to ensure that development proposals
    make efficient use of land and contribute positively to the supply of deliverable
    housing land in its area. Battle is one of the larger settlements in the district’s
    hierarchy and is considered a sustainable location for housing development as a
    matter of principle. I have no reasons to doubt that the infrastructure in the area
    could support a higher density of housing on the appeal site.
37. However, the appellant’s earlier appeal for a row of 8 semi-detached dwellings
    across the appeal site, which the appellant says equated to 27 dwellings per
    hectare, was dismissed due to being at odds with the prevailing pattern of lower
    density development along this part of North Trade Road. This is a strong indicator
    that achieving the Council’s preferred density would be harmful to the character
    and appearance of the area.
38. I have already found that the proposed development would be in-keeping with the
    prevailing pattern of development in the area. It would achieve a very similar


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007272


       density to the bungalows approved by the 2024 permission and would closely
       relate to them. Together they would form a row of 9 backland dwellings in a
       broadly consistent pattern.
39. The Council has advanced no evidence of its own to show that development of the
    density that it is seeking could be accommodated on the appeal site without
    causing other harms, particularly to the character and appearance of the area. It
    seems to me that by utilising undeveloped land within the settlement, the proposed
    development would contribute to an increase in the density of the area in which it
    is situated.
40. Therefore, I conclude on this main issue that the proposed development would,
    when considered in its context, make efficient use of the appeal land consistent
    with Policy OSS4 of the CS, and the overarching objectives of Policies L2 and L3
    of the Framework.
Housing mix
41. The proposed dwellings comprise 3 x 4-bed dormer bungalows, 1 x 3-bed
    bungalow and 1 x 2-bed bungalow. Criterion (i) of Policy LHN1 of the CS states
    that development should be of a size, type and mix which will reflect both current
    and projected housing needs within the district and locally. No definition has been
    provided to demonstrate that the appeal site qualifies as being in a rural area or
    constituting a larger development. Therefore criterion (ii) and criterion (iv) of Policy
    LHN1 are not applicable to the appeal scheme.
42. The supporting text to Policy LHN1 says the appropriate mix will be determined in
    the context of the surrounding area, including whether there is a bias towards
    certain types of households. Policy HD3 of the NP states that housing
    developments will be expected to deliver a range of house types and an element
    of single level dwellings will be encouraged.
43. Nothing of substance has been submitted to indicate the current mixture of house
    sizes in the surrounding area, nor whether there is an overconcentration of
    particular types or sizes of homes or households. Consequently, whether the
    proposed market housing mix is satisfactory is a matter of judgement to be formed
    on the evidence before me.
44. The Council considers that the proposal seeks permission for too many 4-bed
    homes and not enough 2-bed homes. It says that the 2-bed and 3-bed bungalows
    in the 2024 planning permission align more to the local policy requirements than
    the appeal scheme. However, neither Policy LHN1 of the CS, nor Policy HD3 of
    the NP set a quantitative housing mix. Policy DHG1 of the DaSA relates to
    affordable housing and does not set a mix for market housing.
45. There is no substantive evidence of an under provision of 2 or 3 bed dwellings in
    the area. The 2024 planning permission for bungalows on the adjoining land is an
    indicator that smaller homes are being approved within Battle. By delivering 2
    smaller single level dwellings, which are specifically supported by Policy HD3, the
    proposal would contribute to the supply of smaller homes.
46. Whilst the proposed mix of homes is biased towards 4-bed homes there is nothing
    of substance to show there is an overconcentration of such homes relative to



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007272


       others in the surrounding area, or that the proposal would harm the choice of
       market homes in the area.
47. The Council refers to the proposed 4-bed dwellings as being well in excess of
    nationally described space standards. Larger homes would be expected to have a
    higher purchase price than smaller ones. However, there is nothing of substance
    before me to show that they would be unaffordable to prospective purchasers. It
    seems to me that there is some logic to providing family homes in Battle where
    services and facilities, including schools, are located close by and could likely be
    reached by sustainable transport modes.
48. Whilst the supporting text to Policy HD3 of the NP makes reference to 2-bed and
    3-bed homes, it does so in the context of affordable housing. In any case, the
    proposal would deliver 2 and 3 bed homes. Similarly, the extract from the 2024
    Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA) refers to the
    provision of 2-bed and 3-bed properties in the context of intermediate affordable
    housing. The appeal scheme does not propose or secure affordable housing.
    Therefore, the extract from the HEDNA and the supporting text to Policy HD3 are
    of limited relevance and weight to this main issue.
49. In having regard to the relevant policies and the evidence before me, the proposed
    development would deliver a mix of dwelling types and sizes. There is nothing of
    substance to demonstrate that they would not be reflective of the current and
    projected need for market dwellings within the area. Consequently, there is no
    conflict with Policy LHN1 of the CS and Policy HD3 of the NP, the objectives of
    which are set out above.
Other Matters
50. The Council Officer’s Report and Statement of Case refer to concerns over the 4-
    bed chalet style dwellings being poor architecturally due to the positions of the side
    facing dormer windows causing overlooking between the dwellings and into their
    private amenity spaces.
51. In response to those concerns, the appellant has submitted with the appeal an
    amended drawing proposing to fit obscure glazing (up to a height of 1.8 metres
    above floor level) to all first-floor dormer windows serving the bedrooms in the 4-
    bed dwellings. Those windows could be retained in a fixed shut position.
52. In seeking to address those concerns over privacy, it seems to me that the
    proposed obscure glazing would heavily restrict the occupants’ outlook from their
    bedroom windows to views of the sky and the upper parts of the roofs of the
    flanking dwellings through a relatively narrow section of high-level clear glazing.
53. However, given that I have dismissed the appeal for other reasons it would not be
    necessary for me to consider this matter further as it would not alter the outcome
    of the appeal. Therefore, I need not reach a conclusion as to whether the
    proposed development would provide acceptable living conditions for its future
    occupants. Accordingly, for the purposes of this decision, it is not a matter that
    weighs in favour or against the appeal.
54. The appeal site lies within the settlement of Battle, where residential development
    is supported by the development plan as a matter of principle. The evidence
    indicates that the Council can currently demonstrate a 3.04 years supply of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007272


       deliverable housing sites within its area, which is a very significant shortfall against
       the 5-year requirement. However, there appears to be no dispute that the housing
       target for Battle has already been met through the development of sites allocated
       by Policy HD2 of the NP to meet its identified housing requirement.
55. Nonetheless, the proposed development would deliver market homes that would
    make a positive contribution to the supply of housing in the Council’s area. It would
    also bring short term and lasting economic benefits during its construction and
    occupation, and it would deliver a net gain in biodiversity.
56. The failure to secure affordable housing and contribute to creating mixed and
    balanced communities brings the development into conflict with Policy DHG1 of
    the DaSA and Policy HD3 of the NP. Whilst the proposal complies with several
    other development plan policies, the substantial weight that attaches to the conflict
    with those policies is sufficient to outweigh its benefits and bring it into conflict with
    the development plan as a whole.
57. In accordance with Policy S4 of the Framework, planning permission should be
    granted unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework.
58. In the context of Policy DP3 of the Framework, substantial weight attaches to the
    proposal’s compliance with the relevant development plan policies listed under my
    first main issue when assessing the design quality of proposals, including
    conserving and enhancing the HWNL as a Protected Landscape in accordance
    with Framework Policy N4.
59. In accordance with Policies L2 and L3 of the Framework, substantial weight
    attaches to the benefits of making effective and efficient use of the appeal land for
    housing. Modest weight attaches to securing and delivering a net gain in
    biodiversity, and the planting of additional trees in accordance with Framework
    Policies N2 and N3. In the context of Policy TR3 of the Framework, the appeal site
    would be in a sustainable location for housing in terms of accessibility to services
    and facilities.
60. The proposed homes would contribute positively to meeting the need for market
    homes in the Council’s area. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial
    weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute
    towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community.
61. However, in accordance with Policies HO7 and HO8 of the Framework, the
    proposal would fail to meet development plan requirements for securing the
    requisite proportion of affordable housing to meet the needs of those requiring it,
    and to create mixed and balanced communities. No clear justification for the failure
    to secure affordable housing has been advanced. In those respects, I attach
    substantial weight to the conflict with Framework Policies HO7 and HO8.
62. The failure to secure affordable housing would conflict with the principle in Policy
    DP3(2.a.) of the Framework, which states that development proposals should
    support mixed communities by incorporating a range of tenures. Policy DP3(3) is
    clear that development proposals that conflict with the relevant aspects of the
    principles in Policy DP3(2) should be refused. The benefits of the proposal do not,
    in my judgement, clearly justify departing from the principle that development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007272


       should contribute to providing mixed communities. Therefore, failure to comply
       with the relevant principle in Policy DP3(2.a.) of the Framework indicates that
       planning permission for the development should be refused.
63. Consequently, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework, I find that the benefits of the proposed development would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects arising from the failure to secure
    affordable housing, including the effects on those in need of affordable housing
    and on the creation of mixed and balanced communities.
Conclusion
64. The conflict with Policy DHG1 of the DaSA and Policy HD3 of the NP brings the
    development into conflict with the development plan as a whole. The material
    considerations including the benefits of the proposed development and the
    provisions of the Framework are insufficient to outweigh that conflict. Therefore, I
    conclude that the proposed development is unacceptable, and the appeal should
    be dismissed.



G Sylvester
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
