Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by N Bowden BA(Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20TH August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007465
Land Adjacent to No 51 Harcourt Road, Bushey WD23 3PD
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
    The appeal is made by Knightspur Homes against Hertsmere Borough Council.
    The application Ref is 24/0990/FUL.
    The development proposed is construction of new two storey house.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for construction of new
      two storey house at Land Adjacent to No 51 Harcourt Road, Bushey WD23 3PD in
      accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 24/0990/FUL, and the plans
      submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Procedural Matters and Background
2.    The appeal is against the failure of the Council to give notice of its decision on the
      planning application Ref 24/0990/FUL within the prescribed period. As such, there
      is no decision notice. However, the Council’s appeal statement sets out that, had it
      determined the planning application within the time limit, the proposed
      development would have been considered acceptable, as it would have been in
      accordance with the policies of the development plan. This includes the Hertsmere
      Site Allocations Development Management Policies Plan 2016, Hertsmere Core
      Strategy 2013, The Planning and Design Guide 2013, The Parking Standards
      Supplementary Planning Document 2014, Draft Sustainable Transport and Parking
      Supplementary Planning Document 2022 and, in addition, the National Planning
      Policy Framework (the Framework).
3.    A new version of the Framework was published on 17 August 2026. I am satisfied
      that, in this instance, the changes to it do not significantly affect the merits of the
      case. I have therefore not consulted the parties in this regard.
4.    Based on the submitted evidence and following an assessment of the proposed
      development during my site visit, I find no reason to disagree with the Council’s
      conclusion that the proposed development is acceptable. The appeal proposal
      accords with the development plan and the material considerations that have been
      put to me do not indicate that the proposed development should be determined
      otherwise than in accordance with it.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007465


Other Matters
5.    An interested party has noted that the proposed development would add further
      development to an already densely built upon area. I recognise these issues and
      accept that there is clear evidence in the local area of numerous infill
      developments that cumulatively alter the character of the area. Nevertheless, this
      proposal remains acceptable on its merits and has the benefit of providing an
      additional home within an established urban area in a sustainable location.
Conditions
6.    I have imposed the conditions put forward by the Council with modifications and
      edits as discussed below. This is whilst having regard to policy DM6 of the
      Framework and Planning Practice Guidance (PPG).
7.    I have imposed a general time condition to accord with the provisions of the Town
      and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) and a plans condition in the
      interests of certainty. A condition for landscaping is imposed to ensure the
      development integrates with its surroundings.
8.    A condition to require details of cycle parking is imposed to promote sustainable
      transport options.
9.    Whilst the appellant has challenged the necessity of a condition relating to climate
      change and sustainability, I have nevertheless imposed this as a condition to
      promote these measures.
10. Condition 6 and 7 are imposed so as to ensure appropriate tree protection. I have
    kept the trigger for the submission of details as “prior to commencement”
    conditions as this ensures that vegetation on site is suitably protected, as required,
    for the duration of works on site. This is proportionate to the nature of the
    development.
11. Conditions 8 to 11 relate to surface water, drainage and flood mitigation. Again, I
    have imposed a trigger which is in effect a “prior to commencement” condition as
    these issues may have an influence on the overall construction of the scheme.
    This is in the interests of flood risk management and sustainability.
12. I have imposed a biodiversity condition to comply with the Environment Act 2021.
13. Finally, a condition is imposed to restrict windows at first floor level in order to
    prevent overlooking towards neighbouring properties in the interests of those
    neighbours living conditions.
14. I have not imposed a restriction on the future use of permitted development rights,
    excepting relating to the insertion of windows as explained above. The site is quite
    constrained and there are already limits on what works could be constructed with
    deemed permission such that further controls are not necessary and would conflict
    with PPG advice.
15. I have not imposed a condition relating to accessibility and adaptability as this is
    controlled under the Building Regulations and therefore is not necessary.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007465


Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.



N Bowden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007465


Schedule of Conditions
    1) The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of 3
       years from the date of this permission.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in complete accordance
       with the approved plans and drawings listed in this decision notice, other than
       where those details are altered pursuant to the conditions of this planning
       permission.
       5463_03 REV B - Proposed First Floor Plan
       5463_04 REV B - Proposed Elevations
       5463_05 REV B - Proposed Street and Roof Plan
       5463-02 REV C - Proposed Site Plan

    3) No development beyond damp proof course (including any demolition,
       earthworks or vegetation clearance) shall take place before a scheme of
       landscaping, phased in relation to any phasing of the development, which shall
       include details of both hard and soft landscape works and earthworks, has been
       submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local Planning Authority. The
       scheme as approved shall be carried out in the first planting season following the
       completion of each development phase. Any trees, shrubs or plants that die
       within a period of five years from the completion of each development phase, or
       are removed and/or become seriously damaged or diseased in that period, shall
       be replaced (and if necessary continue to be replaced) in the first available
       planting season with others of similar size and species, unless the Local
       Planning Authority gives prior written permission for any variation.

    4) Prior to the occupation of the development hereby approved, details of bicycle
       facilities shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority. The facilities hereby approved shall be implemented in full accordance
       with the approved details and retained for the lifetime of the development.

    5) No development above damp proof course shall take place until a Climate
       Change and Sustainability Statement has been submitted to, and approved in
       writing by, the Local Planning Authority. As a minimum the statement shall
       include the following information:
            How the scheme has been designed taking into account the generic
              principles of Policies CS16 and CS17 (eliminate, reduce, substitute and
              offset) taking a structured approach seeking to reduce carbon emissions;
            How materials will be selected having regards to carbon reduction
              objectives;
            Any other relevant information which has been taken into account to
              minimise carbon emissions resulting from the scheme, such as the
              principles of fabric first, energy efficiencies, emitted or embodied carbon.
            Measures taken to reduce water usage during occupation of the
              development.
       The sustainability measures set out within the statement shall thereafter be
       implemented in full prior to the first occupation of the dwelling.

    6) No development, including site clearance, demolition, excavation, level changes,
       the storage of materials, or the bringing of machinery onto the site, shall


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007465


         commence until an Arboricultural Impact Assessment (AIA), prepared in
         accordance with the current version of BS5837:2012 Trees in Relation to
         Design, Demolition and Construction – Recommendations, has been submitted
         to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
         The AIA shall assess the impact of the proposed development on all retained
         trees and identify any measures necessary to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts.
         Where the approved AIA identifies the need for tree protection measures or
         special working methods, an Arboricultural Method Statement (AMS) and Tree
         Protection Plan (TPP) shall also be submitted to and approved in writing by the
         Local Planning Authority prior to the commencement of development.
         Development shall thereafter be carried out in full accordance with the approved
         AIA and, where required, the approved AMS and TPP, and all tree protection
         measures shall be installed prior to the commencement of development and
         retained for the duration of the construction period.

    7) No development shall take place until a scheme for the protection during
       construction of the trees near the site, in accordance with BS 5837:2012 - Trees
       in relation to construction - Recommendations, shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The scheme shall show the
       extent of root protection areas and details of ground protection measures and
       fencing to be erected around the trees, including the type and position of these.
       The protective measures contained with the scheme shall be implemented prior
       to commencement of any development, site works or clearance in accordance
       with the approved details, and shall be maintained and retained until the
       development is completed. Within the root protection areas the existing ground
       level shall be neither raised nor lowered and no materials, temporary buildings,
       plant, machinery or surplus soil shall be placed or stored thereon. If any trenches
       for services are required within the fenced areas they shall be excavated and
       backfilled by hand and any tree roots encountered with a diameter of 25mm or
       more shall be left unsevered.

    8) Construction shall not begin until a detailed surface water drainage scheme for
       the site has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority. The surface water drainage scheme must prioritise the use of source
       control Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) in consideration of the Non-
       Statutory Technical Standards for SuDS and demonstrate no increase in flood
       risk as a result of the Proposed Development with sufficient supporting evidence
       provided to support its viability including supporting calculations for the 100%
       AEP (1 in 1 year), 3.33% AEP (1 in 30 year), 3.33% AEP (1 in 30 year) plus
       climate change, the 1% AEP (1 in 100 year) and the 1% AEP (1 in 100) plus
       climate change critical storms. The scheme shall subsequently be implemented
       in accordance with the approved details before the development is completed.

    9) The development hereby approved shall not be occupied until details of the
       maintenance and management of the sustainable drainage scheme have been
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
       drainage scheme shall be implemented prior to the first occupation of the
       development hereby approved and thereafter managed and maintained in
       accordance with the approved details in perpetuity. The Local Planning Authority
       shall be granted access to inspect the sustainable drainage scheme for the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007465


         lifetime of the development. The details of the scheme to be submitted for
         approval shall include:
            (i)  a timetable for its implementation.
           (ii)  details of SuDS feature and connecting drainage structures and
                 maintenance requirement for each aspect including a drawing showing
                 where they are located.
          (iii)  a management and maintenance plan for the lifetime of the development
                 which shall include the arrangements for adoption by any public body or
                 statutory undertaker, or any other arrangements to secure the operation
                 of the sustainable drainage scheme throughout its lifetime. This will
                 include the name and contact details of any appointed management
                 company.

    10) Prior to the first use of the development, a detailed verification report, (appended
        with substantiating evidence demonstrating the approved construction details
        and specifications have been implemented in accordance with the surface water
        drainage scheme), has been submitted to and approved (in writing) by the Local
        Planning Authority. The verification report shall include a full set of "as built"
        drawings plus photographs of excavations (including soil profiles/horizons), any
        installation of any surface water drainage structures and control mechanisms.

    11) All development shall be constructed in accordance with the submitted and
        approved Flood Risk Assessment (ref: 84023R1, dated 08-11-24), with the
        finished floor level raised a minimum of 600mm above the surrounding proposed
        ground level unless otherwise first approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority.

    12) No development shall commence until an overall Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP)
        has been submitted to and approved in writing by the LPA. The plan should be
        completed using the government template and shall include the following
        minimum information either within the body of the plan or as supporting
        information:
             Completed metric tool calculation that demonstrates:
                  o A minimum 10% net gain achieved within the trading rules and
                     consistent with the figures quoted within the BGP. Hertfordshire
                     LEADS provides Landscape, Ecology, Archaeology, Design and
                     Sustainability support to planning departments in Hertfordshire.
                  o A fully completed start page including project details and the date
                     the final version of the metric was completed.
                  o Where off site units are being used these should be shown in the
                     appropriate tab of the metric and the offsite gain site summary
                     should be completed. o Where relevant a fully completed
                     irreplaceable habitats tab.
                  o Pre-development and post-development plans (showing the
                     location of on-site habitat, the direction of north and drawn to an
                     identified scale). Post-development plans should be sufficient to
                     record the location of the post determination habitats within the
                     final metric submitted to discharge the BGP.
                  o A compensation plan if the development affects irreplaceable
                     habitats.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007465


              If off-site units are being used, the biodiversity net gain register reference
               number will be required for a completed BGP.
            Proof of purchase if the Applicant buys statutory biodiversity credits.
            A description of how they will manage and monitor significant on-site
               gains (Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan).
            Evidence of a legally secured delivery mechanism (s106 Agreement or
               Conservation Covenant).
         Development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved plan.

    13) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
        Permitted Development) Order 2015 (or any Order revising, revoking and re-
        enacting that Order with or without modification), no first floor windows, doors or
        other openings other than those expressly authorised by this permission shall be
        constructed.
End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
