Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 2 September 2026
Site visit made on 22 August 2026
by L N Hughes BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007133
Land at Brock, Garstang Road, Bilsborrow, PR3 0BT
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by The Hub (UK) Ltd against the decision of Wyre Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is 22/00612/OUTMAJ.
•      The development proposed is outline application for the erection of mixed-use class commercial
       units featuring Use Class E(g) and/or B8 with associated access off Garstang Road (A6), with
       access, layout and scale applied for.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       At appeal submission stage the appellant proposed several amendments, which I
         considered in accordance with the substantive test and procedural tests identified
         by the Holborn Studios judgement1. I accepted the removal of the potential for the
         proposed uses to include offices, to be achieved via a condition. This was because
         I found no reliance on an office use intent within the application stage documents,
         it is not expressly stated in the operative description of development, and the
         extent of parking provision would be unaffected. Its removal would therefore meet
         the substantive test, and would not cause any procedural unfairness as it would
         restrict the proposal and not expand it.
3.       New appeal stage plans ‘Proposed Access Arrangement 16-2090-002 Rev E’ and
         ‘Vehicle Tracking 16-2090-004 Rev E’ proposed site access amendments and
         provided further detail. I accepted them as meeting the necessary tests, because
         the access would not be a fundamental change to the application stage proposal,
         and they had been agreed by the Lancashire County Council Highway Authority.
4.       Based on the above, and on the hearing discussion regarding the potential impact
         on the veteran oak tree (which I address within Character and Appearance), the
         Council confirmed that the 2nd, 4th, and 5th reasons for refusal fell away. These
         related to the lack of sequential test for office use, loss of the oak tree, and
         highways matters.
5.       The appellant’s appeal submission also requested removal of consideration of
         layout and scale until future reserved matters stage. However, they have remained
         part of my assessment as I found this would be a substantive change, being part
         of the operative description, and would cause procedural unfairness as it informed

1
    Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007133


       the basis of a high number of interested party responses. The Council also
       considered that layout and scale are fundamental to the proposal’s assessment.
6.     The hearing was initially scheduled in person, but was postponed at short notice
       and rearranged to a virtual event 3 weeks later. I am satisfied that no-one was
       prejudiced by this change. Specific discussion of this at the hearing identified that
       the two parties who had previously registered to speak in person and who could no
       longer attend, were able to be suitably represented by other interested parties,
       alongside their own previous written representations.
7.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework ('the Framework')
       was published on 17 August 2026. Prior to the hearing I sought written comments
       from the main parties, with the discussions held on this basis.
Main Issues
8. The main issues are:
     • the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
       area; and
     • whether the proposed development would be in a suitable location, having
       regard to the spatial strategy for the area.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
9. The A6 Garstang Road runs north-south through the village of Bilsborrow. The
   appeal site is a grassed field parcel to its east, separated by a grassed verge and a
   hedgerow with some trees. Dwellings and commercial units lie on the opposite side
   of the A6. To the site’s north lies hedging and vegetation adjacent to the River
   Brock, with the forecourt of a car showroom beyond the river. To its east runs the
   mainline railway on an elevated bund, with a large field and the M6 beyond. The
   site’s southern extent partly comprises residential gardens, and partly a low
   boundary to a single track lane, with a commercial unit on its other side.
10. The veteran oak tree in the site’s south-eastern extent is subject to a Tree
    Preservation Order. The application was refused in part due to the loss of this tree,
    and its associated ecosystem, although the appellant clarified at appeal stage that
    its direct removal is not sought. However, it would likely be impacted by the draft
    drainage scheme’s attenuation pond layout.
11. Were I to allow the appeal, the proposed condition 3 requires further details of a
    sustainable surface water drainage scheme and foul water drainage scheme to be
    approved, and condition 18 requires an Arboricultural Method Statement and Tree
    Protection Plan for all retained trees. I would also be able to impose an additional
    condition for specific details to demonstrate how the veteran oak tree and its
    immediate ecosystem would be protected and accommodated within the drainage
    and construction strategy. I could ensure that the condition approving the Proposed
    Site Plan2 clarified that this would not approve the tree’s removal.
12. The Council agreed in discussion at the hearing that that this provides sufficient
    confidence that there would be no physical impact on the tree, and thus no conflict
    with the protection for veteran trees given by Policy CDMP4(24) of the Wyre Local

2
8679-BOW-A0-00-DR-A-1000_P7


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007133


     Plan 2011-2031 (incorporating partial update of 2022) (‘the LP’), and by the
     Framework Policy N6(2). My consideration of the proposal’s impact upon character
     and appearance is therefore made on this basis.
13. I take no in principle issue with the Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment
    (LVIA)3 methodology and representative viewpoints chosen as a professional
    landscape analysis, in accordance with the Guidelines for Landscape and Visual
    Impact Assessment (Third Edition). The Council criticised elements of its approach
    as overcomplicating the process, however, I find it to be consistent with established
    professional guidance.
14. The LVIA identifies the site as within the Landscape Character Area of ‘5i West
    Bowland Fringes’, within the broader ‘Undulating Lowland Farmland’ Landscape
    Character Type (LCT)4. It is described as transitional landscape between the
    gritstone scarps of the Bowland Fells and the coastal plain of Amounderness, with
    a fault line corridor containing the motorway, road, and railway, and providing a
    transition to the agricultural plain.
15. To some extent the site could be perceived to be a remnant field parcel more
    aligned to the built form of Bilsborrow than to the wider countryside. This results
    from the separation by the railway bund and its associated infrastructure, with the
    frequency of passing trains drawing attention to its presence, and the influence of
    the commercial and residential development to the other sides. The urbanising
    effect of the proposal could therefore be read not as a different form of physical
    intervention, but rather a continuation of the established character of ribbon
    development along the A6. The LVIA acknowledges that the land-cover change
    within the site would cause an overall moderate significance of effect, but identifies
    that the key characteristics of the LCT would prevail, and with only minor effect on
    the other landscape receptors.
16. However, the verdancy and openness of the site behind and above its prominent
    A6 hedgerow frontage provides a very apparent break to the built form. This aligns
    with the broader character of the main route through Bilsborrow being stretches of
    development interspersed with open grassed areas or thick tree cover. Although
    the railway acts as a raised barrier to the field beyond, the distant hills of the Forest
    of Bowland National Landscape are evident above and beyond it from along the A6
    and its dwellings, even with a high hedgerow in full leaf. These hills are noted within
    the LCT West Bowland Fringes description; “the scarps of the Bowland fells are
    never far away”5. There are also glimpsed views of the field itself through the
    hedgerow along the A6, which would vary seasonally, and a clear oblique view of it
    from the A6 river bridge.
17. From the raised parts of the Public Right of Way (PRoW) route to the north-east,
    the site’s verdant and agricultural form is especially evident as its main
    characteristic, despite its framing by the railway in the foreground and some other
    built form elements visible around it. Similarly, the stretch of the adjacent lane to its
    south allows for very open views across the whole site.
18. Although longer pastoral views are restricted by the railway infrastructure, that is
    not a recent landscape intervention, and its associated vegetation provides a green
3
  Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment, Pegasus Group, March 2025; Landscape and Visual Technical Note, Urban Green,
March 2026.
4
  A Landscape Strategy for Lancashire, Landscape Character Assessment, Lancashire County Council, 2000
5
  As repeated in the LVIA paragraph 3.13.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
Appeal Decision 6007133


     bookend such that elements of hard infrastructure are predominantly limited to the
     slimline poles and wires. Development to the north of the field is also longstanding,
     albeit has changed in form and use over the years. In this sense, the field is not a
     remnant parcel of countryside, but rather a valuable element of the village’s historic
     development. Overall, I find a strong visual and perceptual connection across the
     railway to the site’s broader countryside setting. The site provides a strong and
     positive contribution to the character of the village.
19. The proposal would retain the majority of the frontage hedgerow as its prominent
    feature, excepting the new access road. However, its value to the local character in
    providing a verdant break would be reduced due to the stark visual contrast of the
    higher built form massing behind it, and the blocked long range views and
    countryside connection. A continuous extent of commercial frontage along the A6
    would be a marked change in character, even with additional landscaping.
20. The density and layout in part responds to the need for variety of plot sizes and
    types, and thus contributes to the proposal’s identified economic benefits which I
    discuss later in this decision. Nonetheless, I find harm from the overall extent of
    massing and hardstanding proposed across the site. The lack of consistent
    proportions and plot size for the proposed buildings would not be especially
    evident, but cumulatively the proposal would be overly dense and of overwhelming
    scale for its location. In particular, plots 2-7 would form a long barrier row to those
    important views I have identified above. The layout would not reflect the other
    commercial buildings in the vicinity which are further set back from the A6 and
    orientated in alignment to it. These aspects are compounded by the proposed
    height of up to 9m. This would be more evidently impactful than the broadly
    equivalent heights of the individual dwellings opposite, due to the commercial form
    and extent.
21. Although landscaping is a reserved matter, such that more screening could be
    provided than as shown indicatively on the current plans, the proposal’s
    overwhelming character would be densely urban. This would not adequately reflect
    its rural village setting.
22. Regarding visual effects, the LVIA characterises the overall magnitude of effect for
    A6 road users and A6 residents as medium magnitude of effect at year 1, dropping
    to low at year 15. The overall significance of effect is identified as moderate
    dropping to minor for A6 road users, and major dropping to moderate for residents.
    For the reasons outlined above, I find the proposal would have a more severe
    adverse effect for these receptors across this period.
23. With regard to the PRoW routes, the LVIA methodology is inevitably based on a
    consideration of theoretical receptors. In actuality, interested parties also identified
    the recreational walking route’s regional popularity, and the adjacent community
    nature area. Incorporating these aspects, they place high value on the PRoW and
    its elevated bridge running alongside the railway, and its importance for visitors.
    Alongside my own reading of the evidence including my site visit, I judge there
    would be a higher extent of impact upon those viewpoints than as described in the
    LVIA, even though visual effects would be localised.
24. Specifically, I find the impact from viewpoint 4 to the north-east would have a higher
    magnitude of effect at years 1 and 15 than the LVIA’s identified medium and low
    respectively. I agree a year 1 major significance of effect, but expect this would be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007133


     more than moderately adverse at year 15. Views across the site from the lane
     running immediately to the south of the site are encompassed generally within the
     representative viewpoints, albeit not specifically identified. The impact would be of
     high magnitude and major significance. On the layout sought, there would generally
     be limited opportunity across the majority of views for this harm to be mitigated to
     any impactful extent over time by future landscaping.
25. Overall, I find that the extent of the existing surrounding development in this
    location provides even greater need and importance for retention of the character
    of the remaining field gap and views across it. The proposal would not be well-
    related to its edge of village location, and would therefore significantly harm the
    character and appearance of the area, in conflict with the LP Policy CDMP3.
    Amongst other matters this requires that development must be designed to respect
    or enhance the character of the area and make a positive contribution to an
    attractive and coherent townscape, having regard to matters including density,
    height, scale, massing, and views.
26. The decision notice reason for refusal also refers to a conflict with Policy SP4, with
    relation to criterion (1) being development which adversely impacts on the open
    and rural character of the countryside. However, as such development will not be
    permitted unless this harm is demonstrated as being necessary to achieve
    substantial public benefits that outweigh the harm, I therefore conclude on SP4 in
    my Planning Balance.
27. The Framework Policy DP3 criterion (1) identifies that development proposals
    should respond to their context (the history, character and features of their site and
    its setting) so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings, including
    through the arrangement of development plots and buildings. Criterion (3) identifies
    that proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with
    criterion (1). I find conflict in this regard.
Suitable Location
28. Bilsborrow is identified as one of ten ‘Main Rural Settlements’ within the settlement
    hierarchy established by the LP Policy SP1, with 1.9ha of employment growth
    identified across them. The appeal site size of approximately 2.44ha would exceed
    this entire employment land allocation. Policy SP1 requires new development to be
    of appropriate type and scale to the character of the settlement in the hierarchy,
    which would not be achieved.
29. The LP Policies Map places the appeal site within the ‘Countryside Area’ outside
    of the Bilsborrow settlement boundary. Again, I reserve full judgement on Policy
    SP4(1) until my Planning Balance. However, SP4 further identifies that within
    Countryside Areas, planning permission will only be granted for new development
    that meets the requirements of the Core Development Management Policies and is
    for the purposes of a set of listed development types, aligned with various criteria.
    My straightforward reading of SP4 is that those types of development not
    specifically identified under its criterion (2) to (4) are therefore precluded in
    principle from this location. The only development form which may be relevant to
    the appeal proposal is (2)(h), being ‘the expansion of business in rural areas in
    accordance with Policy EP8 (Rural Economy)’.
30. Policy EP8(2) in turn identifies that the expansion of existing businesses within
    countryside areas will be supported where it is demonstrated that (a) its scale

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007133


       would not be detrimental to the rural character of the area. As I have already
       identified such detriment, the proposal would thus not be in accordance with
       EP8(2)(a). Moreover, although nothing would preclude a rural business from
       operating from the site, this also cannot be relied upon as justification. If one of the
       proposed units were leased by a multi-national company, that would not make it a
       ‘rural business’ just because it were in a rural location. Policy SP4(2)(h) therefore
       would not apply, bringing the proposal into overall conflict with SP4, subject to the
       overall balance.
31. With reference to EP8 criterion (1), which identifies that the Council will support
    proposals to help diversify the rural economy, I similarly find the appellant takes
    too broad a reading when considering support for the proposal before me. If any
    and every type of development which would create jobs in the rural areas should
    generate this support, it would essentially make the policy unnecessary and
    meaningless as it would infer no differentiation. The focus of this policy as
    identified in its justification text, relates to farm diversification and small
    businesses. Overall, I find no direct support from EP8.
32. Aligned to this theme, the appellant considers the Framework Policy E4 ‘rural
    business development’ to be a significant policy shift which weakens the argument
    that countryside location alone makes the development unacceptable. However,
    E4 addresses similar themes to the LP EP8. The lack of identification of any
    specific local business need for the site again indicates no direct relevance to
    E4(1). As I have already identified that the proposal itself would not be physically
    well-related to existing development or with appropriate siting and design having
    regard to the character of its surroundings, it would conflict with E4 criterion (2)(a)
    and (b).
33. The Framework Policy S5 relates to the principle of development outside
    settlements. Criterion (1) states that only certain forms of development should be
    approved outside settlements, and these should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
34. These forms of development are identified within several criteria, of which only (b)
    and (j) could directly apply. As (b) is for development for rural businesses and
    services where a location outside settlements is shown to be necessary, I make
    the same finding as above that the proposal would not definitively be a
    development for rural businesses.
35. S5(1) criterion (j) is most relied upon. Firstly, this is for development which would
    address an evidenced unmet need. The Framework Policy E2(2) is important in
    this regard, as it identifies considerations to assess unmet need including market
    signals and the availability of suitable existing land and buildings.
36. Although the appeal site lies outside Bilsborrow’s settlement boundary, in
    economic terms it aligns with the village’s location within the sub-market of the ‘A6
    Corridor’, a well-established and strategically important economic spine within the
    Borough. It is characterised by strong market demand, commercial activity, and
    good transport links.
37. The need for the proposal was discussed extensively across the written evidence
    and at the hearing. Key points of dispute between the parties include whether the
    current employment site vacancy rates in the A6 Corridor indicate either market

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007133


         failure and ineffective supply, or conversely indicate need is met through an
         appropriate spatial strategy. The appellant’s evidence identifies that a 5% to 10%
         vacancy rate is indicative of a healthy property market, as this allows businesses
         to expand or contract into suitable premises, whilst also not leaving vacant
         premises on the market for extended periods. They identify a Wyre Borough
         vacancy rate of only 3.7%, and of 1.6% in the A6 corridor, suggesting significant
         market constraint6. The parties also addressed whether the four key employment
         sites discussed (as being those most in contention) are available and deliverable.
38. However, matters concerning the extent to which employment land is being
    delivered and needs addressed, are best assessed under my Planning Balance
    section. This is because they are primarily material considerations to balance
    against the development plan, including where supported by the Framework,
    rather than in isolation leading to direct conflict or compliance with its specific
    policies. I have therefore not addressed this point in further detail here.
    Notwithstanding this approach, for the purpose of reasoning on this main issue as
    to whether the proposal would be in a suitable location having regard to the spatial
    strategy, I have assumed that an unmet employment land need does exist.
39. The Framework Policy S5(1) criterion (j) also requires the development to be either
    (i) physically well-related to an existing settlement (unless the nature of the
    development would make this inappropriate) and be of a scale which can be
    accommodated taking into account the existing or proposed availability of
    infrastructure, or, (ii) comprise major development for freight and logistics
    purposes which accords with policy E3. The proposal would fall under the
    definition of freight and logistics, which includes storage and distribution
    operations7.
40. I take compliance against S5(1)(j)(i) to be not just the site’s own spatial
    relationship to the settlement of Bilsborrow, against which is it physically well-
    related due to the extent and positioning of the built form around it, but also how
    the proposal itself would relate to the surrounding character. In this regard I have
    explained in detail above how it would not be well-related due to the nature of the
    development being inappropriate and the harm it would generate. Conflict with S5
    would therefore arise in this regard.
41. When turning to the Framework Policy E3 for freight and logistics development,
    requirement (b) includes that proposals should be sited and designed to limit
    environmental impacts. My reading is that environmental impacts may incorporate
    the relationship with character and appearance. However, it could be argued that
    the wording of ‘sensitive building design’ in E3(1)(b) should instead relate to a
    broader interpretation of the environmental objective as set out in the Framework
    paragraph 17, including because detailed building design is a reserved matter. In
    that case, the proposal would comply with all the E3 criteria, including
    environmental impacts, highways and transport matters, and impact on local
    residents.
42. Nonetheless, the flexible Class E(g)(ii)/(iii) and/or B8 use sought means that a
    development could be delivered on the site from which freight and logistics use



6
    Paragraphs 5.3.2 and 5.3.3, Employment Land and Premises Assessment, Lambert Smith Hampton, April 2025.
7
    Framework Annex B: Glossary.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               7
Appeal Decision 6007133


       were entirely absent. The traffic modelling and economic benefits are also not
       predicated on it exclusively comprising freight and logistics.
43. On this basis, I therefore find that the proposal should not be considered to wholly
    fall under Policy S5(j)(ii) relating to “major development for freight and logistics
    purposes which accords with policy E3.” There would be disparity with the
    proposal’s underlying assumptions if I were to accept this approach. Criterion
    S5(j)(i) holds more weight in the proposal’s determination. I therefore conclude that
    there would be conflict with the Framework Policy S5 overall, even in assuming
    that the proposal would address an evidenced unmet need for employment land.
44. The appeal site is an agricultural field outside of the Bilsborrow settlement limits.
    The LP could have identified special areas such as the A6 corridor where the
    restrictive countryside policies could be tempered for economic purposes,
    including due to being edge of settlement or due to physical characteristics such
    as the mainline railway. However, it did not do so.
45. The overall spatial strategy under the LP Policies SP1 and SP2 aims to create
    sustainable communities, which includes aligning employment opportunities to
    areas of significant housing growth. Bilsborrow is not a location for significant
    housing growth. Local residents have highlighted that the village has already
    embraced appropriate economic growth over the past few years from the major
    developments at its northern extent, and smaller scale tourism and commercial
    enterprises. Notwithstanding the weight to the material consideration of the
    broader context of employment land need in the A6 Corridor, which I come onto
    below, this does not in itself reduce the specific policy conflict.
46. Overall, I have found conflict with the LP Policies SP1 and SP2, and partial conflict
    with SP4 subject to the final balancing exercise, with no support from Policy EP8.
    The proposal would also conflict with the Framework Policies E4 and S5. Against
    the development plan and the Framework, the site’s countryside location and the
    proposal’s specific form therefore indicates that it would not be in a suitable
    location. However, ultimately this issue goes to the principle of the proposal as a
    whole, such that the final conclusion of suitability must result from weighing of all
    matters in my Planning Balance below.
Other Matters
47. Numerous residents raised highways concerns, including the proposal’s trip
    generation and impact on existing congestion, implications of the new pedestrian
    and cycle measures and access works, and sightlines to and from the north.
48. However, the two Statements of Common Ground confirm that subject to
    appropriate mitigation secured by condition, the Council and Lancashire County
    Council as the Local Highway Authority have agreed the principle of the A6 priority
    junction with right turn ghost island, the detailed access design, traffic impacts, trip
    rates, and parking provision. Pedestrian and cycle improvements along the A6
    frontage are deliverable and can be secured with detailed design via Section 278,
    to include consultation with immediate residents. A Travel Plan, Construction
    Environmental Management Plan (CEMP), and £6,000 Travel Plan monitoring
    contribution are acceptable, and can be secured by condition or section 106
    agreement.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007133


49. Residents also objected on grounds of flood risk. Nonetheless, the proposal has
    passed the sequential test, no exception test is required, and the relevant
    consultees including the Environment Agency and the Lead Local Flood Authority
    have no objections, subject to agreement of the final detailed drainage design via
    conditions. As I am dismissing the appeal, it is unnecessary to address these
    matters in any further detail, or any others raised by interested parties.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
50. For the purpose of assessing the planning balance and ultimately whether the
    proposed development would be in a suitable location, I find it most straightforward
    to take the starting point of testing the ‘what if’ position of accepting the appellant’s
    employment need arguments in entirety. I have already taken this approach above
    with relation to the Framework Policy S5 ‘unmet need’. On this premise, I can
    consider the appellant’s position against the relevant policies and the development
    plan as a whole including the overall spatial strategy, and the Framework. If I
    resultingly find in favour of allowing the appeal, at that point I would have to make
    more definitive conclusions on those specific matters contested by the Council.
51. The proposal would include two pedestrian crossings and shared cycle and
    pedestrian routes. Although acting partly as mitigation for the proposal’s highway
    impacts, I give minor weight to the crossings as a benefit, based on the range of
    interested party objections that the A6 is currently very busy and difficult to cross.
    There is no statutory requirement for biodiversity net gain, and landscaping is
    reserved, but conditions would ensure limited biodiversity benefits such as bat and
    bird boxes and compensatory hedgerow planting. I also give this minor weight.
52. The Framework Policy E2(1a) identifies that to support business growth,
    substantial weight should be given to the economic benefits of proposals for
    commercial development which allow businesses to invest, expand and/or adapt;
    especially where this would support the economic vision and strategy for the area,
    or support improvements in freight and logistics. The appeal proposal would
    directly support business growth and achieve such benefits.
53. During the 2 years of construction, and after allowing for leakage, displacement
    and substitution, the proposal would bring a net additional impact of approximately
    49 jobs per annum and £2.8 million GVA per annum within the North West region.
    Annual business rates are cited as being approximately £156,000.
54. After allowing for additionality, the net local impact would be approximately 94 net
    jobs within Wyre District, generating approximately £6.6 million GVA per annum
    locally. However, this is based upon calculations in the April 2025 Employment
    Land Assessment, which assumed office occupation of the smallest units, being
    13% of the total floorspace. The operational job and GVA totals would therefore be
    lower, albeit the extent of this reduction was not quantified to me. Nonetheless,
    even at a reduced level the economic benefits would still be of an extent to which
    Policy E2 directs that I should give substantial weight.
55. In accepting the appellant’s position on employment land and market dynamics,
    this indicates that the overall employment strategy in the A6 Corridor is insufficient
    to address need. The appellant argues that there is no bespoke policy position or
    release mechanism within the LP which could directly support the type and
    location of employment development proposed. On this basis, employment need,
    as supported by the Framework policy E2 and in broader terms by the LP’s

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007133


         economic objectives, is a material consideration which tempers the weight to
         which I give the conflict with the LP Policies SP1, SP2, and SP4.
56. However, the Framework paragraph 3 identifies that planning law requires
    planning applications to be determined in accordance with the development plan,
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise. The national decision-making
    policies in the Framework are a material consideration in making these decisions
    and should be read alongside the policies in the development plan. Policy S3
    reiterates this through the presumption in favour of sustainable development.
    Criterion (c) states that in all locations, development proposals that accord with
    both an up-to-date development plan and the decision-making policies in this
    Framework should be approved without delay.
57. The proposal would significantly harm the character and appearance of the area,
    bringing it into conflict with the LP Policy CDMP3. This Policy is up-to-date,
    including because it is not materially inconsistent with the Framework Policy DP3
    as the relevant national decision-making policy8. On this basis, there is no
    presumption that overrides the conflict with the relevant development plan and
    Framework policies with regard to character and appearance. I have therefore
    found that the proposal would not accord with the development plan as a whole,
    even on the taking the appellant’s position that it is out-of-date with regard to the
    employment land spatial strategy.
58. The Framework Policy S5(2) further identifies that the circumstances in which the
    benefits of approving development proposals outside settlements are likely to be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects include situations where the proposal
    would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state
    that development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. Again, I
    find this to be the case, which indicates that the site’s location outside of the
    settlement is unsuitable.
59. In this instance, even in also accepting the appellant’s arguments generally
    relating to need within the A6 corridor and a lack of alternative sites, I do not find
    the specific and significant harm to the character and appearance of the
    countryside to be necessary to achieve the substantial public benefits, being the
    proposal’s economic benefits, and the pedestrian crossings and biodiversity
    measures. This encompasses that the harm from the proposal’s density and layout
    in part results from those identified economic benefits and need.
60. I reserved judgement above on the LP Policy SP4(1), as this requires the harm
    from adverse impacts on the open and rural character of the countryside, to be
    demonstrated as being necessary to achieve substantial public benefits that
    outweigh the harm. Again, I do not find this harm to be outweighed or necessary.
61. Overall therefore, the proposed development would conflict with the development
    plan as a whole. With no other material considerations indicating otherwise,
    including the Framework, for the reasons given above I conclude that the appeal is
    dismissed.

L N Hughes
INSPECTOR

8
    Framework Annex A: Implementation, paragraph 2.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              10
Appeal Decision 6007133


ANNEX A: APPEARANCES


FOR THE APPELLANT:

Mr Anthony Gill                      Barrister, Kings Chambers
Mr Graeme Thorpe                     Associate, PWA Planning
Mr Alex Roberts                      Head of Economics Planning Policy, Lambert Smith Hampton
Mr Mark Evans                        Associate Director, Urban Green
Mr Toan Chau                         Director, Cora IHT

FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:

Mr Rob McKillop                      Senior Planning Officer (Development Management)
Miss Lucy Embery                     Senior Planning Officer (Planning Policy)


INTERESTED PERSONS:

Cllr James Tomlinson                 County Councillor (Wyre Rural East) and resident
Mr J Hyde                            Resident
Mrs C Johnson                        Resident
Mr C Holmes                          Resident
Mr Hamilton                          Resident
Mrs B Hempton                        Resident




ANNEX B: DOCUMENTS ACCEPTED AT AND AFTER THE HEARING

 1 Council                    Tree Protection Order - veteran oak
 2 Appellant                  Signed Unilateral Undertaking dated 7th September 2026




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        11
