Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by Ann Veevers BA(Hons) PGDip(BCon) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007456
Brookfields Farm, Longhill Lane, Hankelow CW3 0JQ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
       Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•      The appeal is made by Mr Ian Reade against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/3358/PRIOR-3Q.
•      The development proposed is the change of use of an agricultural building and the land within the
       curtilage to form four dwellinghouses.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The description of development provided on the application form refers only to a
         description of the existing building and its location. I have therefore used the
         description given in the decision notice as this better describes what is proposed.
3.       During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
         (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
         matters upon which prior approval is sought in the appeal before me and therefore
         no interested parties would be prejudiced by my consideration of the 2026 version
         of the Framework.
4.       The appeal building forms part of a wider agricultural enterprise. A separate
         application for approval under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
         Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order
         2015 (as amended) (the GPDO) for the conversion of a different building on the
         agricultural enterprise to form two dwellings has also been refused by the Council1.
         This is the subject of a separate appeal2 (the other appeal).
Background
5.       Under Class Q(c) of the GPDO, development is permitted for the change of use of
         a building that is part of an established agricultural unit and any land within its
         curtilage, together with building operations reasonably necessary to convert the
         building, to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) or to extend that
         building, subject to limitations and conditions.



1
    LPA Ref: 25/3355/PRIOR-3Q, refused 28 October 2025.
2
    Appeal Ref: 6007422

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007456


6.     The Council may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
       development would not comply with, or that the developer has provided insufficient
       information to enable the Council to establish whether the proposed development
       complies with, the conditions, limitations or restrictions set out in Q1 and Q2.
7.     The Council’s first reason for refusal refers to the matter of curtilage set out in
       Class Q(a) of the GPDO. While the Council’s second reason for refusal refers to
       paragraph Q1.(j) of the GPDO in relation to the extent of the works that would be
       required to enable the building to function as a dwelling, which are perceived to go
       beyond works that would reasonably be described as a conversion. However, the
       Council’s delegated officer report also includes an assessment under Class Q(c).
       This similarly refers to building operations reasonably necessary to convert the
       building. The appellant has addressed this matter in their appeal submissions.
       Therefore, I am satisfied no party would be prejudiced by my proceeding to
       determine the appeal on the basis of the requirements of both Q(c) and Q1.(j).
8.     The Council’s third reason for refusal refers to the prior approval matter in respect
       of the location and siting of the appeal building in relation to other agricultural
       buildings and land.. Although this reason for refusal makes no reference to a
       specific paragraph of the GPDO, the Council’s officer report confirms that the
       relevant paragraph is Q2.(1)(e) regarding whether the location or siting of the
       building makes it otherwise impractical or undesirable for the building to change
       from agricultural to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouse). This matter has
       been addressed in the appellant’s appeal submissions. Therefore, I am satisfied
       that no party would be prejudiced by my proceeding to determine the appeal on
       this basis.
9.     There is no dispute between the main parties about compliance with the remaining
       paragraphs of Q1 or Q2.(1). Based on the evidence before me and observations I
       made at my site visit, I have no reason to take a different view.
Main Issues
10. Against the above background and the submitted evidence, the main issues are:
       •     whether the proposal would be permitted development, with particular regard
             to paragraphs Q(a) relating to curtilage and Q(c) and Q1.(j) relating to the
             extent of the building works; and, if it is permitted development:
       •     whether, under the provisions of paragraph Q2.(1)(e), the location or siting of
             the building would make it impractical or undesirable for it to change to a use
             falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of the GPDO in terms of whether the
             proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for future occupiers, with
             regard to disturbance and odours.
Reasons
Whether permitted development
11. Permitted development rights under Class Q of the GPDO are a grant of planning
    permission, subject to the prior approval requirements. Therefore, insofar as
    relevant to this appeal, it is necessary in the first instance to determine whether the
    proposal falls within the scope of permitted development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007456


         Curtilage
12. It is important to note that ‘curtilage’ is a legal concept, not a use of land. The term
    generally refers to land which serves the purpose of a building in some reasonably
    necessary or useful manner given the tests of physical layout, ownership and use.
13. The definition of ‘curtilage’ insofar as it relates to Class Q, is set out at Q3. It
    means the lesser of (a) the piece of land, whether enclosed or unenclosed,
    immediately beside or around the building on an established agricultural unit or
    former agricultural building, closely associated with and serving the purposes of
    that building, and (b) an area of land immediately beside or around the building on
    an established agricultural unit or former agricultural building no larger than the
    land area occupied by that building.
14. The application is accompanied by a plan with the access from Longhill Lane, an
    area to the north of the appeal building, the building itself and a small parcel of
    land to the east and west of the building, within a red line boundary denoting the
    application site3. The access and land to the north of the appeal building is
    hatched on the plan but the land to the east and west of the building is not.
15. However, the red edge is not necessarily contiguous with the curtilage. Indeed,
    there is no requirement under Class Q for a proposed development to include a
    curtilage at all.
16. In this case, the Council’s concern is that there is ambiguity within the appellant’s
    submission as to what land within the site is claimed to be permitted development
    as part of a defined ‘curtilage’ and thus would be subject to the change of use. The
    land within the whole of the red line boundary would be well in excess of the land
    occupied by the building. Similarly, the written extent of curtilage for each of the
    proposed dwellings denoted in the schedule of floorspace set out on Plan ref:
    HN/2526/0725 – 200_03 would, in total, appear to result in an area almost double
    the area occupied by the building. However, to my mind, and as explained by the
    appellant, the written figure given for the curtilage of each plot equates to the sum
    of the external footprint of the plot together with the land associated with it to the
    east and west as shown on the red line plan. In which case, the written extent of
    curtilage would not be larger than the land area occupied by the building.
17. When taking into account the proposed internal layout, it is clear to me that the
    parcels of land to the immediate east of the building are intended to serve each of
    the proposed dwellings as private outdoor amenity space. The land to the west
    provides access to each front door. Together, this land would be an area of land,
    whether closed or unenclosed, immediately beside or around the building on an
    established agricultural unit, closely associated with and serving the purposes of
    that building and would be no larger than the area occupied by the appeal building.
    As such, it would comply with the interpretation of curtilage at paragraph Q3 of
    Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO, and would be the extent of the land that would be
    subject to the change of use, were I to allow the appeal.
18. This means that there would be no defined curtilage for the parking of vehicles
    associated with the dwellings. However, there is nothing in the GPDO which
    stipulates that the access to the site and the areas of parking must be included


3
    Plan Ref: HN/2526/0725 – 200_01


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007456


        within the curtilage. Nor does Class Q expressly restrict development where no
        parking or turning area is proposed.
19. That being said, I saw a large area of hardstanding immediately adjacent to the
    north elevation of the building, bound by a low concrete wall and gates. At the time
    of my site visit, albeit a snapshot in time, this land was in use for the storage of ad
    hoc building materials and is of sufficient size to be used for vehicle parking and
    turning.
20. It is important to note however, that development is not permitted under Class Q
    where it would involve the change of use of land beyond the area defined as
    curtilage, which in this case is denoted by the un-hatched site edged red line.
    Thus, the use of land outside this area would require a separate application for
    planning permission where its lawful use differs from that proposed. However, that
    is not an issue for me to determine in the context of this prior approval application
    and, if required, is capable of being dealt with by the parties outside the scope of
    this appeal.
21. Of the decisions referred to by the Council and the appellant in support of their
    respective cases, only three draw conclusions about curtilage4. Limited information
    has been provided with these decisions, including plans. Therefore, I cannot be
    certain what, if any, land formed part of the curtilage of the buildings subject of the
    applications under Class Q and thus, whether they are directly comparable to the
    appeal before me. These decisions are therefore of limited assistance in relation to
    this main issue. In light of this, I have formed my own judgement, taking into
    account the circumstances of this case and my understanding of the relevant
    provisions of the GPDO.
22. For the above reasons, I conclude on this matter that the information provided
    demonstrates that the curtilage would be no larger than the land area occupied by
    the building. Therefore, the proposal complies with the provisions of
    Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q(a) of the GPDO.
        Extent of works
23. Paragraph Q1.(j) of the GPDO specifies that development is not permitted by
    Class Q if it would consist of building operations other than (i) the installation or
    replacement of windows, doors, roofs, exterior walls, or water, drainage, electricity,
    gas or other services to the extent reasonably necessary for the building to
    function as a dwellinghouse; and (ii) partial demolition to the extent reasonably
    necessary to carry out building operations allowed by paragraph Q1.(j)(i).
24. The operative part of criterion (i) is that those building operations would be
    ‘reasonably necessary’, which also reflects the wording of Class Q(c). This is
    expanded on in Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)5 which states the Class Q
    permitted development right assumes that the agricultural building is capable of
    functioning as a dwelling, and that it is only where the building is already suitable
    for conversion to residential use that the building would be considered to have the
    permitted development right.
25. The building subject of this appeal is a pitched roof symmetric steel portal frame
    structure forming six bays with three enclosed sides and one open front. It has a
4
    Appeal Refs: APP/D3505/W/24/3337012; APP/J0405/W/24/3338831 and APP/J1860/W/25/3364410
5
    Paragraph: 105 Reference ID: 13-105-20180615


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decision 6007456


         concrete floor. The appellant’s Schedule of Works6 (SoW) submitted with the
         application states that the portal structural frames are braced laterally to all three
         sides and part of the front, by concrete panels at lower level and timber battens at
         upper level. This provides support for external cladding of vertical metal profile
         sheets to the east elevation and timber boarding to the west and rear (south)
         elevations. The roof is formed off the steel joists of the portal frame structure that
         support timber purlins which, in turn support the profiled cement sheet roof
         covering. A series of uPVC rainwater gutters and downpipes provide rainwater
         drainage to ground soakaway at the rear. At the time of my visit the building
         appeared to be structurally sound and in an overall good condition.
26. The building would be converted to four dwellings, each with a mezzanine floor.
    The existing structural frame would remain to provide the main load-bearing
    element of the building, together with the existing cladding and masonry blockwork
    walls. The submitted SoW and accompanying application plans clearly identify that
    all of the existing external envelope of the building would be retained.
27. In terms of new works, internal walls would be formed, together with internal
    partitions and party walls within the envelope of the building to ensure an insulated
    and watertight structure. Insulation would be incorporated beneath the roof
    covering, between and under the existing frame, in addition to an airtight
    membrane. Externally, the concrete panels would be rendered, four existing
    rooflights would be removed, leaving the remaining eight, and several aluminium
    frame, triple-glazed windows and doors would be formed. There is nothing in the
    SoW to suggest that the structural integrity of the existing external facing material
    would be compromised as a result of creating these openings, since the internal
    insulated structure would accommodate the load of the windows.
28. The large open-fronted bay would be enclosed with a lightweight timber frame
    construction and finished externally with rendered concrete blockwork and vertical
    profiled timber board cladding to replicate the existing construction.
29. As set out above, paragraph Q1.(j)(i)(aa) allows for the installation or replacement
    of windows, doors, roofs, and exterior walls. In this case, most of the building’s
    external fabric would be retained. Furthermore, PPG states that internal works do
    not generally constitute development and, where necessary to enable a building to
    function as a dwelling, internal works, including the installation of internal walls,
    may be undertaken and are not prohibited under Class Q.
30. The Council is concerned is that excavations, load-bearing bases and footings
    would be required to support new walls, which would exceed what could
    reasonably be described as a conversion.
31. From the evidence, there is no suggestion that the existing portal frame would not
    be capable of withstanding the additional loading from the proposed development,
    thus no significant structural improvement or new structural elements to the
    existing frame, nor underpinning or foundation works, would be required.
    Moreover, from the information available, there is no evidence to indicate that the
    condition of the existing floor slab would prevent the proposed internal blockwork
    from being constructed or affect its stability once built. However, due to the division
    of the building into four dwellings, the SoW states there would be a requirement for

6
    Acorus, ‘Schedule of Works Conversion of Agricultural Building to Form Dwelling’, Barn A, dated August 2025.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   5
Appeal Decision 6007456


         each party wall to be constructed in loadbearing studwork, supported by footings,
         although other internal walls would be non-loadbearing timber studwork
         constructed directly off the floor slab.
32. Even though the excavation of footing is not listed in paragraph Q1(j), such works
    would be internal and not relate to the underpinning or support of the main
    structure of the building. The creation of party walls within the building would be
    negligible in the context of the proposed works to the building as a whole,
    particularly having regard to all existing external and structural framing material
    that would be retained.
33. Neither the GPDO nor the PPG define the term ‘reasonably necessary’.
    Consequently, this is a matter of planning judgement based on the nature and
    extent of the proposed building operations. Although the totality of works required
    to enable the building's conversion to residential use would be considerable, they
    would not involve the substantial replacement of the building’s external fabric, and
    the primary structural elements of the building would be retained.
34. In this regard, the proposal differs from the appeal example provided by the
    Council to support their case7. In that case, it is clear that substantial works to
    excavate, underpin and provide new footings, as well as replace the existing floor
    slab would be likely to be required. This is not comparable to the relatively limited
    amount of works envisaged in this case.
35. Consequently, I find that the cumulative extent of the works to facilitate the
    proposed conversion of the agricultural building to residential use would fall within
    the scope of operations reasonably necessary for the building to function as two
    dwellings, in compliance with paragraphs Q(c) and Q1.(j). As there is no dispute
    about paragraph Q1.(j)(ii) or any other part of paragraph Q1, the proposal would
    be permitted development.
Prior approval – location and siting
36. At the time of my site visit, the appeal building accommodated some calves, a
    small amount of hay and some ad-hoc materials. To the west of the building is
    Brookfield Farmhouse and The Sycamores, dwellings associated with the farm
    enterprise, along with a single storey agricultural storage building which is the
    subject of the other appeal. The Sycamores sits parallel to the building and is
    separated from it by a relatively small parcel of land that is grassed and includes
    some shrubs. Close to the east elevation of the building the land is partially
    underlain with stone chippings and, at the time of my site visit, included some
    machinery, building materials and vehicles. Beyond this, lies open agricultural land
    which wraps around to the south of the building.
37. To the north is a large open-sided agricultural building. Evidence indicates that
    planning permission was granted for this building in 2018 for uses associated with
    a dairy farm enterprise. It is surrounded by an area of hardstanding. I observed
    animal stalls, hay, tractors and other farm machinery within the building, but no
    livestock. Nor did I see a slurry lagoon close to any building on the wider site. The
    open-sided building appears to be the central focus of the enterprise and a
    separate access to it and the appeal building has been formed to the west of
    Brookfields Farmhouse. There is therefore a clear separation of access between

7
    Appeal Ref: PP/H4505/W/25/3363090


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007456


         the residential parts of the enterprise and the building the subject of the other
         appeal from the main agricultural activities undertaken on the site.
38. The Council argues that the proximity of the appeal building and associated private
    outdoor amenity space to the large open-sided agricultural building and
    surrounding land would be undesirable or impracticable for future occupants of the
    building. However, the Council do not identify the nature of any potential harm.
39. Impractical or undesirable are not defined in the GPDO. The PPG states that
    impractical reflects that the location and siting would “not be sensible or realistic”,
    and undesirable reflects that it would be “harmful or objectionable”. It goes on to
    confirm that the decision maker should start from the premise that the permitted
    development right grants planning permission, subject to the prior approval
    requirements. That an agricultural building is in a location where planning
    permission would not normally be granted for a new dwelling is not a sufficient
    reason for refusing prior approval. Amongst other instances, the example of an
    undesirable location would be where a building would be located adjacent to uses
    such as intensive poultry farming buildings, silage storage or building with
    dangerous machines or chemicals8.
40. Paragraph W(10)(b) of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO requires that regard be
    had to the Framework so far as relevant to the subject matter of the prior approval
    as if considering a planning application. Policy P3 of the Framework, amongst
    other things, states that development proposals should provide healthy living
    conditions for occupiers including in terms of avoiding exposure to levels of air,
    noise, light or other sources of pollution which could have an unacceptable
    adverse effect on health and the quality of life.
41. The current lawful use of the appeal site, the open-sided building to the north and
    the surrounding land is for agriculture, although I note the evidence indicates that
    much of the land on the enterprise is part of a Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) habitat
    bank through a BNG registered conservation covenant. Therefore, the level of
    agricultural activity taking place on the land subject to the BNG habitat bank would
    be limited for at least 30 years. However, this would not prohibit all agricultural
    activity. Livestock grazing and hay cutting could typically still take place on land
    subject to a BNG habitat bank.
42. Therefore, even though I accept that the current farming enterprise is very limited
    in scale and I do not doubt, from observations at my site visit, that the site as an
    active farm operated by the appellant is ‘winding down’, it could be used more
    intensively in future. Even as part of a BNG habitat bank, I see no compelling
    reason why the modern, large open-sided building, yard area and land could not
    potentially accommodate a considerable number of livestock, farm vehicles and
    machinery, given the approximate 40 hectare extent of the land indicated in the
    appellant’s information.
43. As such planning judgement is required as to the nature and intensity of activities
    that could reasonably occur given the land-use, as well as the character of the
    disturbance and odour likely to be generated by them. These could include from
    the keeping of livestock, storage of equipment, chemicals, movements associated
    with agricultural vehicles and other general agricultural practices. Such activities
    are likely to take place at any time of the day or night and for 7 days a week.
8
    Paragraph: 109 Reference ID: 13-109-20150305


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           7
Appeal Decision 6007456


44. Here is where the proposal differs from the appeal example provided in support of
    the appellant’s case on this matter at Rolestone Manor Farm 9, although limited
    information has been presented to make a robust comparison between this appeal
    and the one before me. I note however from the decision that the Inspector refers
    to the potential for farm buildings to be brought into a more active use in future but
    that due to the small-scale of the holding, any future use would be unlikely to
    intensify to a scale that would cause unacceptable harm to potential future
    occupiers. From the decision, that farm was debated to be between 12 and 20
    acres, much smaller than land at Brookfield Farm and thus materially different in
    scale. No details of the appeal referred to in the appellant’s final comments10 have
    been provided to me so I am unable to make any comparison in this case.
45. Due to the open-sided design of the building to the north, the location of the feed
    hopper and its proximity to the appeal building and gardens, disturbance to the
    future occupiers would be expected to arise from animal sounds and odours
    emanating from this building and from the movement of livestock in and around the
    building and yard. Furthermore, farm machinery and vehicles operating in and
    around the open-sided building would generate noise disturbance near to the
    appeal building and gardens, particularly along the appeal building’s north
    elevation where several habitable rooms have windows. This would likely include
    sounds from vehicles manoeuvring, engines running, as well as sudden and varied
    tones from loading and unloading activities and machinery. The nature of those
    sounds in combination and occurring close to the proposed dwellings and their
    private outdoor space at any time of day or night would be particularly annoying
    and disturbing to future occupiers, which, in turn, could be harmful to their health
    and well-being.
46. Although I did not experience much noise or odour on my visit due to limited
    agricultural activities currently taking place on the enterprise, that was a snapshot
    in time and would not necessarily be representative of the conditions that could be
    experienced by the occupiers of the proposed dwellings from within their homes
    and gardens in future.
47. Windows on the west elevation of the building would face The Sycamores and
    windows to the south and east, along with gardens along this elevation, would face
    agricultural land. I recognise this is not uncommon in rural areas and on the edge
    of settlements where rural activities and associated noise, disturbance and smells
    are commonplace, and any future residents would likely be alive to this possibility.
    I also note the SoW identifies all windows in the appeal building would be triple-
    glazed, which would lessen the effect of disturbance and odour emanating from
    agricultural activities.
48. Nevertheless, during warmer weather occupants would be more likely to open
    windows for ventilation and cooling. At these times, due to the limited separation
    distance, agricultural activities taking place in and around the open-sided building,
    including from vehicles the movement of livestock, would be particularly noticeable
    to occupants of the dwelling at Plot 1 and when using their private outdoor space.
49. The land immediately to the north of the appeal building is gated from the main
    yard area of the large open-sided building. Noise insulation of the appeal building
    and details of boundary treatment surrounding private outdoor space could be
9
    APP/D0121/W/20/3257716 and APP/D0121/W/20/3257717
10
     APP/Q1153/W/22/3297510


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          8
Appeal Decision 6007456


       required by a condition. I also note the Council’s Regulatory Services and Health
       team did not raise an objection regarding noise effects of the proposal, although
       their comments appear to have focussed on air quality and land contamination
       rather than the effects of the proposal on noise disturbance and odour.
       Nonetheless, in the absence of any assessment or details of disturbance or odour
       that would be generated by the movement and housing of livestock in and around
       the wider enterprise, I cannot be certain that it would not be an unacceptable level
       when experienced within the proposed dwellings or their private amenity space or
       could be made acceptable through mitigation measures.
50. The appeal building may relate well to the other dwellings at the farm, but its
    location would not relate well to the adjacent large open-sided building, which, as
    well as the yard lying in between, is the main focus of agricultural activities. The
    appellant argues the open-sided building is the subject of a separate pre-
    application query with the Council to re-purpose its use given matters of viability.
    Be that as it may, I must assess the proposal as submitted and against its current
    use, which is for agricultural purposes.
51. Consequently, the effects of disturbance and odours would make the location and
    siting of the building undesirable for it to change from agricultural use to a
    dwellinghouse. Moreover, I cannot be certain that the living conditions of the
    occupiers of the proposal could, in this regard, be made acceptable through the
    imposition of planning conditions.
52. To conclude, for the above reasons, and in applying a reasonable judgement, the
    proposal would not comply with the prior approval matter at paragraph Q2.(1)(e) of
    Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO as the location or siting of the building
    makes it undesirable for the building to change use to a dwellinghouse.
Other Matters
53. The proposal would result in an additional four dwellings to the housing supply of
    the district, which is acknowledged to have a shortfall. However, the consequent
    benefits have already effectively been recognised by the grant of permission under
    Article 3(1) of the GPDO. Housing land supply is therefore not a relevant
    consideration and has not been given any weight in my determination.
54. Hankelow Parish Council and a neighbouring resident have raised several
    concerns, including the agricultural operations and agricultural integrity; traffic,
    parking and highway safety, the potential for pollution to nearby Birchall Brook;
    land contamination; the effect on the character of the area; historic planning
    context of the site; utility supply; flooding and drainage; heating provision and oil
    tanks; effect on national fuel line; infrastructure requirements; and the size of
    outdoor amenity space.
55. The application is not for planning permission. PPG advises that the statutory
    requirements relating to prior approval are much less prescriptive that those
    relating to planning applications. It goes on to say that this is deliberate, as prior
    approval is a light-touch process, and it is important that a local planning authority
    does not impose unnecessary onerous requirements on developers nor seek to
    replicate the planning application system.
56. Since there is no statutory requirement to determine applications for prior approval
    in accordance with the development plan, the primary basis for my assessment is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007456


       the Order itself. The proposal is therefore not subject to the policy in the Hankelow
       Neighbourhood Plan that requires a replacement building. Similarly, I have taken
       account of the Framework only insofar as it is relevant to the prior approval
       matters.
Conclusion
57. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.



Ann Veevers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
