Appeal Decision
by S Brook BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007730
Land to the rear of 137 Station Road, Hesketh Bank, Preston PR4 6SR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Alan Baxter against the decision of West Lancashire Borough Council.
•    The application reference is 2025/0778/PIP.
•    The development proposed is Permission in Principle for up to 4 dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for up to 4 dwellings
       at land to the rear of 137 Station Road, Hesketh Bank, Preston, PR4 6SR, in
       accordance with the terms of the application reference 2025/0778/PIP.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Alan Baxter against West Lancashire
       Borough Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
       stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
       is suitable in-principle and the second, technical details consent (TDC) stage is
       when the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the
       first of these two stages.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent TDC application, if permission in principle is
       granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
5.     An applicant can apply for permission in principle for a range of dwellings by
       expressing a minimum and maximum net number of dwellings as part of the
       application. In this instance, the application form does not specify a minimum, only
       a maximum of up to 4 dwellings. No indicative drawings have been provided.
6.     Since the appeal was lodged, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) has been published. Both parties have had an opportunity to
       comment on the revised Framework and so have not been prejudiced by this
       change. The Framework is a material planning consideration and I have had
       regard to the latest version of it in determining this appeal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007730


Main Issue
7.       There is no dispute between the main parties that the principle of residential use of
         the land at this location is acceptable. Having considered the available evidence
         and from my own observations, I have no reason to disagree. Therefore, the main
         issue is whether the appeal site is suitable for the amount of development
         proposed.
Reasons
8.       The appeal site comprises land to the south and west of 137 Station Road, a semi-
         detached, two storey dwelling. The appeal site encompasses the access driveway
         serving No 137, a large lawned area fronting Station Road and a two-storey brick
         built building and associated yard, positioned to the rear, which the Council
         indicates was formerly agricultural in use. The surroundings are predominantly
         residential in character, albeit there is a large glasshouse to the northwest and a
         field opposite.
9.       The site extends to approximately 0.14ha and is broadly rectangular in nature.
         While at this stage, a range of dwellings is proposed up to 4, a maximum of 4
         dwellings on the site would result in a density approaching 30 dwellings per
         hectare, which is the minimum specified by policy RS1 of the Local Plan (LP)1
         subject to the specific context of a site. Framework policy L3 supports residential
         development which contributes to an increase in the density of the area in which it
         is situated. This matter would need to be fully considered at the TDC stage.
10. At my site visit, I carefully considered the character of the area, and while some
    housing plots within the vicinity of the site are more spacious than others, there is
    variation in plot sizes. Given this variation, I am not persuaded that a scheme for
    up to 4 dwellings could not be designed so as to respond appropriately to this
    context, as required by Framework policy DP3, without appearing overly cramped
    or intensive. Framework policy L3 states that in considering the potential to
    increase densities, while the existing character of an area should be taken into
    account in accordance with Framework policy DP3, this should not preclude
    development which makes the most of an area's potential.
11. A number of other factors, such as the street scene, the building line along Station
    Road, and the relationship with existing housing, would no doubt influence the
    arrangement of any future dwellings on the site at the TDC stage. These
    considerations may require a less conventional approach to design and layout,
    including for parking and outdoor amenity space, particularly for 4 dwellings.
    Nevertheless, as there is variety in the size and style of surrounding housing, this
    will afford some flexibility when considering the more detailed design and layout of
    any future proposal. Therefore, at this stage, I see no reason to conclude that a
    scheme for up to 4 dwellings could not be designed to integrate with, and enhance
    the site’s surroundings.
12. I have considered the Council’s concerns relating to the standard of housing to be
    provided, particularly the provision of outdoor amenity space, should the maximum
    of 4 dwellings be pursued. However, whether future occupiers will be provided with
    adequate outdoor amenity space will depend on a number of factors, not least the
    size of the units proposed and the number of intended occupiers. For example, a

1
    West Lancashire Local Plan 2012–2027 Development Plan Document, October 2013


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6007730


         one- or two-bedroom dwelling would not necessarily require the same level of
         outdoor amenity space as a larger family home. As the site’s context will afford
         some flexibility in considering the size and style of the units to be proposed, which
         will in turn influence the requirements for matters such as outdoor amenity space
         and parking provision, I am satisfied that with careful consideration, a suitable
         scheme for up to 4 dwellings could be achieved.
13. Reference has been made to a planning permission2 for a single dwelling in the
    locality which demonstrated a 10m garden depth. It is suggested that this
    represents an acceptable benchmark, while the Council’s Design Guide (SPD)3,
    suggests a minimum rear garden depth generally of 10m also. However, this SPD
    reference is made in the context of considering the potential for overlooking. The
    SPD acknowledges that this is guidance only and that the particular merits of a
    case may warrant a different approach. Consequently, this other proposal and the
    SPD do not lead me to conclude that the amount of development proposed is
    unachievable.
14. For the foregoing reasons, I find that in principle, the site is suitable for the amount
    of development proposed and I find no conflict at this stage with LP policy GN3
    which amongst other matters, requires high-quality design which retains or creates
    reasonable levels of privacy, amenity and sufficient garden/outdoor space for
    occupiers of the proposed and neighbouring properties. Consequently, I find no
    conflict with LP policies RS1 or GN1 either. The former supports residential
    development within settlements, subject to other relevant policies being satisfied,
    while the latter supports the development of brownfield land within settlements,
    subject to other relevant policies being satisfied.
15. Turning to the decision-making policies of the Framework for achieving sustainable
    development, Framework policy S3 requires that decisions on development
    proposals apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. It states that
    Framework policy S4 should be applied when considering development proposals
    within settlements, as is the case here. It goes on that, in all locations,
    development proposals that accord with both an up-to-date development plan and
    the decision-making policies in the Framework should be approved without delay.
    Framework policy S4 states that development proposals within settlements should
    be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    within the Framework.
16. The circumstances in which the benefits of approving development are likely to be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects include where the development
    proposal would have a substantial adverse impact in relation to the application of
    policy in the Framework for development within residential curtilages - policy
    L2(1)(d).
17. The appeal site contains a mix of uses and therefore it is not all residential
    curtilage. Further, a detailed proposal is not before me, and so a full consideration
    of the proposal against Framework policies L2 and L3 would be required at the
    TDC stage. Even so, it is unlikely that following re-development, the proposal
    would occupy more than twice the footprint of all the existing buildings on the site.
    While No 137 would be unlikely to retain at least 50% of the non-developed area
2
    2013/1371/FUL
3
    Council’s Supplementary Planning Document, Design Guide, January 2008, (SPD)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6007730


       within its curtilage, for the aforementioned reasons, this would not necessarily be
       harmful to the overall character of the area, subject to the detailed design. At this
       stage therefore, I have no reason to consider that there would be a substantial
       adverse impact in the context of Framework policy L2(1)(d). Consequently, this
       would not amount to circumstances where the benefits of approving the
       development would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects. I have not
       identified any additional adverse effects, when assessing the proposal against the
       other national decision-making policies of the Framework.
18. As the proposal accords with the development plan and I have not identified any
    conflict with the decision-making policies within the Framework, policies S3 and S4
    of the Framework indicate that the proposal should be approved.
Other Matters
19. I note the additional concerns of interested parties with regards to the capacity of
    certain infrastructure, however these are detailed matters which will be considered
    at the TDC stage, along with any necessary conditions.
20. While the submissions refer to the Council’s position in relation to the need to
    demonstrate a 5-year supply of housing land, given my findings on the main issue,
    it has not been necessary for me to consider this matter further.
21. The Parish Council suggests that the appeal site is within the Green Belt, however,
    this is not supported by any evidence, nor does the Council suggest that this is the
    case. As such, I have not considered this matter further.
22. The Council’s costs rebuttal included reference to paragraph 84 of the former
    Framework, which related to isolated homes in the countryside. Policy H011 of the
    current Framework now considers this matter. However, the appeal scheme would
    not result in the development of isolated homes in the countryside and so I have
    not considered this aspect of national policy further.
Conclusion
23. Having considered the amount of development proposed, no conflict with the
    development plan has been identified and having considered all other material
    considerations, including the Framework, I find that the appeal should be allowed.

S Brook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
