Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by D R Kay BA Dip.Arch RIBA(Retired)
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007369
38 Brook Lane, Corfe Mullen, Wimbourne, Dorset BH21 3RD
•     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•     The appeal is made by Jacquie Upton against the decision of Dorset Council.
•     The application Ref is P/HOU/2025/06963.
•     The development proposed is: Erect extension to existing annex, flue.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of development was changed by the Council from that included on
   the application form. Whilst not being consulted, the appellant has raised no
   objection to the change. I have therefore used the Council’s revised description in
   the header above, as it more accurately describes the extent of development.
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026
   (the Framework 2026). Whilst this made certain revisions to aspects of national
   planning policy, having examined the Framework 2026 in respect of the matters
   relied on by the main parties, I find these are substantially unchanged. I have
   therefore determined the appeal in accordance with the revised Framework 2026.
Main Issues
    4. The appeal site is located within the South-East Dorset Green Belt; the main
       issues therefore are:
         •    whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
              (the GB) for the purposes of the development plan and the Framework 2026
              including the effect upon the openness of the Green Belt; and
         •    if the proposal is found to be inappropriate development, whether the harm
              by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by
              other considerations so as to amount to the very special circumstances
              required to justify the development.
Reasons
Whether or not the development would be inappropriate
5. The appeal property consists of a large, almost square two-storey dwelling,
   together with a single storey rectangular shaped former garage building, which has

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007369


     previously been converted to a two-bedroom annexe. The appeal property sits
     within a large rectangular plot, the main dwelling occupying a central location,
     whilst the annexe building sits to the side and in front of the principal elevation of
     the main dwelling, attached to it via a high masonry wall, through which a gate
     provides access from the property’s front forecourt to the rear garden.
6. The proposal seeks to erect a small extension within the corner between the main
   dwelling and the annexe to provide a dedicated living room. The proposal does not
   seek to create an internal link between the two elements of the property, which
   would remain as two elements within a single residential planning unit.
7. Development within the GB is controlled by saved Policy GB3 of the East Dorset
   Local Plan 2002 (the Saved Local Plan), and Policy KS3 of the Christchurch and
   East Dorset Local Plan Part 1 – Core Strategy 2014 (the Core Strategy). The latter
   policy relates to the strategic control of GB within the development plan area, whilst
   the former provides specific policy relating to extensions and replacement dwellings
   in the GB.
8. Policy GB6 of the Framework 2026 states that development in the GB is
   inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in policy GB7. It goes on to
   state that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the GB and should
   not be approved except in very special circumstances. Such circumstances will not
   exist unless the potential harm to the GB by reason of inappropriateness and any
   other harm resulting from the proposed development, is clearly outweighed by
   other considerations. In making this assessment, substantial weight should be
   given to the harm to the GB which would be caused, including harm to its
   openness.
9. The primary issue is to determine if the proposal would represent inappropriate
   development in the Green Belt. Policy GB7 of the Framework 2026 sets out
   exceptions to inappropriate development. I find the site would not comply with
   exceptions GB7(1)(a), GB7(1)(c), GB7(1)(d), GB7(1)(f), GB7(1)(g) or GB7(1)(h).
   With regards to GB7(1)(e) - the redevelopment of previously developed land (PDL),
   the site is within the garden curtilage of a residential dwelling. As such, it would not
   meet the definition of PDL in Annex B of the Framework 2026. I find it would,
   therefore, not meet the GB7(1)(g) exception.
10. With regards to the exception at paragraph GB7(1)(b), this relates to the extension
    or alteration of a building, provided that it does not result in disproportionate
    additions over and above the size of the original building. For the purposes of the
    policy GB7(1)(b) exception, the ‘original building’ is defined in Footnote 40 as ‘the
    building that existed on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed after 1 July 1948, as it was
    built originally’.
11. The evidence identifies that the original main dwelling was a single-storey dwelling
    with a detached double garage. The main dwelling received permission from the
    Council in 1987 for the addition of a further storey, extending the property upwards
    to create a two-storey dwelling to its full footprint. The evidence does not identify if
    the original bungalow had any accommodation within the roof space, but on the
    basis of creating another full storey height, to its full perimeter, the original main
    dwelling was substantively doubled in size.
12. Subsequently, the double garage received permission in 1993 for a substantial
    extension to create a four-car garage, its footprint increasing by around 110%. This

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007369


     enlarged garage block, in incidental use to the main dwelling, was further granted
     permission in 2021 for its conversion to residential accommodation ancillary to the
     main dwelling house.
13. Cumulatively, the floor area of the original building has therefore already been
    enlarged by significantly more than 100% from its original residential floorspace.
    The proposal would seek further development, which taken in combination with the
    development which has already taken place, I find would represent disproportionate
    additions, over and above the size of the original building. I therefore find that it
    would not benefit from the exception to inappropriateness provided by policy
    GB7(1)(b) of the Framework 2026.
14. Written Policy GB3 contained in paragraph 6.104 of the Saved Local Plan, does not
    specifically place a restriction on the size of extensions. However, within the
    preceding paragraphs 6.99 to 6.103, it acknowledges that it would clearly be
    contrary to the purpose of the GB to allow a succession of ‘limited’ extensions
    which cumulatively form a substantial extension to an existing dwelling. This
    acknowledges that Government advice and general policy towards development in
    the GB at the time (Planning Policy Guidance 2 Green Belts (DETR, 1995)
    (PPG2)), permit ‘limited’ but not ‘disproportionate’ extensions. This accords with the
    thrust of policy GB7(1)(b) of the Framework 2026.
15. Assessed against the wording of Policy GB3 in isolation, as a single-storey
    extension of limited floor area, height and bulk, the proposed extension would not
    dominate the existing dwelling. This would in part be due to its limited size, the
    overall size of the buildings that currently occupy the site and its location within an
    internal corner, where the main dwelling and annexe are at their closest points to
    each other. The proposed development would also be substantially screened from
    within views from the public realm.
16. However, I find the proposal would change the visual impact of the dwelling on the
    openness of the Green Belt through an increase in its built form, resulting in harm.
    The proposal would also create some loss of openness, by the development of
    previously undeveloped land within the Green Belt, which would also result in some
    spatial harm through encroachment. I would classify both these harms as being
    moderate. However, policy GB6(2) of the Framework 2026 requires that substantial
    weight is given to any harm to the Green Belt, including harm to its openness.
17. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would conflict with
    Policy GB3 of the Saved Local Plan and Policy KS3 of the Core Strategy. It would
    also constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Other Considerations
18. Whilst I have found harm to the openness of the Green Belt, the proposal would be
    of an acceptable design in relation to layout, site coverage, architectural style, bulk,
    height, materials, landscaping and other visual impact. It would be sympathetic to
    the character and appearance of the surrounding area. The proposal would also
    raise no conflicts with overlooking or loss of privacy impacts to the occupants of
    neighbouring properties. I therefore find it would accord with the criteria contained
    in Policy HE2 of the Core Strategy.
19. The appellant has stated that the reason for the proposal is to provide additional
    accommodation to allow for multi-generational living. It is understood that this

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007369


     would facilitate support for someone with a protected characteristic. However, the
     existing annexe already provides two bedrooms, a bathroom and a large, combined
     kitchen, dining and lounge area. It is therefore already capable of providing
     independent living facilities for occupants of two separate bedrooms.
20. The proposal would add a separate larger lounge area, together with a combined
    utility/bathroom area. There is no evidence before me that the needs of the person,
    or persons, with protected characteristics have mobility issues which require
    additional circulation space, that would provide justification for the further increase
    in the lounge and dining area. Similarly, it has not been identified that the person
    requires permanent live-in support, that would prevent one of the two bedrooms
    from being used as lounge facilities.
21. I have therefore given due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty for persons
    with protected characteristics under s149 of the Equality Act 2010. However, I
    consider that the harm to the openness of the GB from the proposal, outweighs the
    benefit to the appellant in this case.
22. The appellant’s agent has suggested that the appellant could enact larger
    extensions to the existing dwelling through exercise of their rights under the Town
    and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
    amended) (the GPDO). There is no evidence before me to determine if the rights
    under the GPDO are available to the appellant, or if they have previously been
    restricted by condition or other Article 4 Direction by the Council. It is therefore not
    clear that there would be a real prospect of the suggested development occurring
    under the GPDO. I have therefore given this little weight in my determination of the
    appeal.
Green Belt Balance and Conclusion
23. The proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt,
    resulting in harm to its openness. Accordingly, the Framework 2026 requires that
    substantial weight is given to any harm to the Green Belt, including harm to its
    openness, and that inappropriate development should not be approved except in
    very special circumstances. Very special circumstances will not exist unless the
    harm to the Green Belt and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by other
    considerations. I conclude that the other considerations in this case, are not
    sufficient to comprise the very special circumstances necessary to justify the
    approval of this proposal. The proposal is contrary to Policy GB3 of the East Dorset
    Local Plan 2002, and Policy KS3 of the Christchurch and East Dorset Local Plan
    Part 1 – Core Strategy 2014, which seek to protect the Green Belt.
24. I have considered all other matters raised, but none outweigh the conclusions I
    have reached. For the reasons set out above, the appeal is dismissed.



David Kay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
