Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by A Wright BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007549
Dolphin Court, Shelley Road, Worthing, West Sussex BN11 4DD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by A Bennett against the decision of Worthing Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is AWDM/1103/25.
•    The development proposed is a mansard-type roof extension to provide 4no new residential dwelling
     units (Class C3).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The development proposed was originally described as ‘upper floor extension
       (single storey) to accommodate 4 no C3 units’. However, during the Council’s
       consideration of the planning application, it proposed an amended description
       which the appellant agreed to, and this is reflected in the banner above.
3.     The appellant submitted some amended plans with the final comments, showing
       corrections to the window heights on the existing building and details of the
       proposed wall finish. Some additional proposed 3D views and a proposed window
       perspective were also included. Given that these are corrections and illustrations
       and do not change the proposal, my consideration of these plans would not cause
       procedural unfairness or prejudice to other parties. Thus, I have had regard to
       these in my determination of the appeal.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues in this appeal are the effect of the proposal on:
       •   the character and appearance of the host building and area; and
       •   the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to light,
           outlook and privacy.
Reasons
Character and appearance


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007549


6.     The appeal site comprises a large hip roofed Victorian villa subdivided into flats
       with a 1970s three storey flat-roofed utilitarian addition in a predominantly
       residential area. The other two large blocks within the triangle bounded by Shelley
       Road, Southey Road and Wordsworth Road are four storey flat roofed structures,
       though the wider area is characterised by sizeable two and three storey traditional
       and modern buildings with pitched and hipped roofs. The proposed extension
       would provide an extra storey of accommodation above the existing addition.
7.     There is no dispute that the design of the existing addition appears unsympathetic
       to the host Victorian villa. Nevertheless, as it only extends to around eaves level,
       its scale and height is visually subordinate to the original building.
8.     In contrast, the proposed mansard structure would extend almost to the ridge level
       of the villa. Although windows would be framed within the plane of the mansard,
       due to its height, scale and roof form, the proposed extension would appear as a
       bulky, dominant and discordant addition to the building. This would be particularly
       apparent in views from Shelley Road where it would project forward of the original
       building and from where the mansard form would appear significantly at odds with
       the shallow pitched roof of the villa and the wider roofscape.
9.     Further, the proposed stairwell would be within a flat roof part of the scheme,
       whose wall would project above the pitch roof of the adjacent villa. This would be
       an awkward arrangement, failing to integrate well with the existing building and
       appearing unsightly and incongruous in views between the trees from Southey
       Road. This is an integral part of the proposed design and could not be overcome
       by a condition.
10. I note that mansards are commonly used to provide an additional floor of
    accommodation and that rendering the walls and removing the incongruous UPVC
    fascia boarding would improve the appearance of the existing addition. However,
    this would not outweigh the harm caused by the proposal to the character and
    appearance of the area. Overall, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    Council’s Guide to Residential Development Supplementary Planning Document
    2013 where it seeks sensitively designed infill development which contributes to
    the character of the locality.
11. Furthermore, the proposed new brick-built bin store close to the eastern site
    boundary would be visible above the existing flint-dressed wall and may require
    the removal of a small tree to accommodate it. Due to its height, position and boxy
    form, it would be a prominent and utilitarian addition to the street scene, evident in
    views from Southey Road and Shelley Road.
12. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area. This would be contrary to Policies DM2 and DM5 of the
    Worthing Local Plan 2020 – 2036 (adopted 2023) (LP). Amongst other things,
    these require all development to be of a high architectural quality and respect the
    character of the site and area, including in relation to design, massing and height.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007549


Living conditions
13. There are adjacent four storey blocks of flats at Hopedene Court and Queen’s
    Mansions which have habitable room windows directly and obliquely facing
    towards the building on the appeal site. The T-shaped appeal structure has south
    and west-facing windows on both the original building and the later addition.
14. The appellant’s Daylight and Sunlight Report (DSR) was carried out in accordance
    with the BRE’s ‘Site Layout Planning for Daylight and Sunlight: a guide to good
    practice’ (the BRE guide). The courts have recognised the advisory nature of the
    BRE guide1. Although it is not prescriptive and should sometimes be applied
    flexibly, it provides a good guide to evaluating daylight and sunlight impacts. The
    DSR assesses the impact of the proposal on light to rooms in existing flats at
    Dolphin Court and Hopedene Court.
15. The vertical sky component (VSC) is a measure of available skylight at a given
    point on the vertical plane. The DSR indicates that diffuse daylight may be
    adversely affected if after a development the VSC is both less than 27% and less
    than 0.8 times its former value.
16. The distribution of daylight (DD) within a room can be calculated by plotting the ‘no
    sky line’, which separates areas of the working plane that do and do not have a
    direct sky view. The DSR outlines that daylight may be adversely affected if, after
    the development, the area of the working plane in a room which can receive direct
    skylight is reduced to less than 0.8 times its former value. The BRE guide states
    that the DD calculation can only be carried out where room layouts are known.
17. The BRE guide outlines that sunlight tests should be applied to all main living
    rooms which have a window facing within 90 degrees of due south. The DSR sets
    out the relevant criteria for assessing whether sunlight availability to a particular
    window may be adversely affected.
18. The south-facing windows at ground, first and second floor levels within the
    Victorian part of Dolphin Court are very close to its junction with the existing
    projecting three-storey addition which affects current daylight to these rooms.
    Following development, the DSR indicates that the closest bedroom/living room
    window in the second-floor flat would be reduced to 18.5% VSC, less than 0.7
    times its former value. Further, the VSC for the existing living room in the closest
    first floor flat is already under 19% and whilst the scheme would only reduce it by
    0.92 times its former value, it would worsen the poor daylight to this window.
19. The DSR assesses that the rooms in the closest flats on the first and second floor
    of Dolphin Court would retain adequate DD following development and there would
    be adequate direct sunlight to the windows. Nonetheless, the VSC results indicate
    that there would be harmful loss of diffuse daylight to habitable room windows in
    these flats and in the absence of existing floor layout plans, it is impossible to
    determine whether the affected rooms would have an alternative daylight source.
    Further, due to its height and position relative to the two closest second floor flat
    windows, the scheme would cause a harmful loss of outlook from the
    bedroom/living rooms they serve, adversely affecting the living conditions of these
    neighbouring occupiers.


1
    Rainbird v the Council of the London Borough of Tower Hamlets [2018] EWHC 657 (Admin)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6007549


20. There is reference to several appeal decisions where Inspectors considered
    schemes against the BRE guide, finding that those proposals would not lead to the
    unacceptable loss of daylight or sunlight. However, one case complied with the
    BRE guide and the remaining ones related to sites in inner London which are not
    comparable to the location of the appeal site outside the town centre within a
    residential part of Worthing.
21. Hopedene Court has lounge, bedroom and kitchen windows facing towards
    Dolphin Court which at its closest point to the neighbouring building has mainly
    high-level windows and some larger corner openings. There is no dispute that the
    proposal would avoid harmful loss of light to the occupants of this neighbouring
    flatted block.
22. The scheme includes several large west-facing openings, including those serving
    the living area and bedroom in proposed unit 2 closest to Hopedene Court. Given
    their size, position and proximity to existing habitable room windows in the
    neighbouring block, occupants of unit 2 would overlook rooms in upper floor flats
    at Hopedene Court at close range, harming the neighbours’ privacy. Nevertheless,
    this harm could be overcome by a condition securing these windows as obscure
    glazed and non-opening.
23. South facing windows at Dolphin Court directly overlook north facing openings in
    the eastern wing of Queen’s Mansions around 14.5m away. They also obliquely
    overlook openings in the east elevation of the northern wing of this neighbouring
    block at a distance of around 12.5m. The proposal would introduce south-facing
    bedroom and living room windows at a higher level than currently exist.
24. The Council typically seeks a separation distance of 21-28m to maintain privacy.
    The scheme would increase direct and oblique overlooking of rooms in Queen’s
    Mansions, particularly north facing rooms in the eastern wing’s top floor flat.
    However, given the relative position of the buildings, and the extent and
    relationship of the existing openings, this would not be unacceptable.
25. Whilst the proposal would not harm the privacy of occupants at Hopedene Court
    and Queen’s Mansions, it would cause a harmful loss of daylight and outlook to
    occupiers of flats in Dolphin Court, adversely affecting their living conditions. This
    would be contrary to Policies DM2 and DM5 of the LP where they seek to avoid
    unacceptable impacts on the occupiers of adjacent properties, including in relation
    to daylight and outlook.
Other Matters
26. The Council did not find harm or development plan conflict in relation to several
    other matters, including the principle of residential development, internal and
    external space provision, highway safety, impact on heritage assets, ecology and
    flood risk. Nonetheless, even if I were to agree with the Council on these points,
    the absence of harm would be a neutral matter which would not carry weight in
    favour of the proposed scheme.
Planning Balance
27. The Framework supports the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of
    homes. As the scheme is within the settlement of Worthing, Policy S4 requires



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007549


       proposals to be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
       outweighed by any adverse effects.
28. Policy L2 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits where a proposal would create additional homes within settlements by
    using the airspace above existing residential premises (including the addition of
    mansard roofs). This is subject to various criteria, including being consistent with
    the overall street scene and providing acceptable living conditions for neighbours
    in terms of access to daylight, amongst other things.
29. The Framework also seeks to make efficient use of land, with Policy L3 stating that
    proposals for residential development within settlements should contribute to an
    increase in the density of the area in which they are situated. However, in
    considering the potential to increase densities, the existing character of an area
    should be taken into account.
30. The appellant refers to the capacity-based provision of 3,672 homes for 2020-2026
    against the identified need of 14,160 homes set out in the LP. The appeal scheme
    would contribute four dwellings towards the supply of housing in a highly
    accessible location close to services and public transport. It would be capable of
    being built out quickly and make more effective use of the site by using the
    airspace above existing residential premises. There would also be some economic
    benefits during the construction phase and once occupied through increased
    spend in the local area.
31. In contrast, the proposed development would harm the character and appearance
    of the area and the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. This would conflict
    with Policies DP3 and P3 of the Framework where they require proposals to
    respond to their context so that they integrate with their surroundings and be
    appropriate for their location, taking into account likely effects on living conditions.
    In addition, the scheme would fail to meet the requirements of Policies L2 and L3
    of the Framework due to its impact on the street scene, character of the area and
    access to daylight for neighbours. The proposal would also be contrary to Policies
    DM2 and DM5 of the LP. Therefore, in this case, the benefits would not
    substantially outweigh the adverse effects under Policy S4 of the Framework.
Conclusion
32. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal
    should be dismissed.

A Wright
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
