Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by L Clark BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6007861
Park Tavern, 56 Elder Road, London SE27 9ND
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
      Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
      which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mordechai Waldman of Market Place Properties Ltd against the decision
      of the Council of the London Borough of Lambeth.
•    The application Ref is 25/03139/VOC.
•    The application sought planning permission for change of use of the Public House (Sui Generis) into
      5 self-contained flats (Use Class C3), involving excavation to the existing basement plus the
      installation of 2 front light wells; the erection of a part one and part two storey rear extension; the
      erection of a rear dormer roof extension including a balcony and alterations to the existing rear
      dormer; the replacement of the ground floor front window with a door, together with the provision of
      refuse/recycling and cycle storages and hard/soft landscaping, without complying with a condition
      attached to planning permission Ref 22/00442/FUL, dated 02 December 2022.

•    The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby permitted shall be
      carried out in complete accordance with the approved plans and drawings listed in this decision
      notice, other than where those details are altered pursuant to the conditions of this planning
      permission.
      Basement Impact Assessment, Community Infrastructure Levy, Heritage Statement, Internal
      Illuminance Analysis, Parking Provision Details, Parking Survey, Structural Pack, Sustainability and
      Energy Strategy 14.09.22,Viability Report, Daylight and Sunlight Assessment, Fire Safety
      Statement, Planning Statement, Internal Illuminance Basement Beds Rev A Existing Plans: 1, 2, 3,
      4, Roof Plan 102 P2305 P8, 306 P9, 310 P8, 320 P8, 321 P8, 322 P8.Location Plan 001
      P3,Proposed Plans: 300 P8, 301 P8, 302 P8, 303 P8, 304 P8,Flood Risk Assessment (dated
      24.08.2022).
•    The reason given for the condition is: For the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper
      planning.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have used the address of the appeal site in the banner heading above as it was set
       out on the decision notice granting the original planning permission, and that used
       by the appellant on their appeal statement. The version of the address used on the
       application form seeking approval of details and appeal form omitted the name “Park
       Tavern”.
3.     Planning permission was granted in December 2022 for the change of use of the
       building from a public house to create five self-contained flats and various work
       related to that change of use. 17 Conditions were imposed on the permission. The
       front cover of the appellant’s statement refers to ‘amend and discharge condition 2
       and 4(d)’ and I note from the planning history that the appellant has previously


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007861


       sought approval of details relating to condition 41, with one application resulting in a
       subsequent appeal2. However, on this application for removal or variation of
       condition, the appellant has only referred to condition 2. I have therefore determined
       the appeal based on what was consulted on and assessed by the Council.
4.     The description of works on the application form directs the reader to a separate
       document. This list, however, only lists plans and provides no description. The
       Council’s officer report describes the variations sought as being alterations to the
       fenestration and part single-storey, part two-storey rear extension and internal
       layouts, with the internal changes being to the ground floor. From the evidence
       before me, I have no reason to take a different view.
5.     The original planning application approved, amongst other matters, a part one and
       part two-storey rear extension. From my reading of the officer report for that
       application, the Council found no harm to the character or appearance of either the
       appeal property as a non-designated heritage asset (NDHA) or the CA with regard
       to the scale originally proposed part one and part two-storey rear extension. My
       assessment therefore focuses on the difference between the approved extensions
       and what has now been built for which retrospective planning permission is sought.
6.     The Council has indicated that it has no objection to the internal changes and, from
       my reading of the evidence, it also has not raised any concerns with regard to the
       proportions of the glazing bars. Therefore, based on the evidence and without
       anything to the contrary, I have no reason to take a different view. The dispute
       between the parties relates to the changes to the fenestration which include the
       applied glazing bars and visible trickle vents, and the increase in height of the rear
       extension, and these shall be the focus of my assessment.
7.     The development has already been carried out and, as such, I have therefore dealt
       with the appeal on the basis of their retention.
8.     The Council refused the application for two reasons as set out in the decision notice.
       The second of those reasons, which related to securing appropriate access for
       disabled people, older people and others with mobility constraints, was subsequently
       withdrawn. I have considered the appeal on this basis.
9.     During the appeal, a draft legal agreement made under Section 106 of the Town and
       Country Planning Act in the form of a Unilateral Undertaking (UU) was submitted as
       part of the appeal. I have determined the appeal having regard to the UU and shall
       return to this later in the decision.
10. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised in August
    2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of the main parties were
    prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the changes to the Framework,
    and this has informed my determination of the appeal.
11. The appeal property (Park Tavern) is a locally listed building3 (a NDHA) within the
    Elderwood Conservation Area (the CA), and under s72(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), it is my duty to pay special
    attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of
    the CA.

1
  24/02499/DET and 24/02500/DET
2
  APP/N5660/W/24/3357257
3
  Non-Designated Heritage Asset


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007861


Main Issues
12. The main issues are:
          • whether a suitable mechanism has been provided to restrict future occupiers
            from obtaining residential car parking permits and ensure future occupiers have
            access to car club and cycle hire membership; and,
          • the effect of the applied glazing bars, visible trickle vents and height of the rear
            extension on the character and appearance of the NDHA and the CA.
Reasons
Legal Agreement
13. I acknowledge that previously a bilateral agreement has been executed between
    the Council and the appellant, and the appellant now puts forward a UU
    mechanism to which the Council has raised concerns.
14. The appeal is accompanied by a draft UU which places an obligation on the owner
    to inform each occupier that, they shall not be entitled4 to a resident’s or contractual
    parking permit, and that the owner shall enter into a contract with a Car Club
    Operator to provide Car Club Membership and to provide one free Cycle Hire
    Membership per household.
15. I have not been provided with a copy of the original assessment which detailed the
    reasons for the obligations, however the signing of the original S106 legal
    agreement leads me to believe that these obligations were necessary to make the
    development acceptable. In the absence of a completed planning obligation, the
    owner of the premises may apply for parking permits which would have the
    potential of adding parking stress to the immediate vicinity. The draft UU which is
    not dated or signed also omits any plans. These omissions undermine its
    effectiveness and fails to secure any obligations. It therefore has no effect and
    attracts no weight in my assessment.
16. Whilst previously a bilateral agreement, I have nevertheless considered whether
    the matters within the UU could be overcome by a suitably worded condition(s)
    attached to an approval. However, neither party have suggested such condition(s),
    and nor do I have any suggested wording before me. I am therefore not convinced
    in this instance that such requirements could be attached by such a process.
Character and appearance, and Heritage Assets
17. The Council describe the CA as being small and containing a number of listed
    buildings including, amongst other things, Elderwood and 62A Elder Road,
    originally a lodge to Elderwood (No 62A)5. The CA is predominantly linear in form
    and links several buildings on one side of Elder Road from St Luke's School to and
    including properties within Elderwood Place.
18. The immediate area is predominantly residential, comprising traditional terraced
    dwellings constructed with mainly render to the ground floor and yellow stock brick
    above. Park Tavern punctuates the terrace between nos 36 and 60 and stands out
    from the terrace with its Arts and Crafts style and whole rendered frontage. Whilst

4
    Unless they are a disabled person’s badge holder.
5
    Grade II


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6007861


       noted by the Council as being rebuilt in 1920, it has an attractive front elevation
       with a central bay set forward on columns, an oriel window at first floor and a
       circular window flanked by dormers above. From the evidence before me and
       observations on site, the significance of this part of the CA is derived from its linear
       form and the architectural and historical quality of the buildings within it, which is
       experienced mainly from the front.
19. The evidence indicates that Park Tavern has undergone a number of changes
    which include, amongst other things, excavation to the front to create two light
    wells, the replacement of the ground floor front window with a door, and its change
    of use from public house to residential. Despite these changes, I saw that the
    building makes a positive contribution to the CA.
       Effect of the proposal
20. The Council contend that the installed fenestration does not closely match what
    was there previously and that the inclusion of visible trickle vents and applied
    glazing bars, which have the potential to come loose, are inauthentic in their detail.
    The Council has not, however, provided any evidence to substantiate its claims
    with regard to the previously installed fenestration.
21. The Council refer to the original consent6 which it states sets out that the applied
    glazing bars and trickle vents were unacceptable interventions to the locally listed
    building in the context of the CA. The appellant has provided a copy of this 7,
    however, from my reading, whilst the Council did highlight a lack of ventilation for
    future occupiers, it sets out that the window details could be secured by condition8
    and as such it does not expressly set out that either applied glazing bars or trickle
    vents would be unacceptable.
22. A number of windows to the front elevation of Park Tavern have trickle vents fitted
    predominantly to their top. Large-scale details at 1:10 have been submitted
    alongside the appeal which identify which window it relates to and sets out that
    windows are double-glazed, timber in construction and the astragal bars are
    applied with double-sided glazing tape to both faces of the sealed unit and capped
    with clear silicone. Plans show that trickle vents subject to this appeal, are located
    within specific windows and would not occupy all windows within the front elevation.
23. While I have found that a key factor that gives the CA its special interest is the
    architectural quality of the buildings within it, I also saw that several properties on
    Elder Road which are on the Council’s local list had trickle vents. I also saw that
    several windows in the listed properties of Elderwood and No 62A had modern
    additions which included, amongst other things, trickle vents. Whilst I have not
    been provided with the circumstances surrounding their presence, they are
    comparable to trickle vents in other properties and this lends weight to my
    conclusion that these features are acceptable. Therefore, from my observations,
    the insertion of trickle vents to some windows within the front elevation of Park
    Tavern has a neutral effect on the NDHA and the CA, and thereby preserves the
    character and appearance of the CA.
24. Whilst the glazing bars have not been applied in the traditional way, at normal
    viewing distance they were visually indistinguishable from integral bars. I note the
6
  Ref 22/00442/FUL
7
  Appendix 7
8
  Paragraph 7.3.10


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007861


     Council’s concerns with regard to durability; however, given the windows have a
     10-year guarantee which includes the glazing bars, and without any evidence to the
     contrary, I have no reason to doubt their quality. I am therefore satisfied that the
     glazing bars have a neutral impact on the NDHA and the CA and thereby preserves
     the character and appearance of the CA.
25. I saw that the rear amenity space to Park Tavern was relatively shallow and that
    the rear boundary comprised a solid wall, its height extending above both the
    shared boundaries with the adjoining properties.
26. The boundary to the CA is almost on the rear boundary of Park Tavern and, due to
    the height of the boundary wall to the rear and orientation of properties, I saw there
    was little opportunity to view the rear extension from within the CA as a whole or
    from outwith it. I have found above that the significance of the CA is largely derived
    from the architectural merits and experienced from the front elevation. As such,
    given that the rear extension is predominantly obscured from view by buildings
    which front Elder Road, even if the height exceeds the eaves, it was undiscernible
    from the front.
27. I acknowledge that a height which exceeds the eaves line of the host property
    would in most circumstances fail to be subordinate. However, in this case, the rear
    elevation is largely obscured from view from within and outwith the CA. Moreover,
    the full height of the extension could not be observed in context with the eaves from
    ground level due to the proximity of the building which limited the viewing angle.
    Given my findings above with regard to the significance of the CA, I do not agree
    that the increase in height harms either the NDHA or the character or appearance
    of the CA; rather, it has a neutral factor in my determination of this appeal.
28. For the reasons given above, the trickle vents, glazing bars and rear extension
    result in a neutral effect on the CA and thereby preserves the character and
    appearance of the NDHA and how it is viewed within the CA. On this basis, the
    proposal does not conflict with the expectations of the Act. It follows that there is no
    harm to the significance of the heritage assets and subsequently, no assessment is
    required of public benefits, as set out in Policy HE6 of the Framework.
29. Overall, the proposal does not cause harm to the Park Tavern as an NDHA and
    preserves the character and appearance of the CA. Accordingly, I find no conflict
    with the Policies Q5, Q7, Q11, Q22 and Q23 of the Lambeth Local Plan 2020-2035
    (Local Plan) which collectively seek to ensure that development preserves or
    enhances the character or appearance of the CA, and responds to the positive
    aspects of the historic character in terms of architectural detailing (including
    fenestration and articulation).
Other Matters
30. I am mindful that the Council contend that Policy S4 of the Framework has a similar
    impact to paragraph 11(d) of the 2024 Framework which it referred to in its reason
    for refusal. However, for reasons given above, I have found that there would be no
    adverse effects on the heritage assets. It follows that the development also
    complies with Policy S4 of the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007861


Planning Balance and Conclusion
31. I have found no harm to the heritage assets and find that the development
    conforms with the Policies in the Local Plan and Framework in this respect.
    However, whilst this carries positive weight, the absence of a completed UU is not
    a minor procedural matter. Rather, it would likely lead to unmitigated harm through
    the exacerbation of parking stress, leading to a car-dominant environment. It would
    also fail to ensure that occupants have access to either a car or cycle club
    membership. These are relevant planning considerations in this appeal and have
    implications for the acceptability of the proposed development in planning terms
    which is incumbent for me to consider.
32. It is clearly open to the appellant to re-apply for planning permission for the appeal
    schemes inclusive of the necessary planning obligation. However, it is the
    responsibility of the parties to ensure that an obligation is provided and complete,
    and I must assess the proposal as it is before me.
33. Moreover, the Planning Inspectorate Procedural Guide: Planning Appeals England
    (updated 16 July 2026) is abundantly clear on this matter in Chapter 18. It states
    that if the appeal is following the written representations procedure, the appellant
    must ensure that an executed and certified copy of the planning obligation is with
    the Inspector at the time of making their appeal. It also makes it clear that a
    decision should not be delayed to await a revised obligation unless very
    exceptional circumstances exist. No such circumstances have been demonstrated
    in this case.
34. Consequently, and having regard to the above, the UU before me is incomplete.
    Accordingly, the development would conflict with the development plan when read
    as a whole and no material considerations, including the Framework, outweigh this
    conflict. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

L Clark
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
