Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Nick Davies BSc(Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007431
Land east of Lower Clicker Close, Clicker, Menheniot, Liskeard, Cornwall
PL14 3UF
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Mrs J Ward against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•      The application Ref is PA25/07800.
•      The development proposed is the erection of up to one dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (the
         PPG) advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
         is suitable in-principle, and the second (technical details consent stage), is when
         the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
         of these two stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
         permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.       An applicant can apply for permission in principle for a range of dwellings by
         expressing a minimum and maximum number of dwellings as part of the
         application. In this instance, permission has been sought for a minimum of one
         and a maximum of one dwelling.
5.       An indicative proposed block plan has been submitted, showing how a dwelling
         could be located on the site and a potential means of access. I have considered
         this plan to be solely for illustrative purposes because the application only relates
         to the principle of the proposed development.
6.       The site lies in close proximity to the Plymouth Sound and Estuaries Special Area
         of Conservation (the SAC) and the Tamar Estuaries Complex Special Protection
         Area (the SPA). The Cornwall Council European Sites Mitigation Supplementary
         Planning Document (July 2021) (the SPD) explains the importance of the SAC and

1
    The PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007431


       the SPA and their qualifying features. It identifies that recreational activity,
       resulting from additional residential development nearby, has the potential to
       disturb the habitats, resulting in a likely significant effect on their qualifying
       features. The SPD provides a strategic scheme, and sets out a series of
       measures, to mitigate the effect of this increased recreational pressure. For small
       developments, this involves securing a financial contribution to the strategic
       mitigation plan through each application.
7.     The PPG explains that conditions and/or planning obligations cannot be secured at
       the permission in principle stage, only at the technical details consent stage.
       However, in this case, the evidence indicates that a S111 Agreement has been
       completed and the requisite payment has already been made, so the mitigation
       requirements in the SPD have been secured. Any application for technical details
       consent must specify the permission in principle to which the technical details
       consent relates. There is, therefore, a direct link between the mitigation payment,
       related to the permission in principle stage for this scheme, and the process of
       submitting and considering any subsequent technical details, including its effects
       on the SPA and the SAC.
8.     Natural England has endorsed the measures proposed in the SPD and, in view of
       the payment, the Council is satisfied that the effect of the development on the SPA
       and the SAC has been addressed. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the
       proposal, either alone or in combination with other schemes, would have no
       adverse effect on the integrity of the SPA or the SAC. Consequently, when
       undertaking an appropriate assessment, I am satisfied that the scheme would
       accord with the requirements of the Conservation of Habitats and Species
       Regulations 2017. The proposal would not, therefore, be habitats development, so
       can be considered under the permission in principle application procedure.
9.     On 17 August 2026, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). Both parties have had the opportunity to comment
       on its implications for their respective cases. I have considered the new
       Framework in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issue
10. The main issue is whether the site is suitable for a dwelling, having regard to its
    location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development.
Reasons
11. Policy 2 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030 (adopted 2016)
    (the Local Plan) sets out the spatial strategy for development. It seeks to maintain
    the dispersed development pattern of Cornwall, providing homes and jobs based
    on the role and function of each place. Based on this strategy, Policy 3 defines
    how development will be accommodated, with growth focussed on identified main
    towns. Clicker is not one of these. However, the strategy also supports housing
    growth within or adjoining smaller settlements through the identification of sites
    through Neighbourhood Plans; rural exception sites; infill schemes that fill a small
    gap in an otherwise continuous built frontage; development of previously
    developed land (PDL); or rounding off.
12. Paragraph 1.68 of the Local Plan explains that Neighbourhood Plans can provide
    detailed definition on which settlements are appropriate for infill, and boundaries

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007431


       within which the policy will operate. The Menheniot Parish Neighbourhood
       Development Plan 2021-2030 (the Neighbourhood Plan) establishes a
       Development Boundary for Clicker, within which Policy 1 supports infill
       development and development of previously developed land (PDL). The appeal
       site lies outside the boundary, where Policy 1 says development will not be
       supported unless it accords with Policies 7 or 9 of the Local Plan, or Policy 5 of the
       Neighbourhood Plan. The proposal has not been submitted as a rural exception
       site, so it is not supported by Local Plan Policy 9 or Neighbourhood Plan Policy 5. I
       will return to Policy 7 below.
13. The site’s location is not within a built frontage, so the proposal would not
    constitute infill development as described by paragraph 1.65 of the Local Plan. The
    appeal site is primarily a grass field, and it is not occupied by any permanent
    structures. I acknowledge, however, that there is an area of hard surfacing in the
    southwestern corner of the site. The definition of PDL in the Glossary to the
    Framework includes large areas of hardstanding, but in this case the area covered
    is a relatively small proportion of the overall site. I am not therefore persuaded on
    the evidence that the site comprises PDL. The proposal is not, therefore supported
    by this arm of Policy 3, or by Policy 21 of the Local Plan.
14. Paragraph 1.68 of the Local Plan describes rounding off as development on land
    that is substantially enclosed, but outside the urban form of the settlement, and
    where its edge is clearly defined by a physical feature that also acts as a barrier to
    further growth. It also says that it should not visually extend building into the open
    countryside. The western boundary of the site comprises a row of trees that
    separates the field from the houses in Lower Clicker Close. However, there is only
    a post and rail fence to the southern boundary, and the northern part of the site is
    largely open to the pub car park beyond. Furthermore, the eastern boundary of the
    site is an arbitrary line across the middle of the field, which is not marked by any
    feature on the ground. Consequently, the site is largely open, without distinct
    boundaries to segregate it from the surrounding countryside.
15. Visually, therefore, rather than providing symmetry to the urban edge, a dwelling
    on the site would appear as an extension of development into the countryside,
    beyond the established built form of the settlement. The lack of any substantial
    boundary features would also create the potential for further incremental growth to
    the south and east. Therefore, the site’s location means that the proposed
    development would not meet the description of rounding off. Consequently, the
    proposal would not fall within any of the types of development that are supported
    by Policy 3 of the Local Plan within or adjoining smaller settlements.
16. Paragraph 2.33 of the Local Plan defines open countryside as the area outside of
    the physical boundaries of existing settlements. Whilst the site is adjacent to
    Clicker, it does not lie within its physical boundaries, so is in the open countryside
    for planning purposes. Policy 7 of the Local Plan says that development of new
    homes in the countryside will only be permitted where there are specified
    exceptional circumstances. None of these apply to the proposal, so it would be
    contrary to Policy 7. Consequently, the location and land-use proposed would
    conflict with the spatial strategy set out in Policies 2, 3, 7 and 21 of the Local Plan.
    Its location outside the Development Boundary would also result in conflict with
    Policy 1 of the Neighbourhood Plan.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007431


Planning Balance
17. The proposal would conflict with the spatial strategy of the Local Plan and with
    Policy 1 of the Neighbourhood Plan, which addresses development outside the
    Development Boundary. The proposal would, therefore, conflict with the
    development plan as a whole. The legislation2 requires that applications for
    planning permission be determined in accordance with the development plan
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
18. It is not disputed that the Council cannot currently demonstrate a five-year supply
    of deliverable housing sites. The most recent evidence indicates that the supply is
    3.9 years, so the shortfall is considerable. As the location of the site is well-related
    to the settlement, and a single dwelling would be appropriate in scale, the
    Framework’s approach to determining proposals for development outside
    settlements, as set out at Policy S5 1.j, is a material consideration of critical
    importance. In accordance with this Policy, the proposal should be approved,
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework.
19. In terms of benefits, the development would support the Framework’s objective of
    delivering a substantial increase in the supply of homes. In view of the current
    evidenced unmet need for housing in the Local Plan area, Policy HO7 of the
    Framework requires that substantial weight should be given to this benefit. There
    would also be economic benefits associated with the development, through the
    creation of jobs during the construction phase, and residents thereafter
    contributing to the local economy through ongoing spending and support for local
    services. The scale of the development means that these benefits carry modest
    weight.
20. In terms of adverse effects, Paragraph 2 of Annex A of the Framework says that
    development plan policies should not be given reduced weight simply because
    they were adopted prior to publication of the Framework. The spatial strategy set
    out in Policies 2, 3 ,7 and 21 of the Local Plan is consistent with the Framework’s
    aims to direct development to the most appropriate and sustainable locations.
    However, it is not delivering a sufficient supply of homes across the County in
    accordance with the other aims of the Framework. Consequently, I can only afford
    moderate weight to the conflict with the spatial strategy of the Local Plan.
21. Whilst I attach substantial weight to the benefit of delivering an additional dwelling,
    particularly given the absence of a five-year housing land supply, I must have
    regard to Policy S6 of the Framework when considering the weight I give to the
    conflict with Policy 1 of the Neighbourhood Plan. Policy S6 of the Framework
    advises that the benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects where a proposal would conflict with a
    neighbourhood plan that has been made within the last five years, and which
    contains allocations to meet its identified housing requirement.
22. The Neighbourhood Plan was made in April 2022, and it contains a considered
    rationale setting out its identified housing requirement. At the time of preparation of
    the Plan, the need was for about five open market and 19 affordable dwellings.
    Allocations of land were made to provide about 20 houses, with a further allocation
2
    Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 and section 70(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 4
Appeal Decision 6007431


         of land for a housing facility for the care of elderly people. The need for affordable
         housing was expected to be met through a Policy supporting rural exception sites.
         Additionally, a site for about 275 houses was identified to meet the housing needs
         of the Liskeard and Looe Community Network Area (CNA). Whilst the appellant
         has contested the basis for the Neighbourhood Plan’s identified housing need, the
         Plan was independently examined and found to be in general conformity with the
         strategic policies of the Local Plan.
23. I am mindful that the allocations have not yet come forward, but there is no
    evidence before me to demonstrate that they cannot be delivered. My attention is
    also drawn to a planning permission that has been granted for commercial
    development on the site allocated to meet the needs of the Liskeard and Looe
    CNA. However, I note that this permission only covers part of the site. There is no
    evidence to indicate that housing cannot be provided on the remainder.
    Consequently, there is no reason for me to conclude that the Neighbourhood Plan
    does not continue to make provision for the local housing requirement that was
    identified at the time it was made, less than five years ago. I therefore give
    substantial weight to the conflict with Policy 1 of the Neighbourhood Plan.
24. Overall, I conclude that when assessed against the national decision-making
    policies in the Framework, and having particular regard to Policy S6, the adverse
    impacts of the proposal significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits.
    Therefore, there are no material considerations to indicate that a decision should
    be made contrary to the provisions of the development plan.
25. In arriving at my decision, I have had regard to the appeal decision3 that has been
    drawn to my attention by the appellant. In that case the Neighbourhood Plan
    supported development outside the development boundary where it complied with
    Policy 3 of the Local Plan. The Inspector concluded that the proposal constituted
    rounding off in accordance with Policy 3, so there was no conflict with the
    Neighbourhood Plan. The decision is not, therefore, comparable with the case
    before me, where I have found that the proposal does not comply with Policy 3.
    Consequently, it does not lead me to a different conclusion.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



Nick Davies
INSPECTOR




3
    Appeal Decision APP/D0840/W/25/3360691


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     5
