Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007598
Footpath outside, 9–17 Highgate Road, London, NW5 1JY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2025/5852/P.
•    The development proposed is Installation of 1 No. BT Street Hub Unit and Associated Advertisement
     Panels on either Side of the Unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6007600
Footpath outside 9 - 17 Highgate Road, London, NW5 1JY
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2026/0031/A.
•    The advertisement proposed is Installation of 1 No. BT Street Hub Unit and Associated
     Advertisement Panels on either Side of the Unit.

Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a BT Street Hub
       Unit (Hub). Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display
       advertisements on the Hub. I have considered each on its individual merits,
       however, as they raise similar issues I have combined both decisions into a single
       decision letter.
3.     With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be
       based solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I
       have taken the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account,
       they have not been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
4.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
       comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007598 and 6007600


Main Issues
5.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on (i) the character and appearance of the area, including the setting
       of the adjacent Grade II listed Forum Theatre building, (ii) highway safety, and
       (iii) community safety and security.
6.     The main issue in relation to Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisements
       on the amenity of the area, having regard to heritage assets.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
7.     The appeal site comprises of a footpath outside Nos. 9 - 17 Highgate Road, a
       large Grade II Listed Theatre building in a prominent corner position at the junction
       of Highgate Road and Greenwood Place. It is located on a busy road surrounded
       by a range of commercial and residential properties on the edge of Kentish Town
       Centre, that provides a busy and vibrant mixed use character to the area.
8.     The public realm in the vicinity of the appeal site is defined by the wide and open
       nature of the footway. The existing street furniture and other structures are limited
       and well spaced, including a telephone kiosk, seating, bins, road signs, bollards,
       and lamp posts. This enables a good degree of openness within the footway, with
       a relatively uncluttered pedestrian area.
9.     The new Hub would replace the existing telephone kiosk and would be positioned
       in a prominent location set back a short distance from the edge of the pavement
       and would be clearly visible to passing pedestrians and motorists. Due to its
       height, width and overall solidity it would be the most prominent feature within its
       immediate setting and would contrast unfavourably with the open feel that is a
       characteristic of the footpath. Despite the busy edge of town centre location, it
       would have an undue presence in its setting, appearing as an incongruous and
       uncharacteristic feature, which I consider would adversely harm rather than
       positively contribute to the character and appearance of the area.
10. The nearby commercial buildings display advertisement signage typical of a town
    centre location, with modestly sized fascia signage and projecting signs that are
    proportionate to the scale of the frontages. The double-sided illuminated
    advertisement display screens integrated with the Hub would be an
    uncharacteristic and prominent feature that would detract from the public realm
    and the open character and appearance of the footway. Whilst I acknowledge the
    proposed use of anti-glare glass and planning conditions could be used to control
    the level of illumination and frequency of image changes, such measures would
    not overcome the harm I have found to the visual amenity of the area.
11. Given the location of the appeal site adjacent to the Grade II listed Forum Theatre,
    together with the Grade II listed Christ Apostolic Church on the opposite side of
    Greenwood Place, special attention must be paid to considering the impact of the
    development on the significance of the designated heritage assets and to the
    desirability of preserving or enhancing the setting of the listed buildings. The
    historic and architectural significance of the adjacent three storey glazed ceramic
    frontage with decorative metal glazed windows to the 19th Century listed theatre
    building and the traditional 17th/18th Century listed church with twin stone towers


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6007598 and 6007600


       and slated pitched roof on the opposite side of the road can be readily appreciated
       within the immediate vicinity of the site.
12. I consider that the proposed Hub and advertisement, by virtue of their siting and
    design, would have a negative material impact on how the listed theatre building is
    viewed and appreciated and as such would fail to preserve or enhance the setting
    of the listed theatre building. The proposed Hub would be located a short distance
    from the listed Christ Apostolic Church and would be separated by the church’s
    boundary wall and carriageway along Greenwood Place. Consequently, I do not
    find harm in relation to this aspect and the setting of the listed church would be
    preserved.
13. Whilst the degree of harm resulting from the proposed Hub and advertisement on
    the significance of the listed theatre building would be at the lower level, in
    accordance with Policy HE6 (4) of the Framework, that harm should be weighed
    against any public benefits of the proposals.
14. I have considered the appellant’s comments regarding the substantial weight to be
    given to the benefits of improving telecommunications infrastructure in line with the
    policies in the Framework and the various public benefits put forward by the
    appellant. These benefits include the upgrading of the communications
    infrastructure through providing free calls; free wi-fi and device charging;
    wayfinding; access to emergency services; air quality sensors; pedestrian flow
    monitoring; in-built CCTV cameras as well as the Hub being powered by
    renewable energy. The appellant has also highlighted the potential for advertising
    for local businesses, free services to the council, including the ability to obtain data
    from the Hub.
15. Nonetheless, whilst given substantial weight in line with the Framework, given the
    limited scale of the proposals, these benefits would be modest. I therefore find
    insufficient public benefits arising from the proposals to offset the identified harm to
    which I attach substantial weight.
16. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude for Appeal A that the proposed
    development would have an unacceptably harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, including the setting of the adjacent Grade II listed Forum
    Theatre building. It would therefore be contrary to Policies D1 and D2 of the
    Camden Local Plan 2017 (CLP), which, amongst other things, seek to ensure that
    developments are designed and sited so as to respect the local character,
    preserve or enhance the historic environment and the significance of designated
    heritage assets and their settings.
17. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude the proposed advertisements would have an
    unacceptable harmful effect on visual amenity. Though not determinative, I have
    taken account of Policies D1, D2 and D4 of the CLP, which in addition to above,
    seeks to preserve the character and amenity of the area and resist advertising that
    contributes to street clutter in the public realm.
Appeal A - Highway Safety
18. The proposed Hub would be positioned set back from the edge of the relatively
    wide pavement in line with the existing seating. Highgate Road is a principal street
    leading into Kentish Town centre, and it was apparent from my site visit on a
    weekday that the footpath is relatively busy. Although this was just a snapshot in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6007598 and 6007600


       time, I am mindful of the Council’s comments regarding the high footfall in this
       location and that it is likely to be materially greater at certain times, particularly
       when events are taking place at the Forum Theatre.
19. I note the appellant’s comments that the proposed Hub would be marginally wider
    than the existing kiosk on the site and would leave around 3.9m of unobstructed
    footpath width available in front of the theatre frontage and about 2.0m to the road
    kerbside edge. However, this does not take into account the footfall and the layout
    of the well spaced street furniture that already constrain the width of the footpath.
20. I observed that many pedestrians naturally moved to the edge of the pavement
    nearest to the roadside kerb and metal railings to avoid the existing street furniture
    and other features, close to the position of the existing kiosk and the proposed
    Hub, which formed a natural desire line for pedestrians in this location. This
    situation would be worsened by virtue of the Hub’s design, where users would
    need to stand on the footpath to the side of the structure to use the Hub’s facilities
    and as such create an additional obstruction on the footpath in front of the theatre.
21. Consequently, given the use of the space available on the footpath and the
    potential footfall in this busy location, I consider, in my view, that the proposed
    Hub, by virtue of its siting and design, would cause an undue obstruction to
    pedestrians and impede the free flow of pedestrian movements.
22. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed Hub would have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular
    regard to the free and safe movement of pedestrians. Consequently, the proposal
    would be contrary to Policies G1, A1, C6 and T1 of the CLP, insofar as they relate
    to ensuring the delivery of high quality development that meets the highest
    practicable standards of accessible and inclusive design and prioritises walking
    (among other sustainable means of transport) by providing high-quality footpaths
    of adequate width for the number of people expected to use them.
Appeal A - Community Safety and security
23. The Council has described installations such as telephone kiosks and hubs as
    “crime generators” and focal points for anti-social behaviour. The Council state that
    they have experienced a rise in crime and anti-social behaviour as a direct result
    of the existing InLink kiosks in areas within Camden. These activities include
    increased loitering, as well as the usage of the free calls facility at the InLink kiosks
    to coordinate drug dealing. This, however, is couched in general ‘area’ terms
    rather than specifically related to the appeal site.
24. The Metropolitan Police’s Crime Prevention Design Advisor commented that the
    locations around the existing InLink kiosks, often see higher levels of crime and
    anti-social behaviour and that the proposed Hub is larger than the previous InLink
    kiosks and as such would create a larger space for possible concealment. They
    also noted that, due to the location of the new Hub close to the carriageway and
    the seating nearby, as well as the openness of the proposed Hub, it could offer
    opportunities for would-be criminals to observe people using or charging their
    phones at the appeal site and would be vulnerable to opportunistic phone thefts.
25. However, while I do not seek to downplay the harmful impacts of street crime and
    anti-social behaviour, there is limited substantive evidence before me, including
    recent site-specific crime data, to demonstrate that these issues would be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6007598 and 6007600


       increased as a result of the proposed Hub in this particular location. If I had been
       minded to allow this appeal, a condition requiring the proposed Hub to be operated
       in accordance with the appellant’s submitted Anti-Social Behaviour Management
       Plan would be necessary, in the interests of community safety and preventing anti-
       social behaviour and crime.
26. As such, there would be no significant adverse effect on community safety and
    security. I therefore find no conflict with Policy C5 of the CLP, which seeks to tackle
    crime and anti-social behaviour, and to promote safer streets and public areas.
Other Matters
27. In support of the appeals the appellant has included references to similar
    structures installed across the local authority area and in others part of the country,
    together with a range of appeals that include advertisements. However, I have not
    been provided the full details of these to know how directly comparable they are to
    the current proposals, which in turn limits the relevance of the highlighted appeals.
    In any event I have determined the appeals before me on its own merits.
28. I acknowledge the existing wall-mounted advertising display boards on the
    adjacent theatre building and the illuminated advertisements on bus shelters in the
    locality highlighted by the appellant. However, they appear to have different
    locational and development characteristics to the appeal scheme and as such are
    not directly comparable to the appeals before me. As a consequence, whilst I have
    taken this into account, it does not materially alter my conclusions on the appeal
    proposals.
29. In light of my findings on the main issues, it is unnecessary to consider the need
    for a maintenance plan for the proposed Hub by way of a Section 106 legal
    agreement, as it would not be determinative.
30. The appellant states that the proposals would contribute towards improving
    telecommunications infrastructure in line with the Framework and the Code of Best
    Practice on Wireless Network Development in England 2022. I have considered
    the various other public benefits put forward by the appellant in the main issues
    above, including the removal of the existing telephone kiosk. However, the above
    combined benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified in
    this case and there is no indication that they could not be achieved in a less
    harmful manner than proposed.
Conclusion
31. With regard to Appeal A, having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude that
    the proposed development is not in accordance with the development plan when
    read as a whole and Appeal A should be dismissed.
32. For the reasons given above, I conclude Appeal B should be dismissed.

David Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
