Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 July 2026 by T Morris BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007691
21 Long Row, Horsforth, Leeds LS18 5AA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr James Walker against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00173/FU.
•   The development proposed is the installation of new roof tiles over single storey element to front.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). It includes changes with respect to heritage matters
   with specific regard to the degrees of harm. That said, the actions of finding harm to
   a designated heritage asset is not materially different from the previous iteration of
   the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further
   consultation with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective
   cases would not be prejudiced.
4. The description of development on the application form is extensive and includes
   reasons for the works. Therefore, I have used the description on the Council’s
   decision notice as it accurately describes the development, albeit I have removed
   reference to it being retrospective as that is not a description of development.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether the development preserves or enhances the character
   or appearance of the Horsforth Conservation Area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal site comprises a two-storey terraced dwelling which includes a single
   storey front projection built up to the pavement edge. It is located on Long Row
   which is a residential street in the Horsforth Conservation Area (CA). The
   significance of the CA is mostly derived from its collection of historic properties
   together with the local vernacular of building materials, which includes sandstone

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007691


     elevations, as well as stone and slate roof tiles. The predominance of such building
     materials in the area is a positive characteristic of the CA.
7. I have had regard of The Horsforth Conservation Area Appraisal and Management
   Plan (2008) (CAAMP). This identifies that Long Row has its own distinct character,
   with some of the oldest houses in the CA. The CAAMP further highlights that the
   appeal property and the terrace it forms part of is a positive structure in the area,
   and that Long Row provides important mid-distance views in the CA.
8. These factors were evident on my site visit, where I observed that the main
   roofscape of the terrace, including the appeal property, features stone or slate roof
   tiles which are brown in colour. Accordingly, the main roof materials are in keeping
   with the local vernacular of building materials in the CA. In that regard, and
   notwithstanding the development which has occurred, the appeal property
   contributes positively to the character and appearance of the CA.
9. However, the new roof tiles are formed of fibre cement slate and are grey in colour.
   This harmfully contrasts with the brown stone or slate roof tiles of the main part of
   the terrace, detracting from the important local vernacular of materials in the CA.
   Furthermore, the grey plastic fascia board which faces the street is not a traditional
   material and also jars with the historic fabric in the street scene. Consequently, the
   development is incongruous when viewed in key views on Long Row in both
   directions. The roof materials are, if anything, more conspicuous by their single
   storey siting as they are visible on both sides of the roof and more at eye level.
   Moreover, although they might weather over time, the tiles would still be formed of
   fibre cement slate and would be grey in colour.
10. For the above reasons, the development is harmful to the character and
    appearance of the CA. Such harm is identified in the CAAMP, which states that the
    replacement of roof coverings with inappropriate materials is a negative feature
    which affects individual buildings and the wider street scape in the CA. This issue is
    particularly noticeable on terraced rows such as the appeal site, where uniformity
    has weakened.
11. The appellant refers to the range of roof materials in the area, with photographs of
    some examples provided. However, unlike the appeal site, none of these seem to
    be located on historic terraced properties. Furthermore, I have not been provided
    with the addresses of these in order to understand their location in the CA, or the
    full planning background to make a full comparison with the appeal scheme.
    Therefore, the examples provided do not lead me to a different conclusion and I
    give them limited weight.
12. Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires that special attention must be paid to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of conservation areas. For the reasons set
    out, the development does not preserve or enhance the character or appearance of
    the CA. This has resulted in harm to the significance of the CA. Policy HE6 4. of the
    Framework requires that where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits arising from the
    proposal.
13. I acknowledge the appellant’s comments that the development was undertaken as
    the previous roof was damaged, was not waterproof and its repair was impractical.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007691


     However, there is little before me to suggest that a durable and long-lasting roof
     which could meet modern performance standards and the appellant’s needs more
     generally could not have been achieved with an alternative material. Therefore, I
     give this benefit little weight in support of the scheme. Consequently, there are
     insufficient public benefits arising from the development in order to outweigh the
     harm to the CA.
14. I therefore conclude that the development fails to preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the CA. It conflicts with Policies P10 and P11 of the
    Leeds Core Strategy (2014), Saved Policies GP5, BD6, BC7 and N19 of the Leeds
    Unitary Development Plan (Review 2006) and Policy BE1 of the Horsforth
    Neighbourhood Plan (Made in 2020). Amongst other matters, these require that
    developments are appropriate to their context, respect the character and quality of
    the surrounding buildings and historic townscape, and that developments in
    conservation areas should normally use traditional local materials.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. The appeal scheme is contrary to the development plan overall and there are no
    other material considerations which outweigh this conflict. Consequently, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

T Morris
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
