Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 12 June 2026
by F Cullen BA(Hons) MSc DipTP MRTPI IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007220
7 Bridlington Street, Hunmanby, Filey, North Yorkshire YO14 0JR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
    planning permission
•   The appeal is made by Mr H Fell against North Yorkshire Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/04326/FUL.
•   The development proposed is single storey rear extension.


Appeal B Ref: 6007221
7 Bridlington Street, Hunmanby, Filey, North Yorkshire YO14 0JR
•   The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
    1990 (as amended) against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an
    application for listed building consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr H Fell against North Yorkshire Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/04324/LB.
•   The works proposed are erection of single storey rear extension.


Decisions
1. Appeal A: The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for a single storey
   rear extension is refused.
2. Appeal B: The appeal is dismissed and listed building consent for the erection of a
   single storey rear extension is refused.
Applications for Costs
3. Applications for costs were made by Mr H Fell against North Yorkshire Council.
   These applications are the subject of separate Decisions.
Preliminary Matters
4. The two appeals concern the same scheme submitted under different,
   complementary, legislation. I have dealt with both appeals together in my
   reasoning.
5. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework was published on
   17 August 2026 (the Framework). The revisions include policy changes which are
   relevant to the main issue of these appeals. In the interest of fairness, the parties
   were given the opportunity to comment on the Framework in relation to their
   respective cases. In determining the appeals, I have had regard to the Framework
   and the comments submitted by the parties.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007220 and 6007221


6. The appeals were made on the basis of the Council’s non-determination of the
   applications for planning permission and listed building consent within the
   prescribed period. The Council has submitted a ‘Draft Decision’ and Statement of
   Case, which confirm that, had the applications been determined, they would have
   been refused on the grounds of harm in relation to design and heritage.
7. In forming the main issue, I have had regard to the putative reasons for refusal
   advanced by the Council, and the relevant statutory duties as set out in sections
   16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas)
   Act 1990 (as amended) (the Act).
8. At the time of my site visit I was unable to access inside the property to view the
   room from which the proposed extension would be accessed. As an alternative,
   after the site visit, the appellant submitted a photo of the internal wall which would
   be altered by the proposal. In the interest of fairness, the Council was given an
   opportunity to comment. No response was received. I am satisfied that neither main
   party would be prejudiced in me taking the photo into account in my determination
   of the appeals.
9. As part of the appeals, the appellant references an application for a rear extension
   which was granted listed building consent by the Council in May 20001 (the May
   2000 consent). The parties disagree as to whether the consent has been
   implemented. The appellant contends that it has, and could be completed subject
   to the submission and approval of details. Conversely, the Council advances that it
   has expired.
10. It is not for me as part of these appeals to resolve whether or not the May 2000
    consent has been implemented. In any event, it would not be possible to reach a
    conclusion on this matter given the limited evidence provided. Nonetheless, the
    previous grant of listed building consent for a rear extension is a relevant part of the
    planning history of the appeal site (the site) and a material consideration in the
    determination of the appeals. The appellant’s case in this regard is largely based
    around what they contend is the precedent set by the May 2000 consent. However,
    given their view that it is extant, I have also considered it in terms of a potential
    fallback position. These points are addressed under ‘Other Matters’ below.
Background and Main Issue
11. A previous scheme to extend the property was refused by the Council and then
    dismissed at appeal2. The appellant submits that the proposal before me responds
    to the character and context of the site and addresses the reasons why the
    previous appeals were dismissed.
12. Similar to the previous appeals, the main issue is whether the proposed
    development and works would i) preserve the Grade II listed building known as Mill
    Farmhouse or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it
    possesses; and ii) preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the
    Hunmanby Conservation Area.



1
  Application Ref: SCA00/00232/LB. Demolition of existing external w.c. and erection of single-storey rear extension. Granted with
conditions. Only demolition carried out.
2
  Proposal: erection of single storey rear extension and paving rear garden. Application Refs: 22/00628/HS and 22/00809/LB; and
Appeal Refs: APP/H2733/W/22/3306732 and APP/H2733/Y/22/3306733.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decisions 6007220 and 6007221


Reasons
      Special interest and significance
13. Mill Farmhouse is a Grade II listed building3 which dates from the mid-late 18th
    century. The two-storey former farmhouse occupies a prominent position on the
    east side of Bridlington Street, within the settlement of Hunmanby.
14. The appellant submits that the heritage significance of the appeal property is
    ‘relatively low’, being of ‘local / regional interest with little or no national interest in
    its own right’. It is not my role to consider and/or make a judgement on the inclusion
    of the property on the National Heritage List for England. The Grade II status
    identifying it as being of ‘special interest’ in a national context, and the associated
    legal protection, are afforded to the building as a whole.
15. Listings are primarily for identification purposes and do not provide an exhaustive
    or complete description of the building’s special interest. If a specific elevation or
    feature (external or internal) is not included in the description, it does not mean it
    does not have value or does not contribute to the heritage merit of the asset
    overall. Moreover, the list entry confirms that unless stated otherwise, the listing
    includes ‘both the structure itself and any object or structure fixed to it (whether
    inside or outside) as well as any object or structure within the curtilage of the
    building.’ In relation to the latter, the object or structure must have formed part of
    the land since before 1 July 1948.
16. For the avoidance of doubt, I have assessed the heritage merit of the listed building
    on the basis of the above, having regard to the evidence before me.
17. The parties disagree as to whether the appellant’s supporting information complies
    with Policy HE5(1) of the Framework4. Notwithstanding, from the evidence
    presented, I have been able to determine the special interest and significance of
    the designated heritage assets relevant to the appeals, as well as any effects of the
    proposed development and works.
18. The listed building’s form, design and materials result in a distinct aesthetic which
    positively echoes the regional vernacular. Main features include a fairly modest,
    two-room deep, central stairhall plan; a steep clay pantile roof; and the use of
    white-washed chalk and red / brown brick.
19. The front façade presents a visually pleasing, formal and balanced elevation to the
    highway. White-washed, coursed, squared chalk is carefully combined with red /
    brown brick features including a plinth, first floor band, double dentilled eaves
    course and quoined detailing to the gables; and the symmetrically placed openings
    possess red / brown brick quoined surrounds. As a consequence, this primary
    façade imparts quality and status within the village.
20. In contrast, the entrance side gable and rear elevation of the building are more
    utilitarian in their construction, detailing and appearance. Whilst also being built of
    chalk and red / brown brick, the arrangement of these materials is less considered
    and the brick elements and detailing less intricate, with the exception of the
    distinctive brick ‘tumbling-in’ on the gable. Additionally, the positioning of the

3
  National Heritage List for England, List Entry Number: 1167941.
4
  Which requires the submission of an assessment of the significance of the assets affected (including any contribution made by
their setting) and of the potential effect of the proposal on their significance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decisions 6007220 and 6007221


      openings is more random, and the brick surrounds less elaborate. These
      secondary elevations are reflective of the historic agrarian context within which this
      former farmhouse and associated farmstead have evolved.
21. Having regard to the above, I find that the special interest and significance of the
    listed building to be mainly derived from its architectural and historic interests in
    exemplifying a mid-late 18th century former farmhouse; and its group value with
    nearby former outbuildings, with which it is historically associated. Important
    contributors in these respects which are pertinent to the appeals, are the listed
    building’s vernacular form using locally distinct methods of construction and
    materials; surviving historic fabric; and status differentiation between the primary
    front elevation and secondary side and rear elevations of the property.
22. The site is located within the Hunmanby Conservation Area (the HCA), which
    encapsulates the historic core of the village. There is no formally adopted appraisal
    of the HCA. Nevertheless, it can reasonably be concluded that the key
    characteristics which contribute to its special interest and significance are, the
    village’s historic street pattern and associated configuration of ‘ribbon’
    development; and the variety and quality of its historic buildings, which denote its
    organic evolution. A common palette of materials, including chalk and brick
    (exposed, painted and / or rendered) and clay pantiles, as well as distinctive
    detailing including tumbled gables, provide coherence to the buildings and street
    scene, creating a distinct sense of place. Mill Farmhouse along with the associated
    outbuildings, is an important and integral element of the villagescape. By virtue of
    its historic and architectural integrity, Mill Farmhouse adds considerably to
    Hunmanby’s heritage merit and aesthetic charm. In doing so it positively
    contributes to the character and appearance of the HCA as a whole and so to its
    significance as a designated heritage asset.
      Effects of the proposed development and works
23. The proposal is for a single storey extension to the rear of the property, with access
    being gained from the existing dining room. It would provide ancillary
    accommodation, including a home office.
24. Policy HE5(2) of the Framework confirms that assessments of the potential effects
    of development proposals on the significance of heritage assets should identify
    whether they would be likely to: a. Have a positive effect; or b. Have no effect; or c.
    Result in harm (which includes substantial harm), the degree of which should be
    identified; or d. Cause the total loss of significance.
25. Following the dismissal of the previous appeals, amendments have been made to
    the design of the proposed extension, including a decrease in the amount of
    historic fabric to be removed, a reduction in its width, and the incorporation of a
    steep pitched roof. In addition, the revised proposal clearly takes cues from the
    host building in terms of materials and construction. These comprise the use of
    chalk, brick and clay pantiles; brick quoin detailing to openings and corners, and
    ‘tumbling-in’ on the projecting gable; and the incorporation of Yorkshire sliding sash
    windows. I am also mindful of the appellant’s stated intention to remove the existing
    mortar on the rear elevation, including cement, and repoint with lime mortar, albeit
    the extent of this alteration is not explicitly clear in the evidence5.

5
 The change is referenced as relating to the internalised part of the rear elevation; but also as relating to the rear of the dwelling.
This is not clarified in the application form (description), nor annotated on the plans.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    4
Appeal Decisions 6007220 and 6007221


26. Nevertheless, it remains that the proposed extension would be a substantial
    addition, spanning just less than half of the width of the property, and with a ridge
    height at first floor level. Moreover, its projection into the rear yard would be
    considerable relative to the property’s depth. It would also result in uncomfortable
    junctions with the rear door and a first floor window, as well as the associated
    concealment of a sizeable part of the façade.
27. Even though the internalised and repointed part of the rear elevation would remain
    exposed and would be visible to a degree through the French doors, given the
    nature of this change, I am not persuaded that this aspect of the proposal would
    have a ‘positive effect’ and ‘better reveal’ the significance of the asset. Additionally,
    even if I assess that the whole of the rear elevation would be repointed with lime
    mortar as part of the proposal, this would ‘preserve’ the asset and therefore have
    ‘no effect’ on its significance.
28. I note the use of traditionally constructed complementary materials and the
    incorporation of vernacular features. However, in this instance as proposed, I am
    not convinced that the detailing is appropriate. The direct transfer and application of
    such bold decorative features, the inspiration for which is taken mainly from the
    front façade, would result in the extension appearing overly designed and unduly
    elaborate in its form and detailing adjoined to this secondary ‘more rustic’ elevation.
    This visual discordance would be compounded by the inclusion of modern patio
    doors. Together, these effects would weaken the primacy of the host asset and
    disrupt the important status differentiation between the front and rear elevations of
    the building.
29. The scheme would involve the harmful loss of historic fabric from the rear elevation.
    This would be limited in extent and would be from an area which possesses no
    internal features of interest and appears to have been the subject of change in the
    past. Moreover, I note the appellant’s stated intent to salvage this fabric and reuse
    it in the construction of the extension. Whilst it has not been demonstrated how
    feasible this approach would be in practice; it has the potential to mitigate the
    identified harm to a degree.
30. Taking all of the above together, the proposed extension would be unduly
    prominent, would not assimilate well with this secondary rear elevation and would
    not successfully respond to its sensitive context. It would undermine the
    authenticity of the host asset and weaken its value as part of a group. In all of these
    respects, it would not preserve its special interest and would harm its significance.
    The identified harmful effects would not be visible from public routes. Nonetheless,
    listed buildings are safeguarded for their inherent architectural and historic interest
    irrespective of whether public views of the building can be gained.
31. The proposal would not affect some of the key traits that contribute to the character
    and appearance and thus special interest and significance of the HCA. Moreover,
    although the identified harmful effects would be highly conspicuous and readily
    perceived from the private domains of adjacent properties, they would not be visible
    from the general public domain. These considerations moderate the extent of harm
    to the significance of the HCA as a whole. Nevertheless, given the key contribution
    that Mill Farmhouse makes to the positive characteristics of the HCA and the
    cherished local scene, it is reasonable to conclude that its adverse alteration due to
    the proposal, would also undermine the character and appearance of the HCA as a
    whole.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6007220 and 6007221


32. Conservation is an active process of managing change to heritage assets in ways
    that sustain, reveal, or reinforce their heritage interests. For all of the reasons set
    out above, I find that the proposed development and works would not preserve the
    Grade II listed building known as Mill Farmhouse and any features of special
    architectural or historic interest which it possesses; and would not preserve or
    enhance the character and appearance of the HCA. Consequently, the significance
    of these heritage assets would be harmed.
     Public benefits and balance
33. In finding harm to the significance of heritage assets, Policy HE5(2c) of the
    Framework requires the degree of harm to be identified. In making this assessment
    I recognise that it is the effect on the assets’ significance rather than the scale of
    the development which should be considered. Given the nature of the proposed
    change, I find that the scheme would result in a low level of harm to the significance
    of the listed building and a very low level of harm to the significance of the HCA. I
    am satisfied this assessment accurately reflects the effects on the heritage assets
    caused by the proposal.
34. Nevertheless, Policy HE6(1) advises that, when considering the potential effect of a
    development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. This is irrespective
    of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm,
    or total loss of its significance. Additionally, Policy HE6(3) states that any harm to a
    designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight.
35. Following on from the above, Policy HE6(4) requires the effect on the asset and its
    significance to be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
36. There would be some time-limited economic benefits generated by the
    implementation of the scheme and general investment into the listed building; and
    social benefits would accrue from improvements to the local housing stock.
    Additionally, by sustaining the listed building’s significance, heritage benefits would
    arise from the removal of cement pointing from the rear elevation and repointing (in
    part or whole) with lime mortar. Having regard to the amount of development and
    works proposed, I give each of these benefits little weight.
37. Environmental benefits would result from the use of salvaged materials. Bearing in
    mind the extent and unknown practicality of this approach, I ascribe little weight to
    this benefit. In addition, the proposed extension would be well-insulated and
    incorporate double-glazed windows in its construction providing, as advanced by
    the appellant, ‘improved energy efficiency to this part of the dwelling’ (my
    emphasis). On the basis that this would enable energy efficiency measures to be
    employed, it is an important public benefit and carries moderate weight in favour of
    the proposal.
38. However, with reference to Policy CC2(2) of the Framework, there is no substantive
    evidence presented which demonstrates that, of itself, the proposed development
    and works would improve the energy efficiency of the ‘existing’ host building.
    Consequently, this asserted benefit carries little weight. Moreover, although the
    proposal may enable any current or future owner or occupant to work from home,
    the scale of any reduction in their carbon footprint and subsequent environmental
    public benefits are likely to be negligible, and so also carry little weight.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6007220 and 6007221


39. The existing building is in residential use. There is no compelling evidence before
    me which demonstrates that the proposal is required to maintain this use and the
    asset, or to maintain the positive contribution that it already makes to the local
    community and the area’s local character and distinctiveness.
40. In all of the above respects, clear and convincing justification has not been
    provided for the identified harm to the significance of the designated heritage
    assets. In giving substantial weight to the assets’ conservation and considerable
    importance and weight to the identified harm, on balance, the weight I attach to the
    public benefits which would result from the proposal, is not sufficient to outweigh
    the weight I attach to the harm to the assets and their significance.
41. The scheme would therefore conflict with the requirements set out in sections
    16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Act, and the provisions within the Framework which
    seek to achieve well-designed places and conserve and enhance the historic
    environment. It would also not comply with Policies DEC1 and DEC5 of the
    Scarborough Borough Local Plan, July 2017 (the Local Plan), which together and
    amongst other things, require proposals to apply the principles of good design,
    including responding positively to the local context; and to conserve and where
    appropriate enhance historic environments and assets including listed buildings
    and conservation areas.
Other Matters
42. Amendments have been made to the scheme to address the Inspector’s comments
    on the previous appeals’ proposal. Nonetheless, I have assessed the revised
    scheme before me on its own merits and for the reasons set out above, have found
    that it would harm the significance of the designated heritage assets which would
    not be outweighed by the public benefits generated by the proposal.
43. In coming to my conclusions I have had regard to the May 2000 consent as a
    material consideration. From the limited information provided6, the consented
    scheme when compared to that before me, is smaller in width and depth, and is
    more centrally positioned on the rear elevation. That said, there are some
    similarities in terms of materials and design, including the use of coursed chalk,
    brickwork plinth and quoins, and clay pantiles, and the incorporation of Yorkshire
    sliding sash windows.
44. In terms of precedent, even though the relevant statutory duties contained within
    the Act have not changed, there has been a significant and material change in the
    national and local policy context within which a proposal of this type is assessed
    and determined. Namely, the publication of the Framework in 2012 (last updated 17
    August 2026), the publication of the Planning Practice Guidance in 2016 (last
    updated 14 February 2024) and the adoption of the Local Plan. Given these
    changes, the previous grant of listed building consent by the Council in 2000 is not,
    of itself, a reason to allow the appeals, and carries little weight.
45. In terms of a potential fallback position, the May 2000 consent would not create the
    same amount of additional accommodation as the scheme before me. On this
    basis, it is reasonable to conclude that there is little ‘real prospect’ that the May
    2000 consent would be constructed if the appeals were not allowed. In any event,
    even if it were constructed, mainly due to its lesser dimensions, but also because of

6
    Elevation plans but not floor plans.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decisions 6007220 and 6007221


        its more balanced position on the elevation, I find that it would be less harmful than
        the appeals’ proposal. I therefore attach little weight to this potential fallback
        position.
46. None of the other matters raised, individually or cumulatively, alter my conclusions
    on the main issue.
Overall Balance and Conclusions
47. Policy S3(1) of the Framework requires decisions on development proposals to
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4 is relevant
    and states, development proposals within settlements should be approved unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
48. The benefits of the scheme are set out above. Collectively, these carry moderate
    weight in favour of the proposal.
49. Against this, I have found that the scheme would not preserve the Grade II listed
    building known as Mill Farmhouse and any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which it possesses, nor preserve or enhance the character and
    appearance of the HCA, and would harm their significance. As part of this, it would
    also fail to achieve good design and would not respond positively to its local context
    in terms of its scale, form and architectural detailing.
50. The Framework is clear that substantial weight should be given to a designated
    heritage asset’s conservation, and that any harm to a designated heritage asset will
    be a matter of considerable importance and weight7. Moreover, that development
    proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they do not, amongst
    other things, respond to their context8.
51. Accordingly, I find that the benefits of approving the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the identified adverse effects, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework.
52. Appeal A: The proposed development would conflict with the development plan
    and the material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided
    other than in accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given above, Appeal A
    should be dismissed and planning permission refused.
53. Appeal B: For the reasons given above, Appeal B should be dismissed and listed
    building consent refused.

F Cullen
INSPECTOR




7
    Policies HE6(1) and (3).
8
    Policy DP3(3) and (1).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
