Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026
by Andrew Fuller BSc (Hons), Dip TP, MA, MRTPI, IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007589
83 Attingham Drive, Dudley DY1 3HW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr R Ayokosok against the decision of Dudley Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is P25/1167.
•   The development proposed is to change the residential dwelling (Class C3) to a residential care
    home (Class C2)

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to change the residential
   dwelling (Class C3) to a residential care home (Class C2) at 83 Attingham Drive,
   Dudley DY1 3HW in accordance with the terms of the application Ref P25/1167,
   and subject to the following conditions:
    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawing no 5120-210 (Plans-Elevations).
    3) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes)
       Order 1987 (or any order revoking and re-enacting that order) the premises shall
       be used only as a children’s care home for up to one child and for no other
       purpose (including any other use falling within Class C2 of the Order.
Preliminary Matters
2. There is no reference to boundary fencing in either the description of development
   or on the submitted plans. Whilst the Council’s Officer’s Report notes that 1m high
   boundary treatment adjacent to the highway constitutes permitted development, the
   presence of fencing is cited in the first reason for refusal. On my site visit, I saw that
   there was a low section of fencing along the pavement edge, followed by taller
   fencing extending away from the highway along the boundary with No 85 Attingham
   Drive. I have made my decision based on this aspect of the development visible to
   me on site as being retrospective.
3. The Council has a Regulation 19 Local Plan (2024). This emerging plan is at an
   advanced stage. However, whilst I give it great weight, the policies within it, that are
   relevant to this appeal, do not alter the considerations of the main issues.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007589


       • the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
         property and surrounding area; and
       • whether the proposed development would provide satisfactory living conditions
         for future occupiers, with regard to provision of private external garden space.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5. The housing estate on which the appeal site is located comprises a variety of
   properties arranged in different formations and orientations along a winding network
   of streets. Houses are sat relatively close to the road and are separated from it by
   small informal gardens within a dominant array of driveways, parking bays, parking
   courts, garages and car ports. Whilst much of the landscaping along the road
   frontage is open, there are occasional sections of tall fencing that screens private
   gardens, particularly at corners and are in some cases very prominent.
6. The appeal property sits sideways onto Attingham Drive, which curves past it. There
   are clear views into the side garden of the appeal site over low boundary fencing.
   The rear garden is open to the side garden and visible through a narrow gap
   between the house and the common boundary with the neighbour at No 85. This
   neighbouring property faces directly towards the street and tall fencing offers a
   degree of screening between its front garden and the combined side rear garden of
   the appeal site. Whilst the evidence before me notes the removal of a substantial
   portion of original side and rear garden, a mature tree survives within the side
   garden area.
7. The existing fencing that has been erected around the appeal site along the road
   frontage is low and does not appear prominent in the street scene on the approach
   towards the front of the property. The taller fencing along the boundary with No 85 is
   more prominent and is mostly experienced in views where the rear of the appeal
   property is visible from the highway. As such, it reads as typical screening to be
   expected in connection with an area of private rear garden.
8. The proposed change of use of the house to residential care home for a single child
   includes a new parking area to the side of the property. The parking area would be
   accessed directly off the street through existing gates in the boundary fencing. The
   short linear driveway and parking area would be in a similar position and orientation
   to many of the other existing parking spaces to surrounding properties. As there
   would be separation between the proposed parking area and other neighbouring
   parking in the road there would be very limited cumulative visual impact. Moreover,
   along with the fencing, the plans indicate that the existing tree to the side would be
   retained. Together these would provide screening to any parked vehicles in this
   location.
9. My attention has been drawn to the Dudley Council Residential Design Guide
   Supplementary Planning Document (2023) (Design Guide SPD). The Design Guide
   SPD does not explicitly resist new parking or close board fencing to residential
   properties. As such, both the parking and fencing assimilates to an acceptable
   standard with the established character and appearance of the property and
   Attingham Drive.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007589


10.Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would not harm the character
   and appearance of the property or surrounding area. As such, I find no conflict with
   Policy S6 of the Dudley Borough Development Strategy (2017) (Development
   Strategy) or Policy ENV3 of the Black Country Core Strategy (2011) (Core Strategy).
   These policies, amongst other things, support development that is appropriately
   designed to respect the character of the local area.
Living conditions - Future occupiers
11.The house has a rear garden not untypical in size to many of the gardens to
   surrounding houses across the estate. It is of a comparable width to the house and
   narrows from a mid-point onwards. Whilst it gently slopes away from the property, it
   is directly accessible from the rear ground floor living areas.
12.The proposed residential care home would accommodate one child with Emotional
   and Behavioural Difficulties (EBD) and complex needs between the ages of 7 and
   17. They would be cared for by up to three carers over 18 years of age. Whilst other
   individuals could be expected to visit, the number of people in the house and garden
   at any one time would likely be low.
13.The additional parking area would mostly fall within an area in line with the side of
   the house and encroach only marginally into a small part of the rear garden beyond
   the house. The proposed car parking space would be visible from the area close to
   the rear of the house, where future occupants could reasonably be expected to
   mostly sit. There would also be a bin and cycle storage area further down the
   garden.
14.However, the current house has four bedrooms and the garden services the needs
   of what might be a relatively large family, potentially with multiple children. Whilst the
   car parking space, bin and cycle storage would slightly reduce the garden space,
   there is limited evidence before me to explain why a single child with EBD and
   complex needs could not live comfortably at the property. The garden would still be
   adequate in its proportions for both the child along with the low numbers of carers
   and visitors. The area directly to the rear of the house would still be able to
   accommodate seating comfortably and the lawn could still adequately be used for a
   range of recreational activities. In its entirety, the garden would only be marginally
   smaller and still capable of accommodating sufficient space for play, quiet time and
   therapeutic benefits to meet the needs of a single child.
15.In making my decision, I have had regard to the Design Guide SPD. This provides
   minimum standards for private rear gardens, in terms of area and length, for new
   housing of different sizes. The appeal proposal is not for a new house but for a
   residential care home for one child which the SPD does not set a standard for.
   Whilst the Design Guide SPD is useful, I find that the slight reduction in garden
   space to be acceptable for a single child’s needs.
16.Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would satisfactorily meet the
   living conditions for future occupiers, with regard to the provision of private external
   garden space. As such, I find no conflict with Policy L2 of the Development Strategy
   which, amongst other things, supports the provision of accommodation for people
   with specific needs along with adequate levels of overall amenity.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007589


Other Matters
17.Interested parties have raised concerns, including the fear of crime, antisocial
   behaviour, security, safeguarding and impact on community cohesion. This includes
   the submission of a petition. Furthermore, matters of car parking, highway safety,
   drainage, noise and disturbance as well as loss of family housing, impact on
   property values and neighbouring wellbeing have been raised.
18.There is no dispute between the Council and appellant on these matters, and there
   is limited substantive evidence before me that would lead me to an alternative
   conclusion in these respects. I have set out above my considerations in respect of
   character and appearance and living conditions.
Conditions
19.The Council has suggested a set of conditions in the event that the appeal is
   allowed. In imposing conditions, I have had regard to the tests within the National
   planning Policy Framework, the Planning Practice Guidance, and the relevant
   statutes, and have accordingly amended the wording in certain conditions proposed
   by the Council without altering their aim.
20.In addition to the standard time condition (1), I have imposed a condition requesting
   that the development is carried out following the approved plans, in the interest of
   certainty (2). Finally, a condition is imposed limiting the number of occupiers to the
   maximum proposed, in the interests of certainty and the acceptable living conditions
   of future occupiers (3).
Conclusion
21.For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

Andrew Fuller
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
