Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 July 2026
by David Reed BSc DipTP DMS MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government
Decision date: 16th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007871
Land adjacent to 47 Langridge Circle, Watlington PE33 0UF
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Mr James Williams against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk
    Borough Council.
   The application Ref 26/00180/O, dated 16 January 2026, was refused on 30 March 2026.
   The development proposed is a self-build single storey bungalow.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a self-build single
   storey bungalow at land adjacent to 47 Langridge Circle, Watlington PE33 0UF, in
   accordance with the terms of the application Ref 26/00180/O, dated 16 January
   2026, subject to the attached schedule of conditions.
Preliminary Matters
2. The application was originally for a chalet bungalow over two floors but this was
   subsequently amended to a single storey bungalow. The description of the
   application has been amended accordingly.
3. The application is in outline with all matters reserved. An indicative site plan, floor
   plan and elevations have been submitted and taken into account but these are only
   illustrative of how a scheme may be developed on the site.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
      the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
      the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of nearby occupiers in relation
       to privacy and outlook; and
      whether the proposal would adversely affect the integrity of internationally
       recognised wildlife habitats.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5. The proposal is for a single storey bungalow on a long, narrow piece of land sited
   between No 47 and Nos 43/45 Langridge Circle, part of a modern housing estate.
   The site is unkempt and overgrown with close boarded fencing on the boundaries


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007871


        each side. Its width is put at 5–6 m by the Council and 7-8 m by the appellant
        following adjustments which it is claimed can be made. The strip appears to have
        been left open within the layout due to underground drainage pipes but there is no
        evidence before me that the site is undevelopable for that reason.
6. The adjacent properties comprise two storey semi-detached and terraced houses.
   In this immediate context, whatever the precise width of the site and however laid
   out and designed, a narrow frontage bungalow would appear a slightly unusual
   house type in the street scene. However, the Council offer no suggestions as to
   how the site could be put to an alternative positive use. The existing strip of poorly
   maintained vegetation is an unattractive and untidy feature in the housing estate
   and is only likely to deteriorate further over time. A bungalow would make good
   use of the site, tidying it up and providing a small unit of accommodation to help
   meet local housing needs.
7. Slightly further afield the housing estate does include bungalows in its layout, two
   pairs of semi-detached bungalows Nos 9/11 Challis Close just around the corner
   and Nos 10/12 Kent Drive in the next cul-de-sac along. No 8 Kent Drive is a single
   wide plan bungalow. These are certainly in less prominent positions at the end of
   culs-de-sac. Nevertheless, overall, the estate contains a variety of house types laid
   out in different ways along the roads and cannot be said to have a uniform, regular
   appearance. In this wider context a single narrow frontage bungalow, particularly if
   set well back on the site, whilst slightly unusual would not appear unduly intrusive
   or discordant in the street scene.
8. The constraints significantly limit the size and design of bungalow that would be
   acceptable on the site but subject to careful design taking them fully into account
   the proposal would not have a significantly adverse impact on the character and
   appearance of the area and would comply with Policies LP02 and LP18 of the
   Kings Lynn & West Norfolk Local Plan 2025 (the KLWNLP) and Policies 2 and 3 of
   the Watlington Neighbourhood Plan 2023 (the WNP). These support residential
   development on windfall sites which optimises site potential, makes best use of
   land and integrates with adjacent properties providing it respects local character,
   responds to the context and has due regard to the heights and rooflines of other
   buildings in the immediate area.
9. In relation to the recently published National Planning Policy Framework1, Policy S4
   advises that proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of
   doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed
   against the policies in the framework. Whilst there would be some adverse effects
   in terms of Policy DP3 which states that proposals should respond to their context
   and integrate with their surroundings, this would not substantially outweigh the
   benefits of an additional dwelling and tidied up site in accordance with Policy L2(1b)
   which seeks to make better use of vacant and underutilised land.
Living conditions
10. Given the constrained shape of the plot the single storey bungalow would be likely
    to have a relatively narrow but deep footprint on the site with a lengthways double
    pitched roof. With relatively short rear gardens on both sides and the proximity of
    first floor windows of the two storey properties to the east, first floor or dormer
    windows on the dwelling would be precluded for privacy reasons but this concern
1
    The main parties were given an opportunity to submit further comments following publication of the NPPF on 17 August 2026.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6007871


        has been resolved by the amendment of the application to a single storey
        bungalow. For the same reasons any rooflights would have to be obscure glazed
        or above eye level to ensure the privacy of near neighbours. Principal ground floor
        side facing windows would be hard up to the site boundaries with an unacceptable
        outlook so these would need to face the road to the front and garden to the rear,
        both acceptable orientations in relation to nearby properties.
11. A single storey building with pitched roof sloping up away from the side boundaries
    would not appear unduly intrusive from the gardens or facing windows on each side
    given the height of normal boundary fencing. One side passage would be needed
    to allow access to the rear garden and a small set back for guttering on the other,
    also reducing the visual impact of the bungalow as seen from adjacent properties.
12. The application drawings show an unusual engineered structural slab on piles to
    protect the underlying culvert with the depth of the culvert and necessary slab
    structure unclear. This may have implications for the finished floor level, eaves and
    ridge height of the bungalow and would need to be carefully considered during
    detailed design stage. A condition to control any changes in ground levels together
    with finished floor and roof height levels is therefore necessary in this case.
13. The constraints significantly limit the size and standard of bungalow that would be
    possible on the site but subject to careful design taking them fully into account the
    proposal would not have a significantly adverse effect on the living conditions of
    nearby occupiers in relation to privacy or outlook and would comply with KLWNLP
    Policy LP21 and WNP Policies 2 and 3. These require assessment of the impact
    on neighbouring occupants in respect of overlooking, overbearing and
    overshadowing development in order to avoid a significant adverse impact on the
    amenity of neighbouring properties.
Wildlife habitats
14. The proposal lies within the zone of influence of various internationally important
    wildlife habitats where additional recreational pressure arising from new residents is
    likely to harm their integrity. However, the appellant has contributed the necessary
    payment towards the mitigation measures set out in the Norfolk GIRAMS Strategy
    which satisfactorily addresses this issue2.
Other Matters
15. Sufficient car parking could be provided on the frontage of the site and there is no
    objection to vehicles reversing out into the road as this is a common arrangement
    on this lightly trafficked road, indeed it is the case next door at Nos 43/45.
16. In relation to drainage and potential flooding, the Internal Drainage Board raises no
    objection subject to compliance with their byelaws. Details of the foul and surface
    water drainage arrangements would be controlled by condition.
17. There is no objection to the development of the site on ecological grounds and no
    priority species would be affected. In this already extensive and intensive built-up
    residential area any additional noise and disturbance arising from the occupation of
    an additional property would not be significant.



2
    The Norfolk Green Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy. Receipt dated 12 August 2026.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  3
Appeal Decision 6007871


Conclusion
18. Whilst the size and design of a bungalow would be circumscribed by the constraints
    of the site the proposal would not have a significantly adverse impact on the
    character and appearance of the area nor the living conditions of nearby occupiers.
    The limited impacts are outweighed by the benefits of an additional dwelling, tidied
    up site and overall compliance with the development plan.
19. The Council suggested six conditions should the appeal be allowed and these have
    been assessed against the relevant tests. Conditions are necessary to impose the
    standard time limits for submission of reserved matters and implementation. In
    addition, conditions are necessary to control finished floor levels to protect the
    character and appearance of the area/living conditions of nearby occupiers and to
    control foul and surface drainage arrangements to prevent flooding/pollution.
20. Having regard to the above the appeal should be allowed.

David Reed
INSPECTOR




Schedule of Conditions
1. Approval of the details of access, layout, scale, appearance and landscaping of the
site (hereinafter called ‘the reserved matters’) shall be obtained from the Local Planning
Authority before any development is commenced.
2. Plans and particulars of the reserved matters referred to in Condition 1 above shall
be submitted to the Local Planning Authority in writing and shall be carried out as
approved.
3. Application for the approval of reserved matters shall be made to the Local Planning
Authority before the expiration of three years from the date of this permission.
4. The development hereby permitted shall be begun not later than the expiration of two
years from the final approval of the reserved matters or, in the case of approval on
different dates, the final approval of the latest such matter to be approved.
5. Prior to the commencement of any development details of existing and proposed
levels, including finished floor levels of all buildings or structures and any changes in
levels proposed to the site, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
Planning Authority. The development shall be implemented in accordance with the
approved details unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
6. No development shall commence until full details of the foul and surface water
drainage arrangements for the site have been submitted to and approved in writing by
the Local Planning Authority. The drainage details shall be constructed as approved
before any part of the development hereby permitted is brought into use.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
