Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 June 2026
by Claire Coles MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007104
Land adjacent to Cedar Cottage, Furners Lane, Henfield BN5 9HS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Thomas and Abi Cullum against the decision of Horsham District Council.
•   The application Ref is DC/24/0535.
•   The development proposed is erection of 2no. pairs of semi-detached dwellings and 1no. detached
    dwelling together with upgraded access onto Furners Lane. Associated hard and soft landscaping
    works.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of 2no pairs
   of semi-detached dwellings and 1no detached dwelling together with upgraded
   access onto Furners Lane and associated hard and soft landscaping works at Land
   adjacent to Cedar Cottage, Furners Lane, Henfield BN5 9HS in accordance with the
   terms of the application, Ref DC/24/0535, subject to the conditions in the attached
   schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. Reason for refusal 2 relates to the submission of insufficient information to
   demonstrate the potential impact of the proposed development on reptiles, a
   statutory protected species. The Council’s Ecologist has now confirmed the
   appellant has indicated a site within the appellant’s ownership, located 2.8km east
   of the appeal site within which appropriate mitigation and compensation measures
   can be secured by a condition of any consent. Given the above, the Council is
   satisfied that sufficient information has now been provided to overcome reason for
   refusal 2 and I have not been provided with substantive evidence to take a different
   view. As a result, I will not consider reason for refusal 2 in my decision.
3. During this appeal I was provided with the decision notice for an appeal for the
   erection of up to 191 dwellings on land directly to the north of this appeal site
   (APP/Z3825/W/25/3376143 (3376143)). The main parties agree this is a material
   consideration in my determination of this appeal and have been given the
   opportunity to provide comment on the relevance of 3376143 to this appeal. I have
   referred to appeal ref 3376143 in my decision and taken into account the comments
   made by the main parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue in this appeal is whether the proposed development would be in a
   suitable location, having regard to the local development strategy.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007104


Reasons
5. The appeal site comprises two fields of undeveloped agricultural land separated by
   a dense line of vegetation to the north of Furners Lane and east of The Old Orchard
   (Cedar Cottage). Open fields extend beyond the site to the north, east and south,
   therefore the site forms part of a wider, rural landscape. However, planning
   permission has been granted on appeal ref: 3376143 for the erection of up to 191
   dwellings on land directly north of the appeal site.
6. The site is relatively well enclosed by post and wire fencing, mature vegetation and
   a number of mature trees. A Tree Preservation Order (TPO) applies to four trees
   within the site. Three are located along the southern boundary adjacent to Furners
   Lane, and one is situated centrally within the site’s existing subdivision.
7. The proposal seeks the erection of five open market dwellings comprising of 2no
   pairs of semi-detached dwellings and 1no detached dwelling. The dwellings are
   proposed to front south onto Furners Lane and would be of a traditional design with
   pitched roofs, large gable on the principal elevation, hanging clay tiles and facing
   brickwork. Each dwelling is proposed with a private garden with access taken from
   Furners Lane through the existing field access which is to be retained and widened.
   Two parking spaces are proposed per dwelling.
Location
8. The site lies outside the Built-up Area Boundary (BUAB) as defined by Policy 1 of
   the Henfield Neighbourhood Plan 2021 (HNP). The BUAB lies to the west of the site
   and the site is therefore within the countryside for planning purposes.
9. Policy 2 of the Horsham District Planning Framework 2015 (HDPF) seeks to
   maintain the district’s unique rural character whilst ensuring that the needs of the
   community are met through sustainable growth and suitable access to services and
   local employment. It allows for growth in accordance with the identified settlement
   hierarchy and supports the sustainable development of settlements of an
   appropriate scale which retains the existing settlement pattern and enhances
   natural environmental resources, including landscape character.
10. Henfield is a ‘tier 2 settlement’, as indicated by the development hierarchy at HDPF
    Policy 3. These settlements offer a good range of services and facilities, strong
    community networks, local employment provision, and reasonable public transport
    services. The site is in an accessible location, close to High Street services, the
    primary school, and bus stops.
11. However, criterion P1.2 of HNP Policy 1 supports development proposals outside of
    the BUAB only where it conforms with relevant national policies and HDPF policies
    for development in the countryside. HDPF Policy 26 seeks to protect the
    countryside against inappropriate development by limiting development outside
    BUABs to types with an essential need for a countryside location, such as to
    support agriculture, forestry, mineral extraction, waste disposal, recreation, and to
    enable the sustainable development of rural areas. It has not been demonstrated
    that the proposed development has an essential need for a countryside location.
12. HDPF Policy 4 also enables development outside BUABs to support the growth of
    settlements to meet identified development needs under certain circumstances such
    as being allocated in a neighbourhood plan.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007104


13. The main parties agree appeal 3376143 is a material consideration in the
    determination of this appeal. Whilst there are significant differences between the
    two schemes, namely the quantum of development and greater housing provision /
    affordable housing provision within 3376143, nonetheless, in allowing appeal
    3376143, the Inspector’s decision addresses many of the same policy
    considerations, including the application of policy S6 of the National Planning Policy
    Framework 2026 (the Framework) (formerly paragraph 14 of the 2024 Framework)
    and conflict with the HNP. I will return to these matters in the planning balance.
14. As set out above, the policies of the development plan do not positively favour
    development in the proposed location. Therefore, having regard to the local
    development strategy, namely HDPF Policies 2, 4 and 26, and HNP Policy 1, the
    proposed development would not be in a suitable location.
Other Matters
15. The appellant has received confirmation from NatureSpace that a Great Crested
    Newt District Licence has been issued. The issuing of this licence demonstrates that
    the impacts of the proposed development on Great Crested Newts can be
    addressed through the Councils District Licence Scheme. In light of this, it is
    considered that any impacts on Great Crests Newt have been appropriately
    mitigated and compensated for.
16. Whilst the proposed development would lead to an increase in traffic along Furners
    Lane and a temporary increase in construction traffic, the Local Highway Authority
    do not consider the proposal would have an unacceptable impact on highway safety
    or result in ‘severe’ cumulative impacts on the operation of the highway network. I
    have not been provided with substantive evidence to the contrary that would lead
    me to a different conclusion. Matters relating to the maintenance of a private road
    are civil matters.
17. The proposed development would by its very nature result in an urbanising effect on
    the site. Notwithstanding this, the site is well enclosed with existing mature
    vegetation which would be further enhanced through the introduction of additional
    trees along the northern and eastern boundaries. The proposed development would
    extend the BUAB into the countryside, however this would be mitigated by the sites
    natural enclosure and the development to the north granted under appeal ref
    3376143. The design of the proposed development would be consistent with the
    prevailing character of the surrounding development and at an appropriate density.
18. The site layout has taken into consideration the location of trees subject to a TPO. I
    have not been provided with substantive evidence the proposed development would
    have a significant impact on the health of the protected trees that would warrant a
    refusal on those grounds.
19. I have determined this appeal on the basis of the submitted plans. If there are any
    discrepancies regarding boundaries, this would be a civil matter and not a matter
    that can be dealt with through a planning appeal.
Planning balance
20. Policy HO3 of the Framework requires local plans to identify a supply of deliverable
    sites for five years. Since the HDPF is more than five years old, the Framework
    requires the Council identify and update annually a supply of specific deliverable


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007104


    sites sufficient to provide a minimum of five years’ worth of housing against their
    local housing need, rather than against the target set by the HDPF. In addition, as
    the latest available Housing Delivery Test (HDT) measurement indicates significant
    under delivery of housing in the past, the Housing Delivery Test measurement rule
    book of the Framework requires a 20% buffer be applied to the identified supply. Set
    against the total housing requirement, the Council’s Authority Monitoring Report
    December 2025 demonstrates a 1.7 years’ supply of housing land. Therefore, within
    the Council’s area there is a significant shortfall in the supply of housing.
21. In this circumstance, policy S5 (j) of the Framework applies, whereby planning
    permission should be granted for development which would address an evidenced
    unmet need (including, but not limited to, development proposals involving the
    provision of housing where the local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five
    year supply of deliverable housing sites or scores below 75% in the most recent
    Housing Delivery Test), and where the development would:
    i. Be physically well-related to an existing settlement (unless the nature of the
    development would make this inappropriate) and be of a scale which can be
    accommodated taking into account the existing or proposed availability of
    infrastructure.
22. In applying this policy, the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects
    include, but are not restricted to, situations where the development proposal would
    fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
23. The proposal would comply with the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework and policy S5(j) of the Framework provides support for the proposal.
24. Annex A of the Framework states development plan policies (or parts of those
    policies) which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies in
    this Framework should be given very limited weight. The only exception to this is
    where they have been examined and adopted or made against this Framework.
    Other development plan policies should not be given reduced weight simply
    because they were adopted prior to the publication of this Framework. As set out
    above, I have found the proposal would conflict with HDPF Policies 2, 4 and 26, and
    HNP Policy 1, although the weight given to the conflict is limited when considered in
    light of Policy S5(j) of the Framework.
25. The proposal would result in a loss of countryside. However, the Council’s Shaping
    Development in Horsham District Planning Advice Note 2025 (SDPAN) recognises
    the HDPF’s housing target can no longer be used for calculating housing land
    supply and expects development proposals will come forward in locations not
    supported by the development plan. Whilst the SDPAN does not reduce the
    statutory weight of the development plan, it sets out how the Council will support
    development to meet identified needs and other objectives. Therefore, there would
    be an expectation that the SDPAN would be applied in decision-making and the
    SDPAN forms a material consideration in my decision.
26. Paragraph 5.12 of the SDPAN sets out criteria which development proposals are
    expected to meet. These broadly reflect criteria 1 to 5 of HDPF Policy 4 but
    crucially, omits the requirement for the site to be allocated by the development plan.
    A function of the SPAN is to enable development to come forward on unallocated

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007104


    land outside BUABs where opportunities for development would normally be
    restricted by HDPF Policy 26. The appeal scheme complies with all the criteria set
    out in paragraph 5.12 of the SDPAN which weighs heavily in support of the appeal
    scheme.
27. Therefore, taking account the degree of consistency with the Framework and having
    regard to the SDPAN, the conflict between the appeal proposal and HDPF Policies
    2, 4 and 26 carries only limited weight against the proposal. However, the conflict
    with HDPF Policy 26 would, by extension, result in conflict Policy 1 of the HNP.
28. The Framework states the planning system should be genuinely plan-led. The
    Framework’s presumption in favour of sustainable development does not change
    the statutory status of the development plan as the starting point for decision-
    making but recognises the application of the presumption has implications for the
    way communities engage in neighbourhood planning. Consequently, policy S6 of
    the Framework advises that:
    ‘For development proposals involving the provision of housing, the benefits of
    approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects where a proposal would conflict with a neighbourhood plan, provided the
    following apply:
     a. The neighbourhood plan became part of the development plan five years or less
     before the date on which the decision is made; and
     b. The neighbourhood plan contains allocations to meet its identified housing
     requirement (see policy HO2).
29. The HNP was made by the Council on 23 June 2021 and is therefore more than five
    years old at the time of writing this decision. Since the HNP became part of the
    development plan more than five years from the date of my decision, the test at
    Framework policy S6(a) is not met.
30. The HNP identifies a housing requirement figure of 270 dwellings for the
    neighbourhood area. HNP Policy 2 provides site allocations. The HNP policies and
    allocations has made provision for more than the 270 dwellings, thereby exceeding
    the HNP’s requirement. Therefore, the test at Framework policy S6(b) is met.
31. Policy HO2 of the Framework requires spatial development strategies should
    establish a housing requirement for each local planning authority within the strategy
    area and HO2 (5) states that in the case of local plans, a housing requirement figure
    should also be set for designated neighbourhood plan areas. HDPF Policy 15
    makes provision for the development of at least 16,000 dwellings or an average of
    800 dwellings per annum over the period 2011-2031. Of this total, Policy 15 of the
    HDPF requires at least 1,500 dwellings be allocated through neighbourhood
    planning.
32. The Council’s annual housing need has significantly increased from the figure set
    out by HDPF Policy 15, and this target can no longer be relied upon. Within the
    context of this significant uplift, I cannot consider the HNP’s housing requirement to
    remain a credible indicator of current housing need.
33. Henfield Parish Council is currently undertaking a review of the HNP. However, the
    review appears to be at the early stages and therefore I have not been provided
    with any substantive evidence which I can afford any weight.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007104


34. In summary, the HNP is now more than five years old but does contain policies and
    allocations to meet its housing requirement. However, significant material changes
    in circumstances since the HNP was made suggest its identified housing
    requirement is no longer reliable. Furthermore, the shortfall in housing land supply
    across the Council’s area is not likely to be remedied in the short term, and I
    anticipate will persist until the emerging Local Plan reaches adoption. Therefore, the
    weight to be afforded to the proposal’s conflict with HNP Policy 1 is diminished.
35. Set against these policy conflicts, within the context of a significant shortfall in the
    supply of housing and the government’s objective to significantly boost the supply of
    homes, the provision of five dwellings attracts significant weight in favour of the
    proposal.
Conditions
36. I have had regard to the list of suggested conditions provided by the Council and
    have considered these in light of the Framework and the Planning Practice
    Guidance.
37. In the interests of certainty, I have included conditions relating to commencement of
    development and the approved plans.
38. To conserve protected and priority species and to allow the Local Planning Authority
    to discharge its duties under the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and
    s40 of the NERC Act 2006 (as amended) I have included conditions requiring
    details to be submitted regarding reptile mitigation, a Biodiversity Enhancement
    Strategy, lighting and a Construction Environmental Management Plan and securing
    full accordance with the District Licencing Scheme for Great Crested Newts.
39. To ensure the development actively manages foul and surface water drainage to
    prevent the increased risk of flooding and protect water quality, I have included
    conditions requiring the submission of details of the foul and surface water drainage
    systems.
40. To protect the longevity of the trees on the site I have included a condition requiring
    tree protection measures to be installed and maintained and for the submission and
    approval of an Arboricultural Method Statement.
41. To protect the amenities of occupiers of neighbouring properties, I have applied
    conditions requiring the submission and approval of the construction site set up and
    limiting the hours of construction.
42. In order to protect the character and appearance of the area, conditions requiring
    the submission of details of the proposed external materials and finishes, finished
    floor levels and landscaping are imposed.
43. To ensure the adequate provision of recycling facilities, a condition requiring the
    submission of details of refuse and recycling is imposed.
44. To ensure a sustainable development, I have imposed conditions requiring the
    implementation of broadband facilities and limitations on water usage.
45. To ensure that no unacceptable risks are caused to humans, controlled waters or
    the wider environment during and following the development works and to ensure



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007104


    that any pollution is dealt with a condition is imposed regarding how to deal with
    contamination if found on the site.
46. To provide alternative travel options to the car, I have imposed a condition requiring
    the submission of details of cycle parking on the site.
47. To ensure adequate levels of car parking are maintained, I have imposed a
    condition requiring car parking spaces to be provided and retained in accordance
    with the site plan.
Conclusion
48. In conclusion, the adverse impact of allowing development that conflicts with the
    HNP is a matter of dimished weight and importance. Therefore, in this
    circumstance, the adverse impacts of allowing development that conflicts with the
    local development strategy, would not significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
    benefits of the proposal such as the provision of additional housing at a time of
    significant housing shortfall. As a result, the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development would apply, and the appeal should be allowed.

Claire Coles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007104


                                           Schedule of Conditions

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Design and Access Statement; Plot 1 and 2
              Plans and Elevations - As Proposed (PL.04 A); Site Plan – As Proposed
              (PL.02 E); Plot 3 and 4 Plans and Elevations – As Proposed (PL.03 A);
              Location and Block Plans – As Proposed (PL.01 E); Plot 3 Plans and
              Elevations – As Proposed (PL.05); Topographic Survey; Arboricultural
              Implications Assessment for proposed Five House Development (J63.48).
     3)       No development shall commence until precise details (to include details
              shown on a plan) of the existing and proposed finished floor levels and
              external ground levels of the development in relation to nearby datum points
              adjoining the application site have been submitted to and approved by the
              Local Planning Authority in writing. The development shall be completed in
              accordance with the approved details.
     4)       No development shall commence and no site preparation, site investigations
              or site clearance works shall take place until an ecological mitigation strategy
              (EMS) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority and has been implemented as approved. The submitted strategy
              shall include:
              (a) updated reptile survey;
              (b) details of required mitigation;
              (c) detailed methodology to implement mitigation;
              (d) plans demonstrating where the mitigation will be implemented to include
              details of the off-site receptor site;
              (e) details/evidence that the habitat of the off-site translocation site would be
              capable of supporting reptiles, would benefit reptile conservation, and
              confirmation that the proposed off-site translocation site will be able to
              support an increased number of reptiles;
              (f) the extent and location/area of the proposed off-site translocation receptor
              site, and evidence that the receptor site is at least the same size of the
              habitat to be lost on the development site, and details of connectivity to other
              sites as and if required;
              (g) the quantity and quality of the habitats located within the off-site
              translocation receptor site;
              (h) the extent of any proposed works required on the off-site translocation
              receptor site, details of which are to be shown on appropriate scale maps
              and plans;
              (i) a timetable for implementation of the works, including details of the
              method and timetable for the capture of reptiles on the development site and
              their relocation to the off-site translocation site;
              (j) a site management and monitoring plan including details of initial aftercare
              of the receptor area;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         8
Appeal Decision 6007104


              (k) details of an ongoing annual monitoring plan for a five year period for the
              off-site translocation site, including monitoring to be undertaken by a suitably
              qualified ecologist and any amendments to the plan arising from the
              monitoring shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority.
              l) details of persons responsible for implementing the works.
              m) details for disposal of any wastes arising from works.
     5)       No development shall take place until a construction environmental
              management plan (CEMP: Biodiversity) has been submitted to and approved
              in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The CEMP (Biodiversity) shall
              include the following.
              a) Risk assessment of potentially damaging construction activities.
              b) Identification of “biodiversity protection zones”.
              c) Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working
              practices) to avoid or reduce impacts during construction (may be provided
              as a set of method statements).
              d) The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
              features.
              e) The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be
              present on site to oversee works.
              f) Responsible persons and lines of communication.
              g) The role and responsibilities on site of an ecological clerk of works
              (ECoW) or similarly competent person.
              h) Use of protective fences, exclusion barriers and warning signs.
              The approved CEMP shall be adhered to and implemented throughout the
              construction period strictly in accordance with the approved details, unless
              otherwise agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
     6)       No development shall commence until details of the proposed foul drainage
              system have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The details shall include details of its siting, design and
              subsequent management/maintenance, if appropriate, alongside a phasing
              and implemented plan detailing how the development will be phased to align
              with the delivery by Southern Water of any sewerage network reinforcement
              required to ensure that wastewater network capacity is available to
              adequately drain the development. Thereafter, no dwelling shall be occupied
              otherwise than in accordance with the submitted details and the phasing and
              implementation plan.
     7)       No development shall commence, including demolition pursuant to the
              permission granted, ground clearance, or bringing equipment, machinery or
              materials onto the site, until, the BS5837 specification tree protection fencing
              has been installed as per Tree Protection Plan documents prepared by Broad
              Oak Tree Consultants Limited on the 24/09/24. The person(s) responsible for
              supervising the works must meet the Arboricultural Officer of the Local
              Planning Authority on site, so the Arboricultural Officer can agree the in situ



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
Appeal Decision 6007104


              BS5837 specification barrier fencing and supervise that condition 9 (below) is
              fully complied with.
              Once installed, the fencing shall be maintained during the course of the
              development works and until all machinery and surplus materials have been
              removed from the site.
              Areas so fenced off shall be treated as zones of prohibited access and shall
              not be used for the storage of materials, equipment or machinery in any
              circumstances. No mixing of cement, concrete, or use of other materials or
              substances shall take place within any tree protective zone, or close enough
              to such a zone that seepage or displacement of those materials and
              substances could cause them to enter a zone.
     8)       No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until the
              following construction site set-up details have been submitted to, and
              approved in writing by, the Local Planning Authority.
              (a) the location for the loading and unloading of plant and materials, site
                  offices, and storage of plant and materials (including any stripped topsoil)
              (b) the provision of wheel washing facilities (if necessary) and dust
                  suppression facilities
              The approved details shall be adhered to throughout the construction period.
     9)       No development shall commence, including demolition pursuant to the
              permission granted, ground clearance, or bringing equipment, machinery or
              materials onto the site, until, an Arboricultural Method Statement including
              the specific details on the access drive design and installation methodology,
              has been submitted and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
              The approved details shall be adhered to throughout the construction period.
     10)      No development above ground floor slab level of any part of the development
              hereby permitted shall take place until a schedule of materials and finishes
              and colours to be used for external walls, windows and roofs of the approved
              building(s) has been submitted to and approved by the Local Planning
              Authority in writing and all materials used in the construction of the
              development hereby permitted shall conform to those approved.
     11)      No development shall commence until a detailed surface water drainage
              scheme including a Surface Water Drainage Statement, based on
              sustainable drainage principles and an assessment of the hydrological and
              hydrogeological context of the development has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The submitted details
              shall be fully coordinated with the landscape scheme. The development shall
              subsequently be implemented prior to first occupation in accordance with the
              approved details and thereafter retained as such.
     12)      Prior to any works above slab level, a Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy for
              protected, priority and threatened species, prepared by a suitably qualified
              ecologist, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority. The content of the Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy shall include
              the following:
              a) Purpose and conservation objectives for the proposed enhancement
              measures;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6007104


              b) detailed designs or product descriptions to achieve stated objectives;
              c) locations of proposed enhancement measures by appropriate maps and
              plans (where relevant);
              d) persons responsible for implementing the enhancement measures; and
              e) details of initial aftercare and long-term maintenance (where relevant).
              The works shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details
              shall be retained in that manner thereafter.
     13)      No part of the development hereby permitted shall be occupied until a
              verification report demonstrating that the SuDS drainage system has been
              constructed in accordance with the approved design drawings has been
              submitted to and approved by the Local Planning Authority. The development
              shall be maintained in accordance with the approved report.
     14)      No part of the development hereby permitted shall be first occupied until full
              details of all hard and soft landscaping works shall have been submitted to
              and approved, in writing, by the Local Planning Authority. The details shall
              include plans and measures addressing the following:
              (a) Details of all existing trees and planting to be removed and retained
              (b) Details of all proposed trees and planting, including schedules specifying
                  species, planting size, densities and plant numbers and tree pit details
              (c) Details of all hard surfacing materials and finishes
              (d) Details of all boundary treatments
              (e) Details of all external lighting
              The approved landscaping scheme shall be fully implemented in accordance
              with the approved details within the first planting season following the first
              occupation of any part of the development. Unless otherwise agreed as part
              of the approved landscaping, no trees or hedges on the site (other than those
              within private gardens) shall be wilfully damaged or uprooted, felled/removed,
              topped or lopped without the previous written consent of the Local Planning
              Authority until 30 years after completion of the development. Any proposed or
              retained planting outside of private gardens, which dies, is removed, or
              becomes seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the next
              planting season with others of similar size and species unless the Local
              Planning Authority gives written consent to any variation.
     15)      No part of the development hereby permitted shall be occupied until details
              for the provision for the storage of refuse and recycling facilities have been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. These
              facilities shall be provided prior to occupation (or use) of the development
              hereby permitted and thereafter be retained for use at all times.
     16)      Prior to the first occupation of each dwelling, the necessary in building
              physical infrastructure and external site-wide infrastructure to enable
              superfast broadband speeds of 30 megabits per second through full fibre
              broadband connection shall be provided to the premises.
     17)      No part of the development shall be first occupied until covered and secure
              cycle parking spaces have been provided in accordance with plans and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     11
Appeal Decision 6007104


              details to be submitted to and approved by the Local Planning Authority.
              These spaces shall always thereafter be kept for their designated purpose.
     18)      No part of the development shall be first occupied until the car parking has
              been constructed in accordance with the approved site plan. These spaces
              shall always thereafter be kept for their designated purpose.
     19)      Prior to occupation, a “lighting design strategy for biodiversity” in accordance
              with Guidance Note 08/23 (Institute of Lighting Professionals) shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
              strategy shall:
              a) identify those areas/features on site that are particularly sensitive for bats
              and that are likely to cause disturbance in or around their breeding sites and
              resting places or along important routes used to access key areas of their
              territory, for example, for foraging; and
              b) show how and where external lighting will be installed (through provision of
              appropriate lighting plans and technical specifications) so that it can be
              clearly demonstrated that areas to be lit will not disturb or prevent the above
              species using their territory or having access to their breeding sites and
              resting places.
              All external lighting shall be installed in accordance with the specifications
              and locations set out in the scheme and maintained thereafter in accordance
              with the scheme. Under no circumstances should any other external lighting
              be installed without prior consent from the Local Planning Authority.
     20)      The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved BS:5837 Survey, Arboricultural implications Assessment &
              Method Statement (once submitted) documents prepared by Broad Oak Tree
              Consultants Limited on the 24/09/24, Method Statement (date to be inserted
              when received as per Pre Commencement Condition).
     21)      No works for the implementation of the development hereby approved shall
              take place outside of 08:00 hours to 18:00 hours Mondays to Fridays and
              08:00 hours to 13:00 hours on Saturdays nor at any time on Sundays, Bank
              or Public Holidays.
     22)      If, during development, contamination not previously identified is found to be
              present at the site then no further development shall be carried out until a
              remediation strategy has been submitted to and approved by the Local
              Planning Authority detailing how this unsuspected contamination shall be
              dealt with. The remediation strategy shall be implemented as approved.
     23)      The dwellings hereby permitted shall meet the optional requirement of
              building regulation G2 to limit the water usage of each dwelling to no more
              than 110 litres per person per day. The subsequently installed water limiting
              measures shall thereafter be retained.
     24)      No development hereby permitted shall take place except in accordance with
              the terms and conditions of the Council’s Organisational Licence (WML-
              OR177, or a ‘Further Licence’) and with the proposals detailed on plan “Land
              Adjacent to Cedar Cottage, Furners Lane: Impact plan for great crested newt
              District Licensing (Version 1)" dated 3rd June 2026.
                                           ** End of Schedule**


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    12
