Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by S Brook BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2028


Appeal Ref: 6007447
Black Moss Farm, Black Moss Lane, Scarisbrick L40 9RN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q class
     of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended) (GPDO).
•    The appeal is made by Mr T Webster against the decision of West Lancashire Borough Council.
•    The application reference is 2025/0803/PNC.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘Application for determination as to whether prior
     approval of details is required - Class Q, Agricultural buildings to dwellinghouses’.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr T Webster against West Lancashire
       Borough Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     I have taken the description of the development in the above banner heading from
       the appeal form, which corresponds with the Council’s Decision Notice. The
       proposal would create 4 dwellinghouses.
4.     Since the appeal was lodged, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) has been published. This has not raised any new matters which are
       determinative to the outcome of this particular appeal.
Background and Main Issues
5.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO, planning
       permission is granted for the change of use of a building and any land within its
       curtilage from a use as an agricultural building to a use falling within use class C3
       (dwellinghouses), together with building operations reasonably necessary to
       convert the building to a dwellinghouse, subject to specified limitations and
       conditions.
6.     Where the development proposed is development under Class Q(a) together with
       development under Class Q(c), paragraph Q.2(1) requires the developer to apply
       to the local planning authority to determine whether the prior approval of the
       authority will be required as to a number of specified matters. These are (a)
       transport and highways impacts of the development, (b) noise impacts of the
       development, (c) contamination risks on the site, (d) flooding risks on the site, (e)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007447


         whether the location or siting of the building makes it otherwise impractical or
         undesirable for the building to change from agricultural use to a use falling within
         Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of Schedule 1 to the Use Classes Order, (f) the design
         or external appearance of the building, and (g) the provision of adequate natural
         light in all habitable rooms of the dwellinghouses.
7.       The Council raised concerns with the effects of continuing agricultural operations
         on future occupiers of the proposed dwellinghouses, as well as the provision of
         private outdoor amenity space for future occupiers, in the context of prior approval
         matters (b) and (e). While the Council’s Decision Notice referred only to the
         possible effects of noise, the Council’s Officer Report referred to both noise and
         odour.
8.       During the course of the appeal, the views of both main parties were also sought in
         relation to whether the building operations proposed were reasonably necessary to
         convert the buildings to dwellinghouses, considering paragraph Q.1 (j), which
         states that development is not permitted by Class Q if it would consist of building
         operations other than the installation or replacement of windows, doors, roofs, or
         exterior walls, or water, drainage, electricity, gas or other services, to the extent
         reasonably necessary for the building to function as a dwellinghouse, and partial
         demolition to the extent reasonably necessary to carry out such works.
9.       Therefore, the first main issue in this appeal is whether the proposal would be
         permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO, having
         regard to the extent of building operations proposed.
10. Only if this requirement is met, will it be necessary for me to go on and consider
    the disputed prior approval matters (b) and (e).
Reasons
11. The appeal scheme comprises a group of connected buildings along with some
    land to the front and rear of each, which are positioned to the south of the lane
    serving Black Moss Farm, where it extends off Black Moss Lane.
12. Building operations are permitted by Class Q to the extent reasonably necessary
    to convert a building to a dwellinghouse. However, the Planning Practice Guidance
    (PPG) explains that the right assumes that the agricultural building is capable of
    functioning as a dwelling. The PPG clarifies that it is not the intention of the
    permitted development right to allow rebuilding work which would go beyond what
    is reasonably necessary for the conversion of a building to residential use, and that
    it is only where the existing building is already suitable for conversion to residential
    use that the building would be considered to have the permitted development right.
    It also confirms that internal works are not generally development, and for the
    building to function as a dwelling it may be appropriate to undertake internal
    structural works, including to allow for a floor, or upper floors1.
13. What may constitute ‘reasonably necessary’ is not defined in either the GPDO or
    the PPG. Whether the extent of work required would comprise conversion or
    rebuild is a matter of planning judgement.
14. Paragraph W (2) of Part 3 of the GPDO specifies that where a developer is
    required to make an application for a determination as to whether prior approval is
1
    Paragraph: 105 Reference ID: 13-105-20180615


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6007447


       required, the application must be accompanied by a written description of the
       proposed development, which, in relation to development proposed under Class Q
       must include any building or other operations.
15. While the appellant’s submission titled ‘Class Q conformity document’ states that
    the proposed development would not consist of building operations other than
    those permitted by paragraph Q.1 (j), neither this document, nor the application
    form or cover letter provided included a detailed written description of the building
    or other operations necessary to make these buildings habitable. While existing
    and proposed plans and elevations are provided, these drawings do not explicitly
    detail or describe the extent of the building works proposed. The appellant’s
    Appeal Statement referred only to the building works proposed being minor,
    including the installation of windows and doors and the replacement of the roof.
16. In further evidence, the appellant has stated that: (1) the proposals do not require
    the erection of a replacement structural frame or new foundations, or wholesale
    demolition or reconstruction, (2) the existing concrete floors and external walls are
    to be retained, (3) fibre cement board roofing will be replaced, while existing
    openings will be finished in matching cladding with windows and doors also
    inserted.
17. Buildings A and B as annotated on the existing elevations drawing C532-1 Rev A,
    appear to be only one building. Only this building appears to benefit from walls
    constructed of masonry, in this case breeze block to a height of approximately 2m.
    It is unclear if these walls are tied into the steel structure, or whether this will
    require further remedial work. Above this height and to the other buildings, the
    external elevations consist of a range of materials which vary in appearance,
    quality, and condition, including fibre cement sheets, metal cladding, and what
    appears to be engineered wood panels. While the appellant confirms that external
    walls are to be retained, it is unclear if this refers only to the masonry walls or
    whether it includes this mix of other cladding materials. Given my own
    observations as to the quality and condition of some of these cladding materials,
    and in the absence of any substantive evidence to the contrary, I consider it likely
    that a large amount of these other cladding materials would require replacement in
    practical terms.
18. Consequently, I consider it likely that new exterior walling would extend to much
    more than the existing openings. Along with a new roof covering to each building,
    and new cladding to those elevations that are presently open, these building
    operations could comprise a large part of the external envelope of these buildings.
19. As no structural assessment has been provided in support of the proposal, there is
    no technical evidence relating to the standard of construction of each building’s
    foundations, floor, structural frame, or roof. Therefore, there is no substantive
    evidence to demonstrate that these elements would meet modern standards, or
    that they could accommodate any additional loading resulting from any new walls
    or roof covering, without the need for reinforcement or replacement. Without
    evidence to the contrary, I am unable to conclude that these works would not be
    substantial, or amount to rebuilding, when considered with the other building works
    proposed.
20. I acknowledge that the Council did not raise this as a concern in determining the
    original application. Nevertheless, for the foregoing reasons, I am unable to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007447


       conclude that the appeal buildings are already suitable for conversion to residential
       use, or that no building operations other than those specified by paragraph Q.1 (j)
       would be necessary, or that the extent of building operations would be reasonably
       necessary for conversion of the building, rather than amounting to a rebuild, when
       considered in totality. On this basis, the proposal is not permitted development
       under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO.
21. This finding is decisive for the appeal scheme. As such, it is not necessary for me
    to go on and consider those prior approval matters disputed by the main parties.
Other Matters
22. The appellant highlights that the proposal is only a short walk from the centre of
    Scarisbrick village and the amenities therein, the proximity of the proposal to public
    transport, that the existing access provides adequate visibility, that the adjoining
    hardstanding provides ample space for parking, and that the appeal site is in Flood
    Zone 1, land at the lowest probability of flooding. Additionally, I am advised that
    the Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing
    land. While the provisions of Class Q are intended to boost housing supply through
    the conversion of agricultural buildings, the Council’s housing land supply position
    and these other matters are not relevant to my findings above, that the proposal
    does not constitute permitted development.
Conclusion
23. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal would not constitute permitted
    development, and the appeal should be dismissed.

S Brook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
