Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by S Sharp BSc(Hons) BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007836
65A Richmond Wood Road, Bournemouth BH8 9DQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by J McCarthy, Lautus Property Development Ltd against the decision of
     Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole Council.
•    The application reference is P/25/03589/FUL.
•    The development proposed is a change of use from dwellinghouse (Class C3), to eight person
     House in Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis).

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.    An application for costs has been made by J McCarthy, Lautus Property
      Development Ltd against Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole Council and this is
      the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.    The description of the development on the Council’s decision notice is different to
      that on the application form. I note from the evidence that the Council did not seek
      to agree an amended description, but the appellant did not dispute their wording.
      Nevertheless, given that the differences are not material and the application form’s
      description accurately reflects what is being proposed, I have used it in my
      decision.
4.    I acknowledge the appellant’s comments that the development proposed is
      confined to the material change of use and does not include any operational
      development. I have addressed this matter in my reasoning below.
5.    The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
      Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
      opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
      in my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issues
6.    The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
           •    the living conditions of future occupiers of the appeal property in relation to
                outlook;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007836


           •    the living conditions of occupiers of 65b Richmond Wood Road in relation to
                noise and disturbance;

           •    the character of the area;
           •    parking provision; and,
           •    access to cycle storage.
Reasons
Living conditions (future occupiers of the appeal property)
7.    The appeal property is currently a semi-detached house with living rooms and a
      kitchen on the ground floor and bedrooms and a bathroom on the first floor.
      Windows on the front, side and rear elevations provide natural light and outlook to
      the bedrooms, the side window being of a projecting oriel style affording views
      towards the front and rear as well as directly towards No 65.
8.    The proposed development includes bedrooms at ground and upper floor levels.
      Two of the bedrooms on the ground floor, annotated as 7 and 8 on the drawings,
      would be served only by windows on the ground floor. These windows would be
      flush with the elevation, not projecting, and face directly at the boundary fence less
      than 1.5m away. A very short distance beyond the fence the outlook would be
      dominated by the two-storey, gabled side elevation of No 65. The proximity, height
      and width of the fence and No 65 itself would result in them appearing oppressive
      from the two bedrooms. This would result in significantly harmful effects on the
      living conditions of the bedrooms’ future occupiers.
9.    A communal space is proposed for the bedrooms, but it would not be of a scale to
      accommodate all eight residents. It is also probable that occupiers would wish to
      spend time in their own rooms when not asleep and this could include home-
      working as well as relaxation. As such, the outlook from these bedrooms is
      material; it cannot be assumed that the occupiers would just be asleep when in the
      bedrooms.
10. The appellant has commented that potential occupiers could choose bedrooms
    elsewhere, including the other six rooms within the property. However, this
    assumes that such accommodation is available which, in an area of demand, it
    cannot be assumed to be the case.
11. As such, the proposed development would be significantly harmful to the living
    conditions of future occupiers of these bedrooms and not provide a high standard
    of accommodation to meet these occupiers’ day to day requirements. It would
    therefore conflict with policy CS41 of the Bournemouth Local Plan: Core Strategy
    (2012) (CS). This policy, amongst other things, seeks to ensure that developments
    provide a high standard of amenity to meet the day-to-day requirements of future
    occupants.
Living conditions (65b Richmond Wood Road)
12. The appeal property shares a party wall with No 65B. At the time of my site visit
    access to the property’s attic was available and I was able to ascertain that this
    party wall is of masonry construction. Currently, at first floor level, two bedrooms
    and the landing adjoin the party wall. Downstairs, at ground floor level, it is


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6007836


      adjoined by two living rooms, a hallway and understairs cupboard. The existing
      house is currently vacant but, if reoccupied, noise would inevitably be generated
      by those future occupiers’ activities such as conversations, watching television,
      and using vacuum cleaners. The masonry party wall would attenuate some of this
      noise but it’s probable that it would be audible from within No 65B, albeit not
      intrusive.
13. The proposed development would likely result in an increase in the intensity of the
    use of the appeal property as a maximum of eight unrelated individuals come and
    go, each having their own living pattern as opposed to a single household. Likely
    characteristics would include the simultaneous playing of music or watching
    television, or use of bathroom/shower facilities, including use of the mechanical
    ventilation equipment. Other characteristics would include the receipt of visitors by
    each of the eight occupiers, doors closing and people conversing in each room.
14. The proposed layout concentrates the bedrooms away from the party wall with
    communal corridors adjoining it. This would mean that some of the noise
    generation from the proposed development would be separated away from the
    party wall. However, the comings and goings along these communal corridors
    would be a material increase from such activities associated with the existing
    three-bedroom house.
15. Sound insulation could be applied to the party wall within the appeal property to
    provide a degree of attenuation, but I have nothing before me to evidence that this
    would be effective or be able to be applied without resulting in the corridor spaces
    becoming too narrow to safely traverse.
16. In this context, I find that the intensification of the use resulting from the proposed
    development would result in a material increase in noise and disturbance
    experienced by occupiers of No 65B. This would be harmful to their living
    conditions and, as a result, the development would conflict with policy CS41 of the
    CS. One of the policy’s criteria is that developments, including changes of use,
    enhance the living conditions of neighbouring residents.
Character of the area
17. During my site visit, I observed that the buildings in Richmond Wood Road would
    have been originally single dwellinghouses, typically detached or semi-detached
    but many have been converted to self-contained flats, as cited in the appellant’s
    evidence. Some conversions to HMOs have also occurred.
18. These subdivisions have resulted in the dwelling density increasing over time. I
    observed that the comings and goings associated with some addresses was
    higher than at other addresses in the road. The higher levels of activity appeared
    to correlate to flats and HMO uses as identified in the evidence before me.
    However, the overall character of the area remains quiet and suburban. My site
    visit represents a snapshot in time, and it would be expected that levels of activity
    would increase during early mornings and late afternoons as residents depart to
    and return from work and education, but this would not materially change the
    character I have identified.
19. The proposed use would result in a change to the character of the site as a result
    of the comings and goings associated with the intensification of the occupation.
    Nevertheless, the proposed development would affect only one building in an area

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007836


      where HMOs are clearly the minority of uses. The prevailing character associated
      with detached and semidetached dwellinghouses or subdivisions to a small
      number of flats, would not change as a result of the development.
20. The proposal would therefore accord with policy 6.17 of the Bournemouth District
    Wide Local Plan (2002) (BDWLP) and CS41 of the CS in relation to this specific
    matter. The former, amongst other things, requires that developments are
    compatible with the existing character of the area. Policy CS41 advises that
    developments, which, by virtue of their design, are detrimental to the character of
    the area, should not be permitted.
Parking provision
21. There is currently no on-site vehicular parking. Other addresses in its vicinity,
    including Nos 65 and 65B, have driveway parking and there is also unrestricted
    on-street parking including in front of the site. At the time of my visit there were a
    number of spaces available within the site’s vicinity. Demand is likely to increase in
    the evening as residents return home.
22. The proposed development has the potential to change the nature of car usage at
    the site. The Council’s Parking Standards Supplementary Planning Document
    (2021) (SPD) is included in the evidence before me. Tables 10 and 30 of the SPD
    indicate that the required on-site parking provision resulting from the development
    would be one space, a reduction from the two-space standard for the current,
    three-bedroom dwellinghouse use.
23. The proposed development’s lack of on-site parking provision would accord with
    the SPD’s standards. This lack of provision would also be acceptable given the
    site’s location accessible to local services and facilities. Future occupiers would
    likely complete journeys to and from the HMO by foot, bicycle, public transport or a
    combination of these modes. In this context I note from the Council’s officer’s
    report that the Highways Authority raised no objection and from the evidence
    before me, including my observations on site, I have no reason to disagree with
    them.
24. As such I find accordance with policy CS16 of the CS which states that parking
    provision for new developments shall be in accordance with the Council’s adopted
    parking standards. The policy predates the publication of the SPD but it is clear
    that the latter represents the Council’s current standards.
Access to bicycle storage
25. There is currently no formal bicycle storage within the site. The site’s location is
    conducive to cycling to services and facilities, such as those on Charminster Road.
    It follows that cycle storage is a reasonable requirement for a proposed residential
    use.
26. The proposed development includes a detached outbuilding for secure, covered
    cycle storage within the rear garden at the site. Access would be alongside the
    host building. The width is restricted by the position of the existing building relative
    to the boundary fence with No 65. None of the plans before me are annotated with
    the width of the gap but, from my observations on site, it is clearly less than 1.5m.
    The access would therefore conflict with guidance in the Council’s SPD. However,
    although difficult, it would not be impossible to wheel a bicycle along the passage


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007836


      to access the proposed storage. It would also be no different to the existing
      arrangements for the dwellinghouse.
27. Policy CS18 of the CS states that all new developments will provide adequate
    cycle storage in accordance with the Council's adopted standards. The width of
    the gap being below 1.5m would result in conflict with the standards, as set out in
    the SPD. This, in turn, results in conflict with the policy. However, for the reasons I
    have set out, I find no harm arising from the conflict and the proposed
    arrangements are considered acceptable.
Other matters
28. It is clear that the change of use could only occur once the building has been
    extended. Thus, on the face of it, the extension would be built specifically for HMO
    use and is a fundamental element of the scheme. Had I been minded to allow the
    appeal I would have sought further clarity from the parties regarding this and
    whether the proposal should include the operational development comprised of the
    proposed extension. However, since the appeal is dismissed in any event, it was
    not necessary to do so.
29. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 requires that
    the impact of projects on protected sites is assessed. An Appropriate Assessment
    must be undertaken if a project is likely to have a significant effect on a protected
    habitats site (either individually or in combination with other plans or projects). In
    this instance, the Council’s evidence has identified that the proposed development
    would, in the absence of mitigation, have such effects on the Dorset Heaths
    Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Dorset Heathlands Special Protection
    Area (SPA). The appellant’s evidence includes an unsigned and incomplete
    agreement to secure the mitigation. In the absence of a completed and signed
    agreement I cannot be certain that the proposed development would not have
    significant effects on the SAC and SPA.
30. I acknowledge the appellant’s comments that policy 6.17 of the BDWLP dates from
    2002 and contains criteria that, if adhered to, would unreasonably restrict the
    change of use of buildings to HMOs that would otherwise be acceptable. Such a
    criterion is that buildings should be detached and contain at least seven habitable
    rooms. I note that the Council’s decision notice does not refer to this criterion but
    rather other elements of the policy. Likewise, I have found conflict with the policy
    but not in relation to this criterion.
31. The appellant has cited policy CS24 of the CS as being relevant. The policy is
    referenced in the Council officer’s report and the appellant’s statement. It seeks to
    ensure that a proposed HMO use is not permitted where there are more than 10%
    of dwellings in a defined area already within such use. I note that the policy is not
    cited in the Council’s decision and there is no dispute between the main parties in
    relation to the lack of conflict with the policy. I have no evidence before me to
    disagree with them on this matter.
32. The appellant’s evidence includes a number of examples of where changes of use
    to HMOs have been granted by the Council when assessed against the same
    development plan policies. I have had regard to all of these examples but note, for
    differing reasons, that none of them are comparable to the proposed development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007836


33. The First Floor Flat at Heron Road is on an upper floor with material differences to
    the effects I have identified on the living conditions of future occupiers of ground
    floor rooms at the site. The side elevation of 33 St. Leonard’s Road (referenced as
    33 Leonard Road in the appellant’s evidence) faces the rear gardens of properties
    on Capstone Road, a materially different outlook to that from side elevations at the
    appeal site. 33 Methuen Road is a large detached building surrounded by external
    space. 509A and 509B Christchurch Road occupy a building on a street corner,
    abutting non-residential uses. 240 Holdenhurst Road is flanked by non-residential
    uses and is on a busy road. 2A Southbourne Grove relates to the upper floors of a
    building on a street corner over a non-residential use and, 27 Wolverton Road
    occupies a corner plot materially different in context to the appeal site.
34. I have noted that one of the interested parties mentions that they are elderly when
    commenting on the effects of the proposed development on their living conditions.
    I have had due regard to this person’s age in reaching my decision, but it is not
    material to my determination in this instance.
Planning balance
35. The proposal would result in harm to the living conditions of future occupiers of the
    appeal property and occupiers of No 65B. I find that the proposal conflicts with the
    development plan, taken as a whole.
36. The Framework is a material consideration. The appeal property is clearly within a
    settlement. In such locations, policy S4 of the Framework states that development
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against its national decision-
    making policies.
37. One such policy is P3. It advises that proposals should be appropriate for their
    location, taking into account the likely effects on, amongst other things, living
    conditions, whether these effects are on or off-site. I find conflict with this policy for
    the reasons I have already provided in this decision.
38. There are benefits derived from the proposed development, both from the jobs
    involved in the construction phase and the accommodation that it would provide
    once occupied. In this regard, I note that the property is currently vacant and in
    need of investment to enable it to be reoccupied even for its current use. Future
    occupiers would also reintroduce spend and contribute to the social fabric of the
    area. Nevertheless, the harm to the living conditions of future occupiers of the
    appeal property and occupiers of No 65B would substantially outweigh these
    benefits.
39. Overall, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of sufficient weight
    to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to all other
    matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.
Conclusion
40. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

S Sharp
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
