Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by J J Evans BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007314
Kingston Barn, Access to Kingston House, Kingston Russell, Dorset DT2 9EE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs J Littman of Ashley Chase Estates against the decision of Dorset
     Council.
•    The application Ref is P/FUL/2022/03559.
•    The development proposed is the removal of dilapidated block and portal frame buildings; conversion
     and change of use of barns to comprise 5 dwellings; erect two dwellings; and landscaping and car
     parking.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026, and the comments of the main parties were sought.
       Consideration has been given to those received in reaching the appeal decision.
3.     Kingston Russell Farmhouse is a grade II* listed building. As required by
       Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       (the Act) special regard has been paid to the desirability of preserving a listed
       building or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest
       which it possesses.
4.     The historic buildings within the appeal site are regarded as Non-Designated
       Heritage Assets (NDHAs) by the main parties, and there is no disagreement as to
       the impact of the scheme upon them. For the avoidance of doubt the appeal has
       been considered on that basis.
5.     During the Council’s consideration of the original application, a Tree Preservation
       Order was made on trees to the western and northern boundary of the site and a
       sycamore to the south. This order was confirmed on 10 February 2026, and the
       protection of the trees has been a consideration in the determination of the appeal.
6.     The appeal site is within the Dorset National Landscape (NL). As required by
       Section 245 of the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023, special regard has
       been paid to seeking to further the statutory purposes of the NL.
7.     To address the reason for refusal at the appeal the appellant has submitted
       amended drawings (dwg Nos AM015-07d, AM015-08d, and 319.L.01), and an
       Arboricultural Impact Assessment (2026). The appeal process should not be used
       to evolve a scheme, and it is important that what is considered at the appeal is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007314


       what was considered by the Council and interested persons. In this instance the
       changes comprise additional information and the re-positioning of the granary.
       They have not resulted in a substantial difference to the original application and
       would not cause procedural unfairness to anyone involved in the appeal, so have
       been considered.
Main Issue
8.     The main issue in this case is the effect of the scheme upon the character and
       appearance of the area, having particular regard to the impact upon protected
       trees and the contribution they make to the national landscape.
Reasons
9.     The appeal site is a vacant farmstead positioned upon a steeply sloping hillside
       within the countryside. It comprises a mix of historic and modern buildings with
       their associated yards that are positioned in a clustered group to one side of
       Kingston Russell Farmhouse. Surrounding both the farmstead and the farmhouse
       are paddocks and fields, many of which are delineated by hedges and trees.
10. The scheme proposes the conversion of the historic buildings into five dwellings
    and the erection of a further two dwellings. There is no dispute between the main
    parties as regards the principle of providing residential development in a
    countryside location and the appeal has been considered on that basis.
11. Although some of the historic buildings are in a dilapidated state, individually and
    collectively they illustrate the historic purpose and use of the site as an 18th and
    19th century farmstead. Their forms and relationships to each other, to the road,
    and to the farmhouse clearly demonstrate their former agricultural functions. In
    addition, the use of a variety of local stones within these buildings reflects the
    close association of the farmstead with the land, all of which is part of their
    significance as NDHAs. These vernacular materials contrast those used in the
    farmhouse, whereby the use of brick and slate enhances the high status of this
    listed building. The farmhouse dominates the area due to its size and its elegantly
    mannered appearance which define it as a building of importance. It is set apart
    from the historic farmstead, albeit very close to it, with the legible relationship
    between the two being clearly apparent. These features along with the historic
    purpose and function of the farmhouse are all part of the special architectural and
    historic interest of this listed building.
12. As identified in the West Dorset Landscape Character Assessment (2009) the
    topography often determines the positioning of farmsteads and settlements as they
    are mostly within valley bottoms or part way up the hillsides, as is the case with the
    appeal site. The landscape in this part of the NL is dominated by the openness of
    the uplands contrasting with the more intimate lower reaches of the valleys where
    the fields, the lanes and the scatter of occasional dwellings are mostly enclosed by
    mature trees and hedges.
13. Despite the derelict and dilapidated nature of the farmstead, it makes a positive
    contribution to the character and appearance of the NL, in part because of the
    functional vernacular of the historic built form, but also because both the farmstead
    and the farmhouse are surrounded by trees. There are mixed native species trees
    to the north and south of the site, as well as a linear group of sycamores along the
    western boundary, and further swathes to the east and south of the farmhouse.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007314


       These trees form a distinctive verdant cluster that contrasts the open
       expansiveness of the fields to the north. The grouping of the trees reflects the
       historic importance of the farmhouse and farmstead within the area as they
       provide a functional roll as a wind break and as screening, as well as forming a
       continuous ecological habitat. The size of these trees, the mix of native species,
       along with their enclosure of the farmhouse and farmstead, makes an important
       contribution to the special qualities of the NL.
14. The development would harmfully impact upon the appearance, health and vitality
    of the protected trees, eroding the important contribution they make to the area.
    The row of sycamores forms a long composite crown with an imposing impact due
    to their tall height and large size, and they form a strong linear setting to the farm
    buildings. They show little evidence of management, with those at the southern
    end of the row having crowns that extend over the cow shed and over the concrete
    access track. As acknowledged within the appellant’s Arboricultural Impact
    Assessment (2026) crown lifting would be necessary to allow for the site’s re-
    development, including the rebuilding of the flint boundary wall.
15. Notwithstanding this assessment, details of the amount of crown lifting have not
    been provided, and a root protection area has been drawn in a rigid line
    irrespective of the spread of the crowns and that of the roots. Having regard to the
    age of the trees and their broad, tall crowns and the extent of their encroachment
    into the site, a significant amount of the canopies would have to be removed to
    enable the development to occur, including large limb works. Furthermore, the
    sycamores are growing close to the boundary wall, with some self-seeders within
    it. Works to the wall would be difficult to achieve without significant management
    of the trees. It cannot be assumed that conditions would provide certainty that the
    trees would survive and maintain the important contribution they make to the area.
16. To the south of the site there is a pond with a mix of mostly native trees around it,
    including two sycamore that are to the immediate south of an existing access into
    the farmstead. The protected sycamore has a broad upright crown with low
    sweeping limbs, and as it is close to the lane it is a prominent tree and one that
    contributes to verdant enclosure of the heritage assets and the leafy nature of this
    part of the NL. The relocated granary and a new access track would be installed
    under its crown and within its root area, thereby requiring significant crown lifting
    and reduction works. It is suggested for the appeal that the granary could be
    positioned outside the canopy, although whether this could be achieved is
    uncertain given that the granary sits on staddle stones of varying heights that
    reflect the slope of its current position, whereas its proposed one would follow the
    contour. Even if this issue could be resolved, having regard to the extensive works
    that would need to occur to both the crown and within the root area of this tree, it
    cannot be assumed that conditioning a methodology would protect its health and
    vitality and thereby the contribution it makes to the area.
17. The Framework requires substantial weight to be given to conserving and
    enhancing the natural beauty of NLs. In this case the trees make an important
    contribution to the character and appearance of the NL, but their presence has not
    informed the development of the site. The impact of the development upon the
    protected trees would cause direct and unacceptable harm to them. Even if they
    survived the totality of the works, the number of trees affected would significantly
    erode the verdant contribution they make to the NL, as a biodiversity corridor, and
    the function they perform in screening and enclosing the farmstead and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007314


       farmhouse. Given the residential appearance of the development with its
       clustered concentration of homes, residential paraphernalia, subdivision of the
       farmstead with multiple gardens, and expansive parking provision, the reduction of
       the impact of the trees would result in the development having an intrusively
       conspicuous residential impact that would be at harmful odds with the remoteness
       of this part of the NL. Furthermore, as they are native species, the biodiversity
       value of the trees would be eroded, particularly as form part of a larger group that
       would provide continuous green feeding corridors for species such as bats and
       birds.
18. There is no dispute between the parties as regards the impact of the scheme upon
    the setting of the farmhouse and to the significance of the NDHAs. The impact of
    the scheme upon the protected trees would erode the verdant setting they form to
    the listed farmhouse. The Framework requires that harm to a designated heritage
    asset should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
    The retention and restoration of the historic farm buildings would be a considerable
    public benefit to the setting of the farmhouse, as would the repair of historic
    boundary walls. These public benefits and the provision of an additional seven
    dwellings at a time when the Council does not have a five year housing land
    supply, would be important public benefits of the scheme that would outweigh the
    harms arising to the farmhouse’s setting as a result of the works to the trees.
19. Nevertheless, the development would result in substantial harm to protected trees
    and the important contribution they make to the NL. The scheme would neither
    conserve nor enhance the NL, and the ecological value of the site would be
    reduced. Given the number of trees affected and the ambiguity of works,
    conditions could not be relied upon to ensure the health and vitality of the trees.
    There would be conflict with Policies ENV2 and ENV10 of the West Dorset,
    Weymouth and Portland Local Plan (2015) (LP), as these require, amongst other
    things, development to maintain and enhance local identity and distinctiveness,
    including the retention and protection of trees that contribute to the area’s
    distinctive character, and that nature conservation should be safeguarded.
Other Matters
20. Poole Harbour Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar are nationally and
    internationally important for wetland habitats and birds. The water quality in the
    harbour is in an unfavourable condition due to elevated concentrations of nitrogen
    and phosphorous, which is causing eutrophication with consequential impacts
    upon the quality of the habitats and their ability to support the bird populations.
    Nutrient enrichment occurs from a variety of sources, one of which is from
    wastewater from residential development, and a net increase in the number of
    dwellings and occupiers in the area would therefore have an adverse effect upon
    these important habitat sites and species.
21. The appeal site would be within the groundwater source protection area for these
    habitat sites, and to prevent an adverse effect upon the integrity of the SPA and
    Ramsar proposed development must provide nutrient mitigation. In this case
    nutrient neutrality could be achieved through the provision of a package treatment
    plant (PTP) and restricting water usage. Whilst a condition could restrict water
    usage, the drawings do not show the provision of a PTP nor has any legal
    agreement been provided to secure a maintenance schedule for it for its lifetime,
    which should include and ensure that any replacement would achieve nutrient

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007314


       neutrality. Without such measures the scheme would adversely affect the integrity
       of these important habitat sites. In these circumstances and because of the
       findings on the main issue, it has not been necessary to undertake an Appropriate
       Assessment as required by the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
       (2017). The harms to the SPA and Ramsar weighs heavily against the scheme.
22. Reference to the Dorset Council Local Plan has been made, which was out for
    consultation last year. As explained by the Council this plan is at an early stage of
    preparation and some time away from adoption. Given this, it has limited weight in
    consideration of the appeal.
23. The appellant’s concerns regarding the Council’s handling of the application and
    appeal relate to procedural matters and fall to be assessed by other means
    separate from the consideration of the appeal.
Planning Balance
24. At 2.53 years, the Council acknowledges that it cannot demonstrate a five-year
    supply of deliverable housing sites. This is a substantial shortfall and the provision
    of seven additional homes would be an important benefit of the scheme, as would
    according with the Framework’s encouragement for an efficient use of land. The
    setting of the listed farmhouse would benefit through the retention and ongoing
    use of historic farm buildings, and these would be important benefits. There would
    be a modest time-limited economic benefit arising from construction. The absence
    of highways or living conditions concerns for future occupiers would have a neutral
    weight.
25. Whilst the appellant considers the affordable housing contribution would be a
    benefit of the scheme, it has not been secured. The Unilateral Undertaking
    provided for the appeal contains a variety of omissions and ambiguities, including
    different signatures, dates, and no means of binding successors in title.
    Consequently, the weight to be afforded to the provision of an affordable housing
    contribution would be negated. Furthermore, as mitigation of the proposal’s
    impact upon habitat sites has not been secured, this also weighs heavily against
    the scheme.
26. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
    accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. The decision making policies in the Framework are a material
    consideration and should be read alongside policies in the development plan, and
    where policies or parts of them are materially inconsistent with the Framework, the
    Framework requires they should be given very limited weight. LP Policy ENV10
    requires the retention of trees that contribute to an area’s character, thereby
    reflecting objectives of the Framework that existing trees should be retained
    wherever possible. LP Policy ENV2 seeks to mitigate harm to nature conservation
    interests and development that would have an adverse effect upon the integrity of
    internationally important habitat sites should only be permitted where adequate
    mitigation can be provided, thereby according with the Framework and its
    requirement that planning permission should be refused if harm to biodiversity has
    not been adequately mitigated. Consequently, the conflict of the scheme with
    these development plan policies should be given significant weight.
27. Whilst a key aim of the Framework is to significantly boost the supply of housing,
    when read as a whole the Framework does not suggest this should happen at the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007314


       expense of other considerations. In this case, irrespective of the Council’s housing
       land supply shortfall and the benefits that accrue from the scheme, these would be
       outweighed by the substantial harms that arise from the scheme with regard to the
       NL and to protected habitat sites.
Conclusion
28. For the above reasons the scheme would result in substantial harms that could not
    be overcome by conditions, and there would be conflict with the development plan
    when considered as a whole. There are no other considerations, including the
    requirements of the Framework, that outweigh this finding. Thus, for the reasons
    given above and having considered all other matters raised, the appeal is
    dismissed.

J J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
