Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Terceiro BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007158
Brishing Court Farm, Brishing Lane, Boughton Monchelsea, Kent ME17 4NF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Christopher Blundell against the decision of Maidstone Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/505171/FULL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of agricultural land (part of former traditional orchard) to
     residential use and erection of self-build single storey dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development in the banner heading above is taken from the
       decision notice. The change in description of development was agreed by the
       appellant.
3.     As the proposal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to section
       66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act.
4.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       on 17 August 2026, and I have had regard to this in my decision. The main parties
       were invited to provide comments on the revised Framework and the comments
       received have been taken into account in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
     •     whether the proposed development would preserve the setting of the nearby
           Grade II* listed building, Brishing Court;
     •     the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
     •     whether the proposed development would provide a suitable location for
           housing, having regard to the Council’s spatial strategy for the supply of
           housing, with reference to the accessibility to services and facilities; and
     •     the effect of the proposed development on protected species.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007158


Reasons
Listed building
6.     The appeal site lies near Brishing Court, a Grade II* listed building, which includes
       a farmhouse and farm buildings arranged around a courtyard. Some of the
       buildings have been converted into residential use. Brishing Court is a former
       Wealden open hall, identifiable through its timber frame with upper and lower end
       jetties to the front and sides, and Kentish framing. The listing description1 advises
       that this farmhouse probably dates from the early 15th century, with alterations
       dated from the 16th and 17th centuries. The significance of the asset derives, in
       part, from its agricultural and historic interest as a surviving timber-framed
       Wealden house, and well-preserved farmstead character and appearance.
7.     The evidence before me pertaining to the assessment of the listed building’s
       historic setting is limited, so the relationship between the site and Brishing Court is
       not known. Nevertheless, the Council advises that the site is located along the
       historic access route to Brishing Court, which is a narrow single-track lane situated
       to the rear of this property. The site is part of a disused traditional apple orchard,
       and it is covered by rough grass with some brambles and scattered trees. Given
       such, the site makes an important contribution to the rural context where the
       historic farmstead is experienced and to the significance of Brishing Court as a
       former agricultural building.
8.     The proposal seeks to construct a single storey dwelling with car port and
       driveway. The introduction of a residential plot in this location would erode the
       site’s verdant character and would introduce a more urban form along the historic
       approach to Brishing Court and within its setting. While the retained trees, hedges
       and new planting would restrict intervisibility between the new dwelling and the
       listed building, the proposal would erode a proportion of the former traditional
       orchard and weaken the contribution that the setting makes to the significance of
       the heritage asset. Consequently, the proposal would not sustain the experience of
       the historic asset within its predominantly rural setting.
9.     Published evidence2 indicates that often a cart shed would be positioned at the
       edge of a farmstead, related to a farm track or to the farmland. While the proposed
       development would occupy a similar position and its elevation facing towards the
       listed building would be kept simple, there is limited evidence before me to suggest
       that a similar building existed in connection with Brishing Court. As such, this
       would not provide convincing justification for the proposed development.
10. I acknowledge that there are solar arrays located to the rear of Brishing Court.
    However, these are ground mounted, reversible features with a low profile and
    limited scale. These features do not justify the proposed development.
       Heritage Balance
11. Policy HE6(1) of the Framework advises that, when considering the potential effect
    of a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE4(2)
    states that any harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset, including

1
 List Entry Number: 1344355
2
 Including Historic Farmsteads Preliminary Character Statement: South East Region 2006; and Lake J and Edwards B, South East
Farmsteads Character Statement 2014


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6007158


       from development within its setting, should have a clear and convincing
       justification.
12. Having regard to the above, the proposal would cause moderate harm to the
    significance of the Grade II* listed building, through development within its setting.
    Any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable
    importance and weight. Where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, Policy HE6(4) states that the effect on
    the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits
    resulting from the proposal.
13. The proposal would provide additional housing, in an area within an acknowledged
    housing supply deficit. I further acknowledge the appellant’s intention to deliver a
    self-build dwelling, and the contribution this would make towards the unmet
    demand for self-build housing within the borough. The proposed dwelling would
    recognise the planned occupation by older people, and the plans include a study to
    accommodate the appellant’s needs in terms of storage space. It would provide
    short- and long-term local economic benefits, environmental benefits associated
    with the restoration of a portion of adjoining orchard, and the dwelling would be
    energy and water efficient. Due to the Council’s housing land supply position, these
    public benefits attract substantial weight but given that the proposal relates to one
    dwelling only, the benefits are not sufficient to overcome the considerable
    importance and weight given to the harm that would arise to the designated
    heritage asset.
14. Consequently, the proposal would not preserve the setting of the nearby Grade II*
    listed building, Brishing Court. It would be contrary to Policies LPRSP14 and
    LPRENV1 of the Maidstone Borough Council Local Plan Review 2021-2038 (2024)
    (LPR) which, amongst other things, seek to conserve and where possible enhance
    the quality of heritage assets.
15. The Council’s first reason for refusal refers to Policy PWP3 of the Boughton
    Monchelsea Neighbourhood Development Plan 2021 (NP), which pertains to the
    protection of Non-Designated Heritage Assets. However, based on the evidence, I
    am not persuaded that this policy would be relevant in the context of this main
    issue.
Character and appearance
16. The appeal site adjoins a small cluster of buildings which includes Brishing Court,
    together with barns converted into residential use and into a children’s nursery and
    a solar array. Brishing Court and the nursery sit adjacent to Brishing Lane, and the
    converted barns are located behind the nursery building. Irrespective of their uses,
    the buildings display a well-preserved dispersed farmstead character because of
    their layout, architectural style and appearance. The surrounding area is rural in
    character, and it includes fields, paddocks, and the former orchard.
17. The site’s largely verdant and undeveloped landcover qualities make a positive
    contribution to the local landscape. Moreover, its open and green appearance is
    important in maintaining the quality of the rural landscape around the cluster of
    buildings.
18. The site falls within the landscape type Greensand Orchards and Mixed
    Farmlands, as identified within the Maidstone Landscape Character Assessment

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007158


       2012. One of the key characteristics of this Landscape Character Area are
       orchards, which are recognised as important in maintaining the traditional
       landscape pattern and habitat connectivity.
19. The proposed development would introduce one dwelling within the site, resulting
    in increased urban characteristics and the overall loss of a largely undeveloped
    parcel of land that makes an important contribution to the rural character of the
    area. Moreover, the siting of the proposal, next to the solar array, would be visually
    and functionally separate from the existing buildings and would have a limited
    relationship with them. Consequently, the proposal would reduce the strength of
    the dispersed farmstead character of the cluster of buildings and would not
    safeguard the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside.
20. Furthermore, the loss of part of the orchard would harm the local traditional
    landscape pattern. While public views from the Old Tree Lane towards the
    proposal would be limited, particularly during the summer months, the proposed
    residential plot would nonetheless be a form of development that would not
    integrate successfully into its surroundings.
21. Thus, the proposal would result in significantly harmful effects, albeit localised, on
    the character and appearance of the area. It would be contrary to LPR Policies
    LPRSP9, LPRSP15 and LPRQD4 and to NP Policies PWP4, RH1, RH6 and RH8
    which among other things seek to protect the countryside, and support
    development that would create high-quality design that responds positively to, and
    where possible enhances, the local or historic character of the area.
Suitability of location
22. The site is located beyond any settlement boundary and is therefore within the
    countryside as defined in the LPR. LPR Policy LPRSS1 seeks to focus new
    residential development firstly in the urban area of Maidstone, then rural service
    centres, then larger villages or even smaller ones, and lastly the countryside. This
    approach has been taken to direct development to areas of the borough that have
    been found to be the most sustainable locations for new development. In addition,
    NP Policy RH1 seeks to direct development towards the development boundary of
    Boughton Monchelsea.
23. In terms of accessibility, the site is detached from Boughton Monchelsea and from
    the fringes of Maidstone. Further, the local road network largely includes narrow
    and unlit country lanes without formal footpaths, which would likely discourage
    future residents from walking or cycling, particularly outside daylight hours and in
    inclement weather. While the site is close to bus stops on the junction of Gandy’s
    Lane and Old Tree Lane, the Council indicates that the service is infrequent, and
    in addition they would be accessed via the local road network. This makes it much
    more likely that residents wishing to reach the services and facilities would use a
    car, which would be safer and more convenient.
24. The established use of the site is as part of a traditional apple orchard as part of
    the former Brishing Court, which ceased commercial operations in the mid-1990s,
    and has not been actively maintained since 2005. This indicates that the vehicle
    movements currently associated with the site are likely to be negligible.
25. The appellant advises that the orchard was used for grazing of horses between
    2008 and 2015, when the appeal site was occupied by a small manège. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007158


       description of development refers to agricultural land, and the site’s planning
       history before me does not show any horse related development or use.
       Therefore, it has not been demonstrated that this use occurred lawfully. In any
       event, even if the use was lawful and it would generate a larger number of vehicle
       movements than the proposed development, there is limited evidence before me
       to suggest that this use would be reintroduced to the site.
26. The Council’s spatial strategy seeks to locate new residential development in
    areas suitable for growth, and the countryside has not been identified in this
    respect. Having regard to the above, even if the proposal were to generate a
    limited number of vehicular movements, these would likely be higher than the
    current situation.
27. Thus, the proposed development would fail to provide a suitable location for
    housing, having regard to the Council’s spatial strategy for the supply of housing,
    with reference to the accessibility to services and facilities. The proposal would be
    contrary to LPR Policy LPRSS1 and NP Policy RH1, which seek to direct new
    development towards towns and village locations.
Protected species
28. The submitted Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (PEA) sets out that the site offers
    ideal habitat for reptiles, as does the wider traditional orchard, with tussocky
    grassland, areas of scrub and trees. The PEA goes on to say that, should reptiles
    be present, the proposal would result in the loss of habitat and could lead to harm
    to individual reptiles. Thus, the PEA recommends that it is necessary to undertake
    further surveys to fully understand the impact.
29. Current advice3 states that it is essential that the presence or otherwise of
    protected species, and the extent that they may be affected by the proposed
    development, is established before the planning permission is granted, otherwise
    all relevant considerations may not have been addressed in making the decision.
30. I have not been provided with any reptile survey, and in the absence of such
    evidence, I cannot rule out significant harm to reptiles, even if the number of
    individuals present on site would be small. Further, I cannot be sure what
    measures would be necessary to avoid, adequately mitigate or, as a last resort,
    compensate for any significant harm to reptiles, as required by Policy N2(2) of the
    Framework; or whether such measures could be provided and secured. Given the
    statutory responsibility towards protected species, these are matters that cannot
    be left to a condition.
31. Consequently, on the basis of the available information, the proposal could cause
    unacceptable harm to protected species, contrary to LPR Policies LPRSP14 and
    LPRSP15. Amongst other things these policies seek to protect and enhance any
    on-site biodiversity and features.




3
 Paragraph 99 of Circular 06/2005: Biodiversity and Geological Conservation and 9.2.4 BS 42020:2013 Biodiversity Code of
Practice.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               5
Appeal Decision 6007158


Other Matters
Other heritage assets
32. There are other heritage assets situated near the site, including the Barn about 25
    metres South-West of Brishing Court, which is a Grade II listed building. The listing
    description indicates that the building dates the 14th century and is externally
    finished in timber frame, weatherboard on stone plinth, and tiled roof. Its
    significance derives, in part, from its special architectural and historic interest,
    including its former use as a barn. Given the spatial relationship between the site
    and this heritage asset, I am satisfied that the proposal would preserve its setting.
Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG)
33. The objective of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 is for
    development to deliver at least a 10% increase in biodiversity value relative to the
    pre-development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat. This increase can be
    achieved through onsite biodiversity gains, registered offsite biodiversity gains or
    statutory biodiversity credits.
34. The mandatory condition requiring biodiversity net gain of at least 10% is imposed
    on permissions granted pursuant to a planning application made on or after 2 April
    2024 for small developments such as this. The Council directs me to a recent
    appeal decision4, where the Inspector found that, in order to qualify for exemption
    to BNG, the self-build status should be secured by a planning obligation rather
    than by condition. This is because securing it via a condition would fail to satisfy
    the tests within the Framework. The appellant advised that a legal agreement
    would be provided, should it be found necessary.
35. However, no legal agreement has been submitted, and there is insufficient
    evidence to demonstrate that a condition would be sufficient for this purpose. In
    the absence of an appropriate mechanism to secure the self-build status the
    mandatory requirement applies.
36. The appellant invites me to consider whether the biodiversity gain condition could
    be imposed, were the appeal to be allowed. While a summary of the metric
    calculation is before me, the completed metric calculation tool has not been
    provided. As such, the submission has not met the minimum information
    requirements for development which is subject to the biodiversity gain condition.
    Therefore, I cannot be certain that the biodiversity gain objective would be met. In
    any event, as I am dismissing the appeal on other matters, there is no need for me
    to consider this matter further.
Cherry Barn Appeal Decision
37. My attention is drawn to an appeal decision5 on the nearby Cherry Barn, where the
    construction of a 1-bedroom dwelling was allowed. The available evidence before
    me pertaining to that appeal indicates that there was a building on that site, which
    would have had associated vehicular movements. This is not the case with the
    scheme before me, since the site is largely undeveloped.



4
    Appeal Ref: APP/U2235/W/25/3364165
5
    Appeal Ref: APP/U2235/W/24/3357164


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007158


38. As such, even if the previous building at Cherry Barn was constructed after
    Brishing Court was listed, I am not persuaded that the Inspector’s conclusions in
    relation to the effect of that development on heritage assets and on local character
    would be comparable to that of the appeal scheme. Moreover, the evidence
    indicates that the vehicle movements currently associated with the appeal site are
    likely to be negligible. Consequently, I do not find that the proposal would be
    comparable to this example, and I have therefore considered the appeal on its own
    merits.
Planning Balance
39. Given my findings above, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    when read as a whole. The main parties agree that the Council cannot
    demonstrate a 5-year supply of deliverable housing sites, and that the figure is 4.5
    years.
40. Policy S3(1) of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. This means that
    outside settlements Policy S5 should be applied.
41. Policy S5(1) lists the forms of development that should be approved outside
    settlements, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    in the Framework.
42. Although the proposal would be located near a group of houses, it would adjoin the
    former orchard on two of its boundaries, so it would not constitute infill
    development. As such, the proposal would not meet the requirement of Policy
    S5(1)(e).
43. Policy S5(1)(j)(i) refers to development which would address an evidenced unmet
    need, including development proposals involving the provision of housing where
    the local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable
    housing sites, where the development would be physically well-related to an
    existing settlement (unless the nature of the development would make this
    inappropriate) and be of a scale which can be accommodated taking into account
    the existing or proposed availability of infrastructure.
44. Given the site’s countryside location and accessibility constraints in terms of
    walking, cycling and access to public transport, I find that the proposal would not
    be physically well-related to an existing settlement. Therefore, while there is no
    compelling evidence before me to suggest that the scale of the proposal could not
    be accommodated into the existing availability of infrastructure, the scheme would
    not meet the requirement of Policy S5(1)(j)(i).
45. Policy S5(4) states that development proposals which do not fall within one of the
    categories set out in Policy S5 should only be approved in exceptional
    circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to
    promoting sustainable patterns of movement.
46. The proposal would deliver several public benefits as set out in the Heritage
    Balance. By contrast, it would not preserve the setting of the Grade II* listed
    building, would harm the character and appearance of the area, would not be in a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007158


       suitable location for housing having regard to its countryside location and its
       accessibility to services and facilities, and could cause harm to protected species.
       There would be conflict with the policies in the Framework, including those that
       seek to protect the character of the countryside and promote sustainable patterns
       of movement.
47. I have not been made aware of any exceptional circumstances that would justify
    the proposed development. Moreover, as the proposal would deliver only one
    dwelling, the benefits associated with it would not substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects. Therefore, the presumption in favour of sustainable development
    does not apply.
Conclusion
48. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be determined otherwise than in accordance
    with it. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.

P Terceiro
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
