Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 03 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007907
9 Vinery Grove, Richmond Hill, Leeds LS9 9LT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Wojtek Turek against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•   The application reference is 26/00140/FUL.
•   The development proposed is change of use from dwelling house (C3) to 3 bed HMO (C4) with new
    window to basement in lieu of existing door.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from
   dwelling house (C3) to 3 bed HMO (C4) with new window to basement in lieu of
   existing door at 9 Vinery Grove, Leeds LS9 9LT in accordance with the terms of the
   application, reference 26/00140/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached
   schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has
   altered, any considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally
   changed. I am satisfied that this has not prejudiced either party and I have had
   regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
3. The description of development on the application form does not clearly refer to the
   proposed change of use from a dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a three-bedroom
   House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) (Use Class C4). I have therefore used the
   description of development contained in the Council's decision notice with a minor
   alteration to the wording, as this more accurately reflects the permission sought.
4. In support of the appeal, the appellant has submitted amended plans as part of the
   appeal process. These plans show revisions to the basement accommodation
   including the relocation of the en-suite bathroom to the rear of the basement
   bedroom, enlargement of the window opening adjacent to the access steps, glazing
   to the upper section of the basement entrance door, lowering of the wall
   immediately in front of the basement windows and provision of secure cycle
   storage within the front curtilage.
5. In deciding whether it is appropriate to accept this evidence, I have had regard to
   the Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England. This states that the appeal
   process should not be used to evolve a scheme and what is considered by the
   Inspector at appeal should be essentially the same scheme that was considered by

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007907


     the Council and by interested parties at the application stage. In this instance, the
     revised plans represent only minor changes to the scheme relating to the sizes of
     windows, internal configurations and the provision of cycle storage to address the
     Council’s concerns during the application process. I am therefore satisfied that
     accepting this material would not prejudice any interested party. I have determined
     the appeal on this basis.
6. There is no dispute between the parties regarding the acceptability of the proposal
   in respect of the balance and health of the community.
Main Issues
7.     In light of the above, the main issues are whether the proposal provides:-
       •     adequate living conditions for future occupiers with particular regard to
             internal light, outlook, privacy and noise; and
       •     adequate cycle storage for the needs of future occupiers.
Reasons
Living Conditions
8. The appeal property is a traditional back-to-back terraced dwelling situated within a
   predominantly residential area in Richmond Hill. The dwelling is set back from the
   road and benefits from a small yard to the front which is enclosed by a low brick
   wall. Consequently, there is a degree of separation between the front elevation of
   the property and the public footpath along Vinery Grove.
9. The proposal seeks the change of use of the property to a three-bedroom HMO.
   The development would involve internal alterations, including the use of the
   basement level to provide a third bedroom. The proposal would result in the
   occupation of the property by three unrelated individuals sharing communal
   facilities.
10. The Council's first reason for refusal states that the size of the property, together
    with its back-to-back configuration, renders it unsuitable to accommodate the
    proposed HMO use. However, the Council's Officer Report confirms that all
    bedrooms exceed both the Government's minimum bedroom size standards and
    the room sizes contained within the Council's emerging HMO guidance. In
    particular, the basement bedroom 3 would extend to approximately 19sqm,
    excluding the en-suite facility, and would therefore provide a generous amount of
    floorspace for a single occupant. As part of the appeal process, the appellant has
    submitted amended plans seeking to address the Council’s concerns regarding
    internal light, outlook, privacy and noise.
11. I have had regard to the amended plans which show minor alterations to the
    basement accommodation including the relocation of the en-suite bathroom to the
    rear of the room, enlargement of the window opening adjacent to the access steps,
    glazing to the upper half of the basement entrance door and a reduction in the
    height of the boundary wall immediately outside the basement windows.
    Collectively, these amendments increase the amount of glazing serving the
    habitable basement area and improve both the level of daylight entering the room
    and the overall quality of the accommodation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007907


12. I have also considered the Council's concerns regarding outlook. Whilst Bedroom 3
    would be located at basement level, the windows would face directly towards
    Vinery Grove across the property's front yard. The lowering of the steps wall and
    the increased glazing shown on the amended plans improve the relationship
    between the room and the street. Although the outlook would differ from that
    available from the upper floors, I am satisfied that future occupiers would benefit
    from a reasonable outlook appropriate to this urban location.
13. The Council also considers that the occupier of the basement room would
    experience poor privacy due to persons entering and leaving the property.
    However, users of the access steps would generally be focused upon entering or
    leaving the building and any views into the room would be fleeting and incidental.
    Given the angle of approach and the transient nature of such views, I do not
    consider that the relationship would materially diminish the living conditions of the
    future occupier.
14. With regard to noise and disturbance, I note that the Council's own assessment
    concludes that a three-person HMO would not generate activity materially different
    from that associated with occupation by a family household. Moreover, although the
    basement room would be positioned adjacent to the access to the property, the
    building is set back from the highway behind the front yard and boundary treatment.
    Consequently, future occupiers of the basement room would not be exposed to
    unacceptable levels of noise or disturbance arising from either street activity or the
    ordinary use of the property.
15. Drawing these matters together, I conclude that the proposal would provide
    acceptable living conditions for future occupiers having particular regard to internal
    light, privacy, outlook and noise. Accordingly, the proposal would comply with
    Policies GP5 and BD5 of the Leeds Unitary Development Plan Review and Policies
    H6A(iv) and P10 of the Leeds Core Strategy which together seek, amongst other
    things, to secure a satisfactory standard of accommodation and living conditions for
    occupiers of residential development.
Cycle Storage
16. The Council's second reason for refusal relates to the absence of secure long-stay
    cycle parking.
17. The amended plans submitted as part of the appeal include the provision of a
    secure cycle storage facility within the front curtilage capable of accommodating
    three cycles. The facility would be readily accessible to future occupiers and would
    provide secure long-term cycle parking appropriate to the scale of the
    development proposed.
18. I am therefore satisfied that adequate cycle parking would be provided. Subject to
    a condition requiring the approved facilities to be installed prior to first occupation
    of the HMO and thereafter retained, the proposal would comply with Policy T2 of
    the Leeds Core Strategy, Policy GP5 of the Leeds Unitary Development Plan
    Review and the relevant guidance contained within the adopted Transport SPD
    which amongst other things seeks to promote sustainable patterns of travel and
    encourage cycling as a realistic alternative to the private motor vehicle.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007907


Other Matters
19. The proposal generated a substantial number of objections from local residents
    and Ward Members. Concerns were raised regarding parking pressure, the impact
    upon the character of the area, anti-social behaviour, safeguarding issues, noise,
    refuse and the concentration of HMOs locally. However, the Council's Officer
    Report concludes that the proposal would not result in an unacceptable
    concentration of HMOs, would not undermine the balance and health of the
    community, and would not generate a materially different level of parking demand
    from the existing dwelling. The report further finds that the proposal would not give
    rise to unacceptable impacts upon neighbouring amenity. I have seen no
    substantive evidence that would lead me to a different conclusion on those
    matters. Concerns regarding the future behaviour of occupants are largely
    speculative and can arise from any form of residential occupation. Therefore, such
    matters carry limited weight in my assessment of the appeal.
Conditions
20. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council against the tests set
    out in the Framework. In addition to the standard time limit condition, a condition
    requiring the development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans
    is necessary in the interests of certainty.
21. A condition requiring the approved cycle storage facilities to be provided prior to
    the first occupation of the HMO and retained thereafter is also necessary in the
    interests of promoting sustainable modes of transport.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007907




                                           Schedule of Conditions


     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans.
               •        Location Plan – 9, Vinery Grove, Richmond Hill, Leeds, LS9 9LT
               •        25-201-M2-001 Issue 1 Floor Plans As Existing
               •        25-201-M2-004 Issue 2 Site Plan
               •        25-201-M2-002 Issue 2 Floor Plans As Proposed
               •        25-201-M2-003 Issue 2 Elevations
     3)       The cycle storage facilities shown on the approved plans shall be provided
              prior to the first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation hereby
              permitted and shall thereafter be retained and kept available for cycle parking
              for the lifetime of the development.


                                            ** End of Schedule **




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
