Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 June 2026 by S Jamieson BA (Hons) MPlan MRTPI
Decision by S Brook BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007739
17 Brooklyn Drive, Rayleigh, Essex SS6 9LW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Daniel Batchelor against the decision of Rochford District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00092/FUL.
•   The development proposed is a two storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. I have taken the description of development from the planning application form
   albeit I have omitted those words which do not describe the act of development.
4. The most recent iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published in August 2026. With regard to the main issue of the
   appeal, the relevant policies are not materially different from the previous iteration
   of the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further
   consultation with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective
   cases would not be prejudiced.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal relates to a double-fronted, detached dwelling with a hipped roof and
   shallow footprint, albeit extended at ground floor. It is situated within a residential
   area displaying a mix of dwelling types and architectural styles. Alterations and
   extensions are commonplace, with many properties in the vicinity featuring dormer
   windows and, like the appeal dwelling, single-storey rear additions. The appeal
   property is set in from its shared side boundaries, which gives the plot a more
   spacious character. This sense of space, combined with the dwelling’s modest


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007739


    proportions and balanced design, makes a positive contribution to the character
    and appearance of the area.
7. The appeal scheme would retain a comparable footprint to the existing dwelling,
   and the hipped roof form to the front. Nevertheless, it would result in a substantial
   increase in volume at first floor, effectively doubling the amount of accommodation
   at that level. The rear extension would introduce two substantial flank elevations,
   only punctuated by a single window on one side. Notwithstanding the generous
   width of the plot, the staggered rear elevation, the slight step into the east facing
   elevation, and the material changes, the cumulative effect of the extension’s depth,
   height and overall massing would appear excessive.
8. Further, the proposed extension’s incongruity with the host dwelling would be
   emphasised by the introduction of a flat roof. While I appreciate that this design
   choice has resulted from a desire to minimise any visual dominance from
   neighbouring plots, the result would be an unduly dominant, box-like addition that
   would be at odds with and undermine the modest proportions and form of its host.
9. While the extension would be located to the rear and no changes are proposed to
   the front elevation, it would be visible from the windows and rear gardens of
   neighbouring properties to the side and rear, as well as from the street, through the
   gaps between the appeal dwelling and Nos 11 and 19 Brooklyn Drive. As such, its
   location to the rear, where there would be more limited public views, does not
   negate the need for good design.
10. I have carefully considered the examples of dormer windows and other house
    extensions in the vicinity, provided by the appellant. While I accept that flat roofs
    are common to some of these features, these examples are not directly
    comparable to the appeal scheme, differing from the proposed extension in design,
    scale and relationship with the host dwelling. Nor do I find that the flat roof form of
    the nearby school building justifies the proposal. This school has clearly been
    designed as a flat roof building from its outset. While it is another example of flat
    roofed development in the area, it is not comparable to the appeal scheme, which
    seeks to extend a hipped roof dwelling.
11. Consequently, the proposed development would have a harmful effect upon the
    character and appearance of the area. In this regard, it would conflict with Policy
    CP1 of the Rochford District Council - Core Strategy, Adopted Version (2011) and
    Policy DM1 of the Rochford District Council - Development Management Plan
    (2014) which require, amongst other things, that developments are of good, high
    quality design that promote the character of the locality, including through
    appropriate scale and form, to ensure that they positively contribute to the
    surrounding built environment. For the same reasons, there would also be conflict
    with the aims of the Framework insofar as it requires that development proposals
    respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
Other Matters
12. The appellant highlights that the proposal would provide improved accommodation
    However, it could be possible to achieve similar benefits through a less harmful
    scheme.
13. The Council has raised no concerns with the effect of the proposal on the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers or with parking, ecology and space standards.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6007739


    Based on the evidence before me I see no reason to disagree. However, these are
    neutral matters which do not carry weight for or against the appeal scheme. While I
    no objections have been received from neighbouring occupiers or the Parish
    Council, the absence of objections is not determinative.
14. The appellant has raised concerns in respect of the Council’s handling of the
    planning application, suggesting there was a lack of communication and that a
    comprehensive site visit was not undertaken. There is no substantive evidence
    before me to suggest that proper planning procedures were not carried out. In any
    event, such matters do not prevent me from making my own assessment on the
    planning merits of the appeal proposal.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. The proposal would conflict with the development plan when read as a whole and
    material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be reached other
    than in accordance with it. Consequently, for the reasons given above and having
    had regard to all other matters raised, I recommend that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Jamieson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

S Brook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
