Appeal Decisions
Site visits made on 11 August 2026
by Darren Hendley BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007474
Plot 13, Leys Lane, Winterton, DN15 9QT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Ms Nicole Ward against the decision of North Lincolnshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PA/2025/1360.
•   The development proposed is a static home and site for touring caravan and ancillary surfacing.

Appeal Ref: 6007477
Plot 5, Leys Lane, Winterton, DN15 9QT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Ms Lucie Elizabeth Ward against the decision of North Lincolnshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PA/2025/1463.
•   The development proposed is a static home and site for touring caravan and ancillary surfacing.

Decisions
1. The appeals are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The appeals concern proposals on two separate areas of land. They share the
   same access arrangements from a gated track which leads from Leys Lane and so
   the red line site boundaries overlap. Both respective planning applications were
   also refused by the Council on the same grounds. Accordingly, and while the
   appeals remain separate from one another, they are conjoined for the purposes of
   consistency and decision-making.
3. Both appellants submitted an Archaeology Desk-Based Assessment (the
   Archaeology Assessments) with the appeals. The Assessments do not amend the
   proposals and so they do not result in a substantive difference from what the
   Council considered at the time of its decisions. Nor do they result in procedural
   unfairness as other parties have had the opportunity to comment on the
   Archaeology Assessments during the appeal. Hence, I have considered them in my
   decisions.
4. Development which has already taken place on Plot 13 includes a static caravan,
   an access, close board boundary enclosure, gates, services, ancillary domestic
   structures and surfacing. It is not however entirely as shown on the submitted
   plans. Development on Plot 5 is less advanced and principally relates to
   groundworks and clearance. What is for my consideration is as shown on the
   submitted plans and not any alternative development which has taken place.
   Accordingly, I have considered the proposals on this basis.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007474 & 6007477


5. After I had undertaken my site visit, the new National Planning Policy Framework
   (Framework) was published. As it replaces the previous version of the Framework,
   it has a bearing on my decisions. The main parties were given the opportunity to
   comment solely on this matter and I have considered the responses that I have
   received in my decision.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are (i) whether the proposals would accord with the spatial
   strategy of the development plan with regard to development in the countryside; (ii)
   the effect on the character and appearance of the area; (iii) the effect on flood risk
   by way of surface water drainage; (iv) the effect on biodiversity interests, in
   particular Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG); (v) the effect on undesignated
   archaeological remains; and (vi) if harm arises, if this is outweighed by the needs of
   the appellants and other considerations.
Reasons
Spatial Strategy
7. Both appeal sites lie within a larger site of enclosed plots of land which are
   accessed off Leys Lane. A number contain caravan pitches or other domestic
   related structures, whilst others comprise vacant plots of land and vegetation. While
   there are occasional dwellings and farm buildings along Leys Lane, the vast
   majority of land in the area is in arable agricultural use. The sites are located well
   away from any settlement, the nearest of which is Winterton and is separated from
   the sites by a number of fields and woodland.
8. Policy CS2 of the North Lincolnshire Council, Core Strategy (2011) (Core Strategy)
   sets out an approach to accommodating new development that is focussed on the
   Scunthorpe urban area, market towns and the defined development limits of rural
   settlements. Policy CS3 states that the extent of the development limits will be
   defined in the Housing & Employment Land Allocations Development Plan
   Document, which was subsequently adopted and includes these limits. The site lies
   outside of the defined development limit for Winterton and so they fall within the
   countryside for the purposes of the development plan.
9. Policies CS2 and CS3, along with saved Policy RD2 of the North Lincolnshire Local
   Plan (2003) (Local Plan), generally resist housing development outside of the limits
   and in the countryside. The type of development proposed does not accord with
   those which are permitted under these policies and nor would the proposals
   correspond to where they refer to need or deemed essential, as regards justifying
   development in the countryside.
10. For the purposes of Policies S5 and HO11 of the Framework, the proposals would
    constitute the development of isolated homes because of a lack of proximity to
    settlements and groups of houses, even with the other caravans and structures on
    the broader site. They would also not meet any of the circumstances under Policy
    HO11 where avoiding the development of isolated homes in the countryside would
    not apply.
11. I conclude the proposals would not accord with the spatial strategy of the
    development plan with regard to development in the countryside. As such, they
    would not comply with Policies CS2, CS3 and saved Policy RD2 where they are


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6007474 & 6007477


     concerned with how development is to be managed outside of development limits
     and in the countryside. They would also not comply with the Framework where it
     concerns avoiding the development of isolated homes in the countryside.
Character and Appearance
12. The area in the vicinity of the site is largely countryside in character. It is a low lying
    predominantly agricultural landscape where there are hedgerows on field
    boundaries, or else occasional trees or small areas of woodland. Aside from the
    broader site where the appeal sites are found, built development is occasional and
    consists of principally isolated dwellings and farmsteads. Leys Lane is a typical
    narrow country lane which contributes to this character. The surroundings to the
    sites maintain a distinct sense of peacefulness.
13. The imposition of caravans on the sites, the associated domestic structures and
    hardstanding areas would clearly be at odds with the countryside character. They
    involve built aspects of development that would not reflect either the openness or
    the type of development that is traditionally found in such a location. They would
    not be a type of built development that reflects the countryside character. This is
    irrespective of the development on the rest of the broader site because it is
    countryside which predominates as the local character of the area. Also, the
    proposals and the inevitable associated domestic activities would also lessen the
    peaceful aspect of the local character.
14. The adverse visual impacts of the proposals would be moderated to a degree as
    views beyond the broader site and the immediate part of Leys Lane would be
    filtered by vegetation screening and due to the distances the respective appeal
    sites are set back from this road. Landscaping would also have the potential to
    further reduce the visibility. There would however be likely more of an adverse
    impact when the vegetation is not in full leaf. In addition, as the materials would be
    of a more modern nature to reflect caravan based occupation, this would draw
    attention to the proposals appearing somewhat discordant.
15. The appellant for Plot 13 has referred to a former timber dwelling on this site, but as
    there are no longer obvious signs of it in situ this has a limited bearing on my
    considerations. Irrespective of whether or not the sites would constitute lawfully
    developed previously developed land, the broader character of this area is still
    largely unspoilt countryside. Given my views on character and appearance, high
    quality development would not result.
16. In considering the totality of these effects, I conclude the proposals would have an
    unacceptable effect on the character and appearance of the area. Consequently,
    they would not comply with Policies CS2, CS3 and CS5 of the Core Strategy and
    with saved Policies RD2, DS1 and LC7 of the Local Plan where they concern well
    designed development to a high standard, local distinctiveness and a sense of
    place, scenic quality and the local landscape, and not permitting development that
    does not respect the local landscape, amongst other matters. Similarly, they would
    not accord with the Framework where it seeks to achieve well-designed places.
17. The Council’s related reasons for the refusals also includes Policy CS6 of the Core
    Strategy and saved Policy HE9 of the Local Plan which concern the historic
    environment. I do not find conflict with these policies on heritage aspects of
    character and appearance as my concerns centre on landscape and visual impact.
    Nevertheless, this does not change my conclusion on this issue.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6007474 & 6007477


Flood Risk
18. Sources of flooding that are identified through national policy include surface water,
    when rainwater cannot drain away through normal drainage systems. The
    appellants are proposing to rely on drainage strategies to deal with surface water.
    These would consider matters such as permeable surfacing, soakaways if required
    with ground condition testing, rainwater harvesting and other measures, if they
    prove necessary. However, the drainage strategies are not before me.
19. Hence, there is limited evidence to demonstrate that the means of surface water
    disposal are likely to be suitable, or how these measures would minimise flood risk
    on the site to its residential occupiers or to properties elsewhere. No testing
    appears to have been done to ascertain whether permeable surfacing would be
    effective or if soakaways are suitable, based on the ground conditions. While the
    development plan and the Framework in principle support sustainable drainage
    systems, some evidence still needs to be provided to show why they would provide
    effective drainage, having regard to the development and the location. I therefore
    agree with the position of the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) on this matter.
20. The effect of deferring such a judgment to planning conditions, if I had been minded
    to allow the appeals, would be to potentially nullify the permissions if it transpires
    that a satisfactory means of surface water drainage cannot be established. Such an
    approach would therefore not be reasonable. While I note purported compliance
    with Environment Agency regulations, it is the LLFA who are responsible for
    managing flood risk from surface water.
21. The appellants have referred to the use of an existing septic tank. As this concerns
    foul drainage though, it would not address the concerns over surface water
    disposal. Overall, the proposals fail to demonstrate that suitable drainage strategies
    can be achieved for the sites.
22. I conclude the proposals would have an unacceptable effect on flood risk by way of
    surface water drainage. Therefore, they would not comply with Policies CS18 and
    CS19 of the Core Strategy and saved Policies DS14 and DS16 of the Local Plan in
    as far as where they seek to reduce flood risk, not increase the risk of flooding
    elsewhere, require satisfactory provision to be made for the disposal of surface
    water, the provision of adequate protection or mitigation measures and making
    adequate provision for suitable sustainable drainage systems, as well as not
    complying with the Framework on these grounds.
Biodiversity
23. The proposals were both applied for on the basis of a ‘self-build’ exemption from
    BNG. However, static caravans do not constitute self-build development under the
    Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 because they are not buildings1.
    They cannot therefore benefit from provisions which relate to housebuilding
    projects under self-build legislation. No substantive evidence concerning other
    exemptions to BNG has been submitted. As a consequence, the proposals are not
    exempt from BNG.
24. The statutory framework for BNG is therefore mandatory for the appeal proposals.
    However, there are no statutory metric calculations before me and so there is

1
    Definition of caravan – Section 29(1) of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  4
Appeal Decisions 6007474 & 6007477


     insufficient information in order to demonstrate that the BNG objective would be
     met of delivering at least a 10% increase in biodiversity value relative to the pre
     development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat. While there is a willingness to
     implement schemes for biodiversity gain and management, including through bird
     and bat boxes, limiting external lighting, deadwood habitats, not using chemicals
     and stewardship, this is not a substitute for the BNG objective because of its
     statutory footing.
25. I conclude the proposals would have an unacceptable effect on biodiversity
    interests, in particular BNG. They would be in conflict with the statutory framework
    for BNG as set out by Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
    and they would also not accord with the Framework in this respect.
Archaeological Remains
26. Based on the Archaeological Assessments and the Council’s submissions, the
    potential for archaeological remains and the associated significance is twofold.
    Cropmarks lie in a field immediately adjacent to the site that are likely of Prehistoric
    or Romano British activity. Ermine Street lies further to the east, whose origins
    relate to a route from Roman times. Where activity potentially extend into the sites,
    this may have historically related to the alignment of ditches. As a result, there is
    the potential for the preservation of archaeological remains.
27. The Archaeological Assessments include a desk based assessment and the
    findings of a site visit. The evidence that I have before me thus adequately
    identifies and describes the potential for significance of any potential archaeological
    heritage asset within the sites. It enables me to assess the effect on the particular
    significance of the heritage assets that may be affected by the proposals.
28. Where historical activities may have extended into the site, the proposals have the
    potential to have a low adverse impact. This is reflective of the works being of a
    shallow nature with the creation of a hardstanding over exposed soils, and sub
    base excavations to accommodate the static homes, servicing, fencing and
    landscaping. It would be unlikely there would be an appreciable impact on the
    cropmarks and Ermine Street as they lie outside of the sites’ boundaries.
29. The Archaeological Assessments point to the potential use of planning conditions
    that would require archaeological monitoring and recording, preceded by a method
    statement. In these cases, they would be a proportionate approach, given the
    evidence that is now before me. They would in my view negate any low adverse
    impacts.
30. I conclude the proposals would not have an unacceptable effect on undesignated
    archaeological remains. They would comply with Policy CS6 of the Core Strategy
    and with saved Policy HE9 of the Local Plan where they concern protecting,
    conserving and enhancing the historic environment including archaeological
    remains, and providing archaeological assessments where appropriate and prior to
    determination where there is suspected archaeological importance. The proposals
    would also comply with the Framework with regard to the level of detail on
    significance that has been provided and which allows assessments to be made.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6007474 & 6007477


Needs of the Appellants and Other Considerations
31. The appellants are from Traveller communities and there is no substantive
    evidence to the contrary. I am mindful of the family needs of both appellants and
    the need for mutual care, support and cultural continuity. Personal circumstances
    also arise from settled bases needed for access to healthcare, education, support
    and welfare services. The appellants consider that alternatives sites are not
    available to meet their specific needs.
32. In exercising my function on behalf of a public authority, I am also consciously
    aware of my duties under the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) contained within
    the Equality Act 2010 which sets out to eliminate discrimination, harassment and
    victimisation, advance equality and foster good relations, and the protected
    characteristics under the PSED, including for Traveller groups. I am also aware of
    my duties under Article 8 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (HRA1998) that bestows
    the right to private and family life and for the home, and that the Article 8 rights of a
    child should be viewed in the context of Article 3(1) of the United Nations
    Convention on the Rights of the Child. I am also mindful of Article 14 of the
    HRA1998 which concerns rights and freedoms, without discrimination.
33. In taking these matters together, I am not unsympathetic to the appellants’
    circumstances and having such bases would clearly be advantageous to the
    appellants and their families, as well as serving the best interests of the child. The
    proposals would also provide bespoke homes that are tailored to the needs of the
    appellants.
34. With respect to any identified broader need for Traveller sites in the area, in the
    view of the appellants, the proposals would provide much needed sites. While I do
    not question there would be some level of broader need, very limited evidence has
    been provided. As a consequence, I am unable to gauge the level of need, supply
    and what any shortfall might be. The same applies concerning what relevance
    there might be of other permission(s) on the broader site, which has been indicated
    were for Traveller provision.
35. The proposals would provide investment in the local area, albeit it would be on a
    limited scale. While statutory BNG would not be achieved, there would be some
    limited benefit to biodiversity through the measures that the appellants are
    intending to implement, if permissions were granted. As the self-build nature seems
    to simply reflect that the appellants would build the proposals, rather than in
    accordance with the associated legal definition and that set out in the Framework,
    this does not weigh either for or against. The same holds true for the accessibility to
    local services, given that the sites lie well outside of Winterton where a number of
    these services are located.
Planning Balance
36. The proposals would not accord with the spatial strategy of the development plan
    with regard to development in the countryside. As it is central to the development
    plan, it is an issue which attracts significant weight against the proposals. The
    proposals would have an unacceptable effect on the character and appearance of
    the area. As the effect would be localised in each case, it attracts moderate weight
    against the proposals. The unacceptable effect as regards flood risk attracts
    significant weight against the proposals, given the potential implications for the
    occupiers and others, if flooding was to occur. That the proposals would not accord

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6007474 & 6007477


     with statutory BNG provisions also attract significant weight against them. With the
     conflict that I have identified with the development plan policies, the proposals
     conflict with the development plan as a whole.
37. The personal circumstances of the appellants attract significant weight in favour of
    the proposals. Matters in relation to a broader need attract moderate weight in
    favour, given the limited evidence provided, while economic and environmental
    benefits attract limited weight in favour of the proposals. All other matters do not
    weigh either for or against the proposals.
38. For the proposals to benefit from Policy S5 of the Framework, they must address
    evidenced unmet need. As I have set out, there is insufficient evidence on this
    matter before me. The proposals do not therefore fall within one of the categories
    that should be approved and there are not exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits would substantially outweigh the adverse effects. They do not therefore
    benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable development.
39. The concerns would also not be adequately addressed through temporary or
    personal permissions, because the issues would still remain whilst the resultant
    developments or occupiers would be in place. The planning balance does not
    therefore favour the grant of planning permissions for the proposals.
40. Matters in relation to development in the countryside, character and appearance,
    flood risk and BNG are also legitimate wider community and public interests. The
    needs of the appellants could also be jeopardised by flood risk. Not granting
    planning permissions would not therefore unacceptably conflict with the PSED, and
    with Articles 8 and 14 of the HRA 1998.
Conclusion
41. The proposals would not comply with the development plan when taken as a whole
    and there are no material considerations which indicate that the decisions should
    be taken other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, the
    appeals should be dismissed.

Darren Hendley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
