Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by L Fleming BSc (Hons) MRTPI IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007968
Gladwyns Farmhouse, Holders Green Road, Richmonds Green, Thaxted, CM6
3QF
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Martin Sweeney against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•   The application Ref is UTT/25/2852/HHF.
•   The development proposed is single storey rear extension with flat roof, alterations to existing
    kitchen structure (including revised gable end roof and glazing, addition of rooflights, revised flank
    wall window arrangement, change of external wall finish to timber cladding and creation of vaulted
    roof space) and associated landscaping.
Appeal B Ref: 6007971
Gladwyns Farmhouse, Holders Green Road, Richmonds Green, Thaxted, CM6
3QF
•   The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
    1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•   The appeal is made by Martin Sweeney against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•   The application Ref is UTT/25/2853/LB.
•   The works proposed are single storey rear extension with flat roof, alterations to existing kitchen
    structure (including revised gable end roof and glazing, addition of rooflights, revised flank wall
    window arrangement, change of external wall finish to timber cladding and creation of
    vaulted roof space) and associated landscaping.

Decisions
Appeal A
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for single storey rear
   extension with flat roof, alterations to existing kitchen structure (including revised
   gable end roof and glazing, addition of rooflights, revised flank wall window
   arrangement, change of external wall finish to timber cladding and creation of
   vaulted roof space) and associated landscaping at Gladwyns Farmhouse, Holders
   Green Road, Richmonds Green, Thaxted CM6 3QF in accordance with the terms of
   the application Ref is UTT/25/2852/HHF and the plans submitted with it and subject
   to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Appeal B
2. The appeal is allowed and listed building consent is granted for single storey rear
   extension with flat roof, alterations to existing kitchen structure (including revised
   gable end roof and glazing, addition of rooflights, revised flank wall window
   arrangement, change of external wall finish to timber cladding and creation of
   vaulted roof space) and associated landscaping at Gladwyns Farmhouse, Holders
   Green Road, Richmonds Green, Thaxted CM6 3QF in accordance with the terms of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007968 & 6007971


     the application Ref is UTT/25/2853/LB and the plans submitted with it and subject
     to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Application for costs
3. Applications for a full award of costs were made by Mr Martin Sweeney against
   Uttlesford District Council, these applications are subject to separate decisions.
Preliminary Matters
4. Both appeals relate to the same scheme under different but complementary
   legislation. I have therefore dealt with them together in my reasoning except where
   indicated otherwise.
5. Since the Council made its decision on the proposals, the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026 (the Framework) has been published. It is now material to my
   decisions and supersedes the version of the National Planning Policy Framework
   that was available when the Council made its decisions. However, insofar as they
   are relevant to these appeals, the policies have not materially changed. I have not
   therefore needed to seek the parties’ views on this change. I am satisfied that no
   party has been prejudiced by my approach.
6. Furthermore, the Council has also since adopted the Uttlesford Local Plan 2021-
   2041 (2026) (LP). Emerging policies of that plan were referred to by both parties
   and in the appeal documents. As I am required to do, I have determined the
   appeals against the development plan prevailing at the time of my decisions.
Main Issue
7. The main issue in both appeals is the effect of the proposed development/works on
   the special architectural and historic interest of the grade II listed Gladwyns
   Farmhouse (the Farmhouse).
Reasons
Significance
8. The grade II listed Gladwyns Farmhouse (the Farmhouse) is a C16 timber framed
   and plastered dwelling, with a red plain tile roof, which is half hipped at the western
   end. The building includes leaded casements at first floor level, sash windows and
   a door with moulded architraves at ground floor level. It has a large modern single
   storey side extension, which is built in a traditional style with rendered walls and a
   tiled roof (the modern extension). Insofar as is relevant to these appeals, I find the
   significance of the Farmhouse derives principally from its age, traditional form,
   architectural detailing, its historic association with agriculture and its rural setting.
Effect on significance
9. The proposed development/works would largely affect the existing modern
   extension rather than the historic parts of the Farmhouse. Although the angular infill
   element would be positioned between that extension and part of the historic
   western elevation of the listed building, it would be modest in scale and located
   within an area already influenced by later modern extension.
10. I acknowledge the Council’s concern that the glazed gable and angular infill would
    appear as an incongruous and piecemeal addition and would further obscure part

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6007968 & 6007971


     of the western elevation. However, the western elevation is already partly read in
     association with the existing modern extension. The proposed works would not
     involve the loss of historic fabric, and the limited infill would not materially alter the
     legibility of the historic plan form or the appreciation of the Farmhouse as an early
     timber-framed rural building.
11. The contemporary elements would be clearly distinguishable from the historic
    fabric, while remaining visually subservient because of their scale, position and
    relationship with the existing modern extension. In that context, I do not find that the
    glazed gable or angular infill would distract from the building’s architectural interest.
    Rather, the historic core would remain readily appreciable, and the proposal would
    not erode the features from which the Farmhouse derives its special interest. For
    these reasons, the proposed development/works would preserve the special
    architectural and historic interest of the grade II listed building.
12. It follows that the proposed development/works would have an acceptable effect on
    the special architectural and historic interest of the grade II listed Farmhouse.
    Accordingly, the proposal would accord with Policy CP62 of the LP which, amongst
    other things, seeks to ensure that development conserves designated heritage
    assets in a manner appropriate to their significance.
Conditions
13. The conditions imposed are those which have been suggested by the Council,
    amended where necessary in the interests of precision and enforceability. For
    Appeal A, I have imposed the standard time limit condition and a condition requiring
    the development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans.
14. For Appeal B, I have imposed equivalent commencement and approved plans
    conditions, together with conditions requiring further details of the connection point
    between the existing roof and the proposed extension, proposed new windows and
    doors, rooflights, and external finishes. These conditions are necessary in the
    interests of certainty and to preserve the special architectural and historic interest
    of the listed building. I have not imposed the Council’s suggested condition
    requiring approval of any additional works to the listed building that may be needed
    to facilitate construction of the extension. Any substantive works not shown on the
    approved details would require listed building consent in their own right and,
    therefore, such a condition would not be necessary.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that both appeals A and B should be allowed.

L Fleming
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6007968 & 6007971


                                   Schedule of Conditions for Appeal A


    1) The works authorised by this consent shall commence not later than 3 years
       from the date of this consent.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans and documents: 25SWE100 received 24 October
       2025; Bat and Newt Survey received 24 October 2025; Heritage Statement
       received 24 October 2025; 25SWE200 A received 5 December 2025;
       25SWE201 received 5 December 2025; 3D Model Images received 5 December
       2025; and Design and Access Statement received 24 October 2025.


                                           End of Appeal A Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
Appeal Decisions 6007968 & 6007971




                                   Schedule of Conditions for Appeal B


    1) The works authorised by this consent shall commence not later than 3 years
       from the date of this consent.

    2) The works hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the following
       approved plans and documents: 25SWE100 received 24 October 2025; Bat and
       Newt Survey received 24 October 2025; Heritage Statement received 24
       October 2025; 25SWE200 A received 5 December 2025; 25SWE201 received 5
       December 2025; 3D Model Images received 5 December 2025; and Design and
       Access Statement received 24 October 2025.

    3) Prior to works above slab level, details of the connection point between the
       existing roof, and the proposed extension shall be submitted to and approved in
       writing by the LPA. This shall include fixing details and any proposed loss or
       alteration to historic fabric. The works shall be implemented as approved.

    4) Details and photographic samples (where required) of all proposed new windows
       and doors (including materials and glazing) to be used by section and elevation
       at scales between 1:20 and 1:1 as appropriate shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the local planning authority prior to their first installation or
       construction on site.

    5) Prior to their first installation on site, details and specifications of all the proposed
       rooflights shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the LPA. The
       rooflights shall have metal frames, low profile and a central vertical bar unless
       otherwise agreed and shall be implemented as approved.

    6) Prior to first use on site, details and photographic samples of all external
       finishings shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the LPA. These shall
       include; Roof – Zinc Sheeting (Colour, profile and seem details), Wall – Render,
       and Paving – Slabs and shall be implemented as approved.



                                           End of Appeal B Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          5
