Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by R Major BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6007793
Pavement o/s Hillyard House, Brixton Road, London SW9 0NH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Lambeth.
•    The application Ref is 25/03883/FUL.
•    The development proposed is installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphone kiosks.

Appeal B Ref: 6007795
Pavement o/s Hillyard House, Brixton Road, London SW9 0NH
•  The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
   Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
   consent.
• The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
   London Borough of Lambeth.
• The application Ref is 25/03884/ADV.
• The advertisement proposed is two digital 75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
   Street Hub unit.
____________________________________________________________________________________

Decision
1.    Appeal A is dismissed.
2.    Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3. The two appeals relate to the same proposal on the same site. Appeal A concerns
   the refusal of planning permission to erect a street hub unit (the hub). Appeal B
   concerns the refusal of express consent for advertisement panels on either side of
   the hub. I have considered each appeal on its individual merits, however, as they
   raise similar issues, I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
4. In respect of Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
   (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) require that decisions are made only
   in the interest of amenity and public safety. Therefore, whilst I have taken account
   of the Lambeth Local Plan 2020-2035 (the Local Plan) and the London Plan 2021
   (the London Plan) policies that the Council considers to be relevant, these have not
   been decisive in my determination of this appeal.
5. Subsequent to the Council issuing its decision the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
   were given the opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework,
   and I have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007793


6.    The appeal site is situated within the Brixton Road Conservation Area (the CA)
      and therefore in accordance with the statutory duty set out in Section 72(1) of the
      Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), I have paid
      special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
      appearance of the CA in respect of Appeal A and Appeal B.
7.    The appeal site is located within the setting of the Grade II listed buildings at
      No. 168 Brixton Road and Nos. 195 – 203 (odds only) Brixton Road. In determining
      Appeal A I have a statutory duty, under Section 66(1) of the Act, to have special
      regard to the desirability of preserving the setting of these listed buildings, and any
      features of special architectural and historic interest which they possess.
Main Issues
8.    The main issues in respect of Appeal A are the effect of the proposal on:
         •    the character and appearance of the CA, including its effect upon nearby listed
              buildings; and
         •    highway and pedestrian safety, including the movement of pedestrians.
9.    The main issues in respect of Appeal B are the effect of the proposed advertisement
      on visual amenity and public safety.
Reasons
Character, appearance and visual amenity
10. The appeal relates to a wide section of footway on the western side of Brixton Road
    (A23) which is a wide highway consisting of 4no. traffic lanes, including bus lanes on
    either side. In addition to the existing telephone kiosk, other street furniture within
    the immediate vicinity of the appeal site includes lighting columns, traffic cameras,
    road signs, digital communication cabinets, and street trees within the footway.
11. As mentioned, the appeal site is located within the CA which covers a long section
    of Brixton Road. I observed that the significance of the CA is in part derived from
    the variety in the high-quality of the Georgian and Victorian buildings on both sides
    of the highway, which represent the evolution of this rural district to a busy
    residential suburb.
12. Whilst acknowledging that sections of the CA to the south include parades of
    commercial properties and shops, I found the part of the CA within which the
    appeal site is located to be residential in character. It has a verdant and suburban
    character, emphasised by the wide pavements, street trees and residential
    properties set back from the highway behind boundary walls and landscaped
    areas. These features make a positive contribution to the character and
    appearance of this residential part of the CA, distinguishing it from the more
    commercial areas. This delicate balance of character is an attractive and important
    part of the significance of the whole CA.
13. The proposal would see the introduction of a street hub, with advertisement panels
    on either side, in a prominent location adjacent to the highway. Due to a combination
    of its siting, height and width, the proposed freestanding hub, with its large digital
    advertisement panels on both sides, would represent an alien and obtrusive feature
    in this residential part of the CA, where digital adverts are not a feature.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007793


14. In coming to this view, I acknowledge that the proposed hub would replace the
    existing telephone kiosk, which would otherwise be retained on site. However, the
    proposed hub would be taller and wider than this kiosk and with its large digital
    advertisement panels on both sides it would represent a more dominant and
    overbearing feature. Additionally, against the backdrop of the residential properties
    beyond, their landscaped boundaries and the street trees, I find the proposed hub
    and adverts would represent a more discordant and intrusive presence in
    comparison to the existing kiosk that would be removed.
15. The submission also details that an existing kiosk at St Matthews Road would be
    removed, reducing street clutter in that location. However, having visited that
    kiosk I found that it is located a significant distance from the appeal site and is
    therefore visually unrelated. This limits the weight I can attribute to its removal in
    favour of the appeal proposal.
16. The appellant has also drawn my attention to the visual impact of existing bus
    shelters located along Brixton Road, which include advertisement panels. Sheltered
    bus stops are however an established and common feature along this busy
    highway, and their presence is therefore both regular and expected. Whereas the
    appeal proposal would introduce an alien and incongruous feature which, for the
    above reasons, I find to be visually harmful to the street scene and CA.
17. Furthermore, the advertisements I observed on these bus shelters were paper and
    the digitised nature of the proposed advertisements, along with their changing
    images, would represent a more visually strident feature within the street scene in
    comparison to the advertisements at these bus stops. In this context I find the
    existing bus shelters, with paper advertisements, along Brixton Road to be a
    matter of limited weight in my consideration of the impact of the proposal on visual
    amenity.
18. In view of the above, I find the proposal would fail to conserve the features that
    make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of this part of the CA,
    and the proposal would have a harmful impact upon the significance of the CA as a
    whole. The proposal would therefore be contrary to Policy HE9 of the Framework.
19. The Council’s submissions also refer to harm to nearby listed buildings. However,
    and despite a request for more information, the Council has provided very limited
    information in respect of the listed buildings that they consider would be impacted
    by the proposal.
20. Nonetheless, having checked the National Heritage List I noted that the nearest
    listed building to the north of the appeal site is No. 168 Brixton Road (No. 168)
    and the nearest listed building to the south is the terrace row at Nos. 195 – 203
    (odds only) Brixton Road (Nos. 195 – 203). Both are Grade II Listed.
21. I observed that the significance of the detached, two-storey property at No. 168
    derives from its historic and architectural qualities, particularly within the front
    elevation, including its centrally located Tuscan style front porch, its classic
    proportions and the round headed brick arched, recessed, sash windows at ground
    floor. With regard to the three-storey, terrace row at Nos. 195 – 203, again I found the
    significance of this listed row derives from the architectural detailing within the front
    elevation, including the varying setbacks of the properties, the lined stucco finish and
    arched doorways at ground floor level, and the cast iron balconies at first-floor level.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007793


22. However, the linear street layout, together with the setback of the properties from
    the pavement and the presence of mature trees both within the street and along
    front boundaries, means that views of these listed buildings and the features that
    contribute to their special architectural and historic interest are largely restricted to
    vantage points directly in front of the buildings.
23. As such, and given the separation distance between the proposed hub and these
    listed buildings, I consider that the proposal would preserve their setting. The
    proposal would therefore comply with the Act and the requirements of Local Plan
    Policy Q20, where it seeks to ensure that proposals do not harm the
    significance/setting of listed buildings.
24. Nevertheless, for the reasons given earlier, I conclude that the proposal would
    have a harmful impact upon the character and appearance of the CA and cause
    harm to visual amenity. In accordance Policy HE6 of the Framework, I give this
    harm considerable importance and weight.
25. Policy HE4 of the Framework states that any harm to the significance of a designated
    heritage asset should have a clear and convincing justification. Policy HE5 requires
    that when making the assessment it is the effect on a heritage asset’s significance
    rather than the scale of the development which should be considered. Policy HE6 of
    the Framework states that where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
26. In respect of Appeal A, the proposal would include ultrafast public wi-fi, access to
    public services, multiple accessibility options, wayfinding information, secure power-
    only USB ports for rapid device charging, free phone calls, a direct emergency call
    button, community and emergency awareness messaging, and environmental
    sensors to measure air quality and traffic. The hub would also provide improved 5G
    coverage to local communities through the installation of small cell mobile connectivity
    providing faster and more reliable connection for calls and internet access, as well as
    free screen time for council advertising.
27. Consequently, the proposed hub would support the Government’s aim of expanding
    and upgrading telecommunications infrastructure. In this regard, Policy CO1 of the
    Framework states that in considering proposals for the expansion or upgrading of
    electronic telecommunications networks, substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of maintaining or improving network coverage, capacity, reliability and
    resilience.
28. However, whilst acknowledging that Policy CO1 also states that decision makers
    should not question the need for the expansion or upgrading of telecommunications
    networks, there is limited evidence before me that these telecommunication benefits
    could not be provided at a less sensitive location, or through a more sensitively
    designed proposal that does not include digital advertisements.
29. As such, and when taken together, I find that all the above-mentioned public benefits
    do not outweigh the considerable importance and weight I must attach to the harm
    to the character and to the appearance of the CA.
30. In respect of Appeal B, the Regulations require that decisions are made only in the
    interest of amenity and public safety. As such, most of the proposed benefits put

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007793


      forward by the appellant cannot be taken into consideration in my decision for
      Appeal B. Nonetheless, even in a scenario whereby I accepted that use of the
      advertisement to display emergency messages and public messaging campaigns
      was a public safety matter relevant to the control of advertisements, the benefits
      derived from it would not overcome the harm I have identified to visual amenity.
31. I therefore conclude on this main issue that the proposal would result in
    considerable and enduring harm to the character and the appearance of the CA, and
    thereby the visual amenity of the area in general. The development therefore
    conflicts with s72(1) of the Act, and with Local Plan Policies T9, Q5, Q6, Q17 and
    Q22, where they together seek to ensure, amongst other things, that developments,
    including telecommunications equipment and adverts, be appropriately sited and
    designed so as not to cause harm to amenity and the character or appearance of
    the area; will not be visually intrusive in the street scene; provide robust street
    furniture that is appropriate for its site and immediate locality; and preserve the
    character or appearance of conservation areas by respecting and reinforcing the
    established, positive characteristics of the area.
32. The proposal would also fail to satisfy the relevant sections of Policies HE6 and
    HE9 of the Framework, which I have set out above, as well as Policy DP3 where it
    states that development proposals should respond to their context so that they
    integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
Highway, pedestrian and public safety
33. The proposed hub would replace an existing telephone kiosk and would not increase
    the overall number of items of street furniture on this section of pavement. Whilst
    acknowledging that the proposed installation would be wider than the existing
    telephone kiosk it would replace, the submitted plans detail that an unobstructed
    pavement width of 5.5m would be retained. This remaining space would allow
    multiple pedestrians to safely and comfortably move along the pavement, including
    those with a physical disability, impaired vision and/or a buggy.
34. Consequently, I find the proposal would not result in additional street clutter and
    would not have a harmful impact upon pedestrian movements along this section of
    pavement. The proposal would therefore not conflict with the Transport for London’s
    Streetscape Guidance (2022), where it seeks to minimise cluttering footways and
    maximise unobstructed widths for comfortable pedestrian movements.
35. In terms of the potential of the proposed hub and adverts to cause a distraction for
    road users, whilst acknowledging that Brixton Road is a busy highway and forms
    part of the Transport for London Road Network, digital advertisements on the side of
    busy roads are not an uncommon feature in general.
36. I did observe on site that there is a signal-controlled pedestrian crossing located to
    the south of the appeal site. However, as a result of its siting on the opposite side of
    the road I find the proposed hub would not distract drivers’ attention as they observe
    and approach these traffic lights when travelling from the north along Brixton Road.
37. When traveling along Brixton Road from the south the hub would be sited a
    reasonable distance beyond these traffic lights and thus would not distract road
    users’ attention as they approach. Additionally, the installation would be sited along
    a mostly straight and flat section of the road where drivers would not be undertaking
    complex or demanding manoeuvres that may require greater attention.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007793


38. Furthermore, should I be minded to allow the appeal, planning conditions to
    ensure there are no moving images; the minimum display time of advertisements;
    any changes in image is instantaneous; that the display switches off in the event of
    a malfunction; that no content on the display shall resemble a traffic sign; and to
    control the illumination levels of the advertisements, could all be imposed.
39. As such, and subject to these conditions should the appeal be allowed, I find that
    the proposal would not result in a distracting or confusing element that would
    compromise highway safety.
40. I note the Council have also raised a public safety concern that the proposal could
    impact upon neurodivergent users with sensory or cognitive sensitivities. In reaching
    my decision I have therefore had regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED)
    contained in Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010. This sets out the need to
    eliminate unlawful discrimination, harassment and victimisation, and to advance
    equality of opportunity and foster good relations between people who share a
    protected characteristic and people who do not share it. Protected characteristics
    include people with disabilities.
41. In reaching my decision I have kept these interests at the forefront of my mind. I
    have considered all users of the public highway, including those with a ‘protected
    characteristic’, and find that the size and siting of the hub and adverts would not
    disproportionately affect people with a protected characteristic. Consequently, the
    PSED does not provide a reason to dismiss the appeal. Additionally, I have no
    compelling evidence before me that the appeal should be dismissed on the effects
    of the screens and lighting on human health.
42. In view of all the above, and for the reasons given, I conclude that the proposal
    would not be harmful to highway, pedestrian and public safety. I therefore find no
    conflict with the provisions of London Plan Policies T4, D3 and D8, where they
    together seek to ensure, amongst other things, that development does not
    increase road danger and facilitates convenient and inclusive pedestrian routes;
    that the design and location of street furniture complements the use and function
    of the space; and that applications which seek to introduce unnecessary street
    furniture should be refused. It follows that, in these respects, the proposal would
    also not prejudice the referred to Mayor’s Vision Zero to eliminate deaths and
    serious injuries on London’s transport system.
43. In addition, given that I have found that the proposal would not have an
    unnacceptable impact on highway safety, I find no conflict with Policy TR6 of the
    Framework. I also find no conflict with Policy TR4 of the Framework where it states
    that proposals should minimise the scope for conflict between pedestrians, cyclists
    and vehicles.
Planning Balance
44. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. In this case, the
    appeal site is located within a built-up area and therefore Policy S4 of the
    Framework is applicable. It states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007793


45. In this regard, and for the reasons given, I find that the harm to the character and to
    the appearance of the CA, and visual amenity of the area in general, would be
    considerable and enduring. The proposals would conflict with Policies HE6 and
    HE9, as well as DP3 of the Framework. The identified benefits of granting planning
    permission would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
46. I conclude that the appeal proposal would not have a harmful impact upon highway,
    pedestrian or public safety. However, for the reasons given, I have concluded that
    the proposal would have a harmful impact upon the visual amenity of the area and
    the character and the appearance of the CA.
47. Appeal A therefore conflicts with the Act and the development plan taken as a whole
    and there are no material considerations, including the Framework, to suggest the
    decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
    Appeal B would harm visual amenity.
48. Therefore, for the reasons given, both Appeal A and Appeal B are dismissed.



R Major
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
