Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Chris Mayes CMLI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007484
Boltons Farm, Blackgate Lane, Tarleton, West Lancashire PR4 6UX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
    planning permission in principle.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Thomas Wignall against West Lancashire Borough Council.
•   The application reference is 2025/0981/PIP.
•   The development proposed is permission in principle for up to 9 no. dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for residential
   development comprising a minimum of 6 and maximum of 9 dwellings at Boltons
   Farm, Blackgate Lane, Tarleton, West Lancashire PR4 6UX in accordance with the
   terms of the application, reference 2025/0981/PIP, dated 17 November 2025.
Background and Main Issues
2. Since the appeal was submitted, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) has been published. The parties were given the opportunity to
   comment on the implications of the revised Framework, and their responses have
   been taken into account. I have determined the appeal having regard to the current
   policy position, including the revised Framework.
3. The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
   advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-
   led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages: the first
   stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in
   principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the detailed
   development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2
   stages.
4. The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
   land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
   considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent (TDC) application if
   permission in principle were granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
5. The application seeks permission in principle for a minimum of 6 and a maximum of
   9 dwellings. I have considered the proposal on that basis.
6. The appeal arises from the Council's failure to determine the application within the
   prescribed period. The Council has subsequently confirmed that, had it determined
   the application, it would have refused permission. The Council’s concerns relate to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007484


     flood risk, the potential loss of best and most versatile agricultural land, the
     sustainability of the location and the site’s location within the Green Belt.
7. It therefore follows that the main issues are:
          •    whether the appeal site comprises grey belt land and, if so, whether the
               proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt for
               the purposes of the Framework;
          •    the effect of flood risk;
          •    the effect of the proposal on agricultural land in the area; and,
          •    if relevant, whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other
               harm, would be clearly outweighed by other considerations so as to amount
               to the very special circumstances necessary to justify the development.
Reasons
Whether Grey Belt Land and Whether Inappropriate Development
8. The appeal site lies within the Green Belt. Policy GB6 of the Framework states that
   development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the forms
   of development identified in Policy GB7 of the Framework. Inappropriate
   development is harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in
   very special circumstances.
9. Policy GB7(1)(g) provides that residential development in the Green Belt will not be
   regarded as inappropriate development where, among other things, the
   development would utilise grey belt land, would not fundamentally undermine the
   purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan,
   there is a demonstrable unmet need for the type of development proposed, and the
   development would be in a sustainable location having particular regard to Policy
   TR3.
10. The Glossary to the Framework defines grey belt land as Green Belt land that does
    not strongly contribute to the purposes set out in Policy GB2(a), (b) or (d) of the
    Framework. The parties agree that the appeal site does not strongly contribute to
    the purposes of preventing neighbouring towns from merging into one another or
    preserving the setting and special character of historic towns. Accordingly, the
    principal matter in dispute is whether it strongly contributes to checking the
    unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas.
11. The Framework and associated guidance make clear that villages are not large
    built-up areas for the purposes of this objective. As Tarleton is identified in the
    development plan as a village, I am not persuaded that the appeal site makes a
    strong contribution to checking the unrestricted sprawl of a large built-up area.
    Having regard to Annex E of the Framework, I therefore find that it does not
    strongly contribute to any of the purposes identified in Policy GB2(a), (b) or (d). It
    consequently comprises grey belt land for the purposes of the Framework.
12. There is no substantive dispute that the proposal would not fundamentally
    undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the
    area of the plan. Furthermore, the Council accepts that it is presently unable to
    demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites and the evidence


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6007484


     before me indicates that it can currently demonstrate only a 1.86-year housing land
     supply. Consequently, I am satisfied that there is a demonstrable unmet need for
     the type of development proposed.
13. It therefore remains necessary to consider whether the site would be in a
    sustainable location having particular regard to Policy TR3 of the Framework. That
    policy seeks to promote sustainable patterns of movement and maximise
    opportunities for travel by walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport. However,
    the Framework recognises that opportunities to maximise sustainable transport
    solutions will vary between urban and rural areas and that this should be taken into
    account in decision-making.
14. The appeal site lies adjacent to an established pattern of development along
    Blackgate Lane and is not isolated from existing development. While it lies outside
    the defined settlement boundary, it benefits from footway provision, access to
    services and facilities, and opportunities to travel by public transport. I also note the
    availability of public transport connections and opportunities for cycling within the
    area. Future occupants would be likely to rely upon the private car for a proportion
    of journeys. However, that is not unusual in a rural context and does not, in itself,
    render the location unsustainable.
15. Having regard to the evidence before me, and recognising the rural context of the
    site, I am satisfied that it would be in a sustainable location for the purposes of
    Policy GB7(1)(g), having particular regard to Policy TR3.
16. Drawing these matters together, I find that the appeal site comprises grey belt land,
    the proposal would not fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of
    the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan, there is a demonstrable
    unmet need for the type of development proposed, and the site would be in a
    sustainable location. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal satisfies the
    requirements of Policy GB7(1)(g) and would not constitute inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt.
17. Given my conclusion that the proposal would not constitute inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt, there is no need for me to consider the effect of the
    proposal on the openness of the Green Belt or whether very special circumstances
    exist.
Flood Risk
18. The appeal site lies within Flood Zone 1 and is therefore located within the area at
    lowest risk of flooding from rivers and the sea. However, the evidence indicates that
    parts of the site frontage and existing access, together with other parts of the site
    itself, are affected by surface water flooding. The Council considers that, in the
    absence of a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment (FRA), it has not been
    demonstrated that safe access and egress could be achieved or that flood risk can
    be appropriately mitigated.
19. I recognise that surface water flooding is a material consideration in this case.
    However, the location of any future access, the detailed layout, drainage
    infrastructure, finished floor levels and other mitigation measures have not been
    fixed at this stage. While the submitted drainage information does not provide a
    final engineering solution, it identifies a potential drainage strategy based upon
    attenuation and controlled discharge. The evidence also indicates that the flooding

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007484


     constraints affect only parts of the site and frontage, rather than the entirety of the
     site.
20. In these circumstances, I am not persuaded that the identified surface water
    flooding constraint renders the site unsuitable for residential development in
    principle. While a site-specific FRA may be required as part of any future TDC
    application, together with detailed consideration of drainage infrastructure, finished
    floor levels, exceedance routing and arrangements for safe access and egress,
    these are matters that would ordinarily fall to be addressed through the subsequent
    design process. I am therefore satisfied that flood risk is capable of being
    appropriately addressed through design and mitigation measures at the TDC stage.
21. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would not conflict with Policy GN3 of
    the West Lancashire Local Plan 2012-2027 Development Plan Document (October
    2013) (DPD) insofar as it seeks to ensure that development is not exposed to
    unacceptable flood risk and that appropriate drainage arrangements can be
    secured.
Agricultural Land
22. The evidence indicates that the appeal site is shown on the Agricultural Land
    Classification map as Grade 3 land. However, no site-specific Agricultural Land
    Classification survey has been undertaken and therefore it has not been
    demonstrated whether the undeveloped parts of the site comprise Grade 3a or
    Grade 3b land.
23. The site contains several existing agricultural buildings and areas of hardstanding.
    The undeveloped parts of the site comprise rough grassland, rushes and areas of
    scrub. While these characteristics do not establish the agricultural classification of
    the land, they do not suggest that it currently forms part of a productive agricultural
    enterprise. I also note the evidence concerning the viability of the holding and the
    limited ongoing agricultural use of the site.
24. Policy EN2(4) seeks to protect the best and most versatile agricultural land within
    the plan area. In the absence of a site-specific survey, I cannot be certain whether
    the undeveloped land is Grade 3a land. However, even if it were, the area
    potentially affected would be limited. This must be viewed in the context of a site
    that is already partly developed and where the proposal would affect only a
    relatively small area of undeveloped land.
25. Policy EN2(4) of the DPD seeks to protect best and most versatile agricultural land
    and the proposal does not fall within the circumstances specified by that policy. I
    have also had regard to Policy N2(1)(b) of the Framework. Consequently, I
    conclude that the proposal would conflict with Policy EN2(4) and would not fully
    accord with Policy N2(1)(b) of the Framework.
Other Matters
26. I have had regard to the evidence relating to the Ribble and Alt Estuaries Special
    Protection Area and Ramsar site. The evidence before me indicates that neither the
    appeal site nor the surrounding land comprises functionally linked land for
    qualifying bird species associated with those designated sites. Furthermore,
    Natural England has concluded that the proposal would not be likely to have a



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007484


     significant effect on those designated sites, and I have no reason to reach a
     different conclusion.
27. A bat roost has been identified within one of the existing buildings. However, the
    appeal before me relates only to the principle of development. Matters relating to
    protected species surveys, mitigation, licensing requirements and the detailed
    treatment of existing buildings would fall to be considered as part of any
    subsequent TDC application. Consequently, I find no reason in this case why the
    presence of the bat roost should prevent the grant of permission in principle.
Planning Balance
28. I have found that the proposal would not constitute inappropriate development in
    the Green Belt and would satisfy the requirements of Policies GB6 and GB7(1)(g)
    of the Framework. I have also found that the proposal would not conflict with Policy
    GN3 of the DPD in relation to flood risk.
29. Nevertheless, I have identified conflict with Policy EN2(4) of the DPD due to the
    potential loss of a limited area of best and most versatile agricultural land. I have
    also taken account of Policy N2(1)(b) of the Framework. However, given the
    uncertainty regarding the precise classification of the land, the limited extent of any
    potential loss and the existing characteristics of the site, I find that the resulting
    harm would be modest, and I attach limited weight to it.
30. Set against this, the proposal would deliver up to 9 dwellings in circumstances
    where there is a demonstrable unmet need for housing and the Council can only
    demonstrate a 1.86-year supply of deliverable housing sites. While the number of
    dwellings provided would be modest, the proposal would nevertheless make a
    positive contribution towards addressing the acute shortfall in housing supply. In
    these circumstances and having regard to the importance attached by the
    Framework to the delivery of housing where an unmet need exists, I attach
    substantial weight to this benefit.
31. Taking all matters into account, I conclude that the benefits of the proposal would
    not be substantially outweighed by the adverse effect arising from the potential loss
    of a limited area of agricultural land. I therefore conclude that the proposal accords
    with the approach set out in Policy S5 of the Framework.
Conclusion
32. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan insofar as it
    would not comply with Policy EN2(4). However, material considerations, including
    the Framework, indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal
    should be allowed.



Chris Mayes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
