Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by E Pickernell BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007434
207 Lower Blandford Road, Broadstone, Poole BH18 8DN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr R Miles of Carlton Developments (Poole) Ltd against the decision of
    Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole Council.
•   The application Ref is P/25/02928/FUL.
•   The development proposed is erection of a block of 3no. flats with cycle and bin store and
    operational car parking space.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. The Council and appellant were invited to make further comments,
   and I have taken the submissions received into account in making my decision.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of 207
                Lower Blandford Road (No.207) in respect of outlook and privacy;
           •    whether the proposal would provide adequate living conditions for future
                occupiers of the proposed development in respect of outlook and privacy;
                and
           •    whether the proposal would make adequate provision for biodiversity net
                gain (BNG).
Reasons
Living conditions – occupiers of No.207
4. The appeal site is located to the rear of an existing property, No. 207, which has a
   commercial use at the ground floor with two flats above. The appeal scheme
   comprises a new building containing flats arranged over three floors. The rear
   elevation of the proposed block would face the rear of No.207 and would contain
   six bedroom windows, two per floor.
5. The existing first floor flat at No.207 has one rear facing window which is located on
   the main part of the building, to the side of the existing outrigger. This window

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007434


     would look towards the bedroom windows on the rear elevation of the proposed
     building. The gap between this existing window and the proposed building would be
     relatively modest, the appellant contends that it would be 15.8m.
6. The flat within the second floor of No.207 has a rear facing window within the
   outrigger which based on the evidence before me is a secondary window to a
   bedroom which is also served by windows within a side facing dormer window.
   According to the appellant, this window would be within 9m of the rear facing
   windows of the proposed building.
7. At these distances and given the direct nature of the overlooking which would
   occur, the occupiers of these existing bedrooms would experience a loss of privacy
   resulting in harm to their living conditions. Whilst blinds or curtains could be used to
   mitigate such overlooking, it is not reasonable to expect existing occupiers to have
   to adopt such measures to maintain reasonable levels of privacy. Although the
   effected rooms are not primary living spaces, bedrooms are nevertheless habitable
   rooms in which occupiers may spend considerable time.
8. The presence of a three-storey building in this position would have a somewhat
   overbearing impact upon the rear facing window of the first floor flat due to its
   relatively close proximity. However, the outlook of this room is already somewhat
   compromised by the existing outrigger. Furthermore, due to the lower development
   to the rear of the adjacent plot to the northwest, outlook would be maintained over
   the roofs of these buildings, avoiding a sense of enclosure within the effected room.
9. The second-floor bedroom benefits from a large window which provides outlook to
   the northwest. Consequently, whilst the proposed building would be visible in views
   from the southwest facing window, it would not result in an overbearing impact,
   given the availability of outlook from another window within the same room.
10. Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would result in harm to the living
    conditions of the occupiers of No.207 in respect of privacy. It would therefore
    conflict with Policy PP27 of the Poole Local Plan (Adopted November 2018) (PLP)
    and Policy BP4 of the Broadstone Neighbourhood Plan 2013 – 2033 (Made June
    2018) (NP) which together seek to ensure that development should demonstrate
    that it would not result in a harmful impact upon amenity in respect of, amongst
    other things, privacy.
11. Policy PP29 of the PLP has been referred to in the reason for refusal, however this
    does not refer to privacy other than in respect of the provision of parking, turning
    and access and as such has not been determinative in my consideration of this
    main issue.
Living conditions – future occupiers
12. The proposed rear facing bedroom windows which I have identified would result in
    the overlooking of the existing rear facing windows within No.207 would conversely
    experience overlooking from these existing windows, as a result of their close
    relationship. This would result in poor levels of privacy for the future occupiers of
    these bedrooms.
13. The existing building (No.207) would be clearly visible in the outlook from the rear
    facing windows within the proposed building. However, the parts of the existing
    building which are closest to the proposed building are single storey. Furthermore,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007434


     the mass of the rear elevation of the existing building is broken down as a result of
     the outrigger which is narrower than the main bulk of the building. Consequently,
     the existing building would not be unduly imposing or oppressive within the outlook
     from these rear facing windows which would be acceptable within this relatively
     urban location. Therefore, the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions
     in respect of outlook.
14. Overall, I conclude that the proposal would fail to provide adequate living conditions
    for future occupiers in respect of privacy. It would therefore conflict with Policy
    PP27 of the PLP and Policy BP4 of the NP which together seek to ensure that
    development should demonstrate that it would not result in a harmful impact upon
    amenity for future occupiers in respect of, amongst other things, privacy.
15. For the reasons given above, Policy PP29 of the PLP has not been determinative in
    my consideration of this main issue.
Biodiversity Net Gain
16. Schedule 7A (Biodiversity Gain in England) of the Town and Country Planning Act
    1990 sets out the statutory framework for BNG. In the event that the appeal was
    allowed a deemed condition would apply requiring that a biodiversity gain plan be
    submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority prior to
    commencement.
17. On the application form the appellant stated that they believed that the BNG
    condition would apply. Based on the evidence before me, the application was
    accompanied by the minimum information set out in Article 7 of the Town and
    Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015.
18. I recognise that the plans and accompanying metric indicate a loss of vegetated
    habitat areas. Nevertheless, Planning Practice Guidance makes clear that it is the
    determination of the biodiversity gain plan, required under the deemed condition
    which is the mechanism to confirm whether the development meets the biodiversity
    gain objective. It goes on to say that given this, it would generally be inappropriate
    for decision makers, when determining a planning application for a development
    subject to BNG, to refuse an application on the grounds that the biodiversity gain
    objective will not be met.
19. The Council contends that it has not been demonstrated that the steps of the
    biodiversity gain hierarchy have been followed. However, this information is a
    requirement of the biodiversity gain plan, as set out under Articles 37C(2) and
    37C(4) of The Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure)
    (England) Order 2015. Consequently, this matter would be adequately dealt with
    via the standard condition were I to allow the appeal.
20. In this context, I therefore conclude that the proposal would make adequate
    provision for BNG. The proposal therefore accords with Policy PP33 of the PLP
    which seeks to ensure that new development secures BNG.
Other Matters
Integrity of habitats sites
21. The fourth and fifth reasons for refusal relate to the effect of the development on
    the integrity of habitats sites including the Dorset Heaths Special Protection Area

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007434


        (SPA)/Special Area of Conservation (SAC)/Ramsar sites and the Poole Harbour
        SPA/Ramsar sites.
22. The Council consider that these matters could be overcome through financial
    contributions to mitigate the impact. The appellant states that such obligations can
    be secured through the completion of a legal agreement prior to the determination
    of the appeal. No completed obligation is before me.
23. However, in this instance, as I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, it is not
    necessary for me, as the Competent Authority to carry out an Appropriate
    Assessment into the effects of the proposal upon these European Habitat sites.
Fallback
24. Planning permission was granted for a new building containing two flats in
    November 20171. In May 2026 a Notification of Certificate of Lawful Use or
    Development2 was issued which confirmed that the planning permission was
    commenced within the 3 year timescale of implementation and as such the
    permission remains live.
25. I am satisfied that there is a realistic prospect that if the appeal is dismissed the
    scheme may be implemented. It therefore represents a realistic fallback position to
    which I attach significant weight. However, the plans indicate that the approved
    building would be two storeys in height and would contain four bedroom windows
    on the elevation facing No.207 at ground and first floor levels. The proposed
    building contains two additional bedroom windows serving the second floor flat. As
    such the proposal which is the subject of this appeal would have a materially
    greater impact upon the privacy of the occupiers of No.207 and would result in an
    additional flat which would not be provided with adequate levels of privacy, for the
    reasons given.
26. Consequently, the fallback position does not lead me to conclude that the appeal
    should be allowed.
Planning balance
27. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
28. The circumstances in which the benefits of approving development are likely to be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects include situations where the
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which states that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.
29. The parties agree that the Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year housing land
    supply. The appellant contends that supply sits at approximately 2.55 years. The
    proposal would result in the provision of 3 dwellings which could be delivered
    quickly. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be
    given to the benefits of providing homes which would meet an evidenced need.

1
    APP/17/01/01433/F
2
    P/26/00767/CLE


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007434


30. As supported by Policy L3 of the Framework, the proposal would make efficient use
    of previously developed land and increase the density of the area in a location with
    good access to services, facilities and sustainable transport options. The proposal
    would also bring about the usual economic benefits associated with construction.
    Overall, I attach significant positive weight to these benefits. Furthermore, Policy L2
    of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of
    creating additional homes within existing plots.
31. However, I have found that the proposal would result in harm in respect of the living
    conditions of existing and future occupiers. It would therefore conflict with Policy
    PP27 of the PLP and Policy BP4 of the NP. These harms would be substantial and
    long lasting.
32. These policies are consistent with Policy DP3 of the Framework which requires
    proposals to respond to their context through the arrangement of buildings and
    support liveability of developments. They are also consistent with Policy P3 of the
    Framework which requires that development proposals are appropriate for their
    location taking into account the likely effect of living conditions. Furthermore, Policy
    L2 of the Framework states that proposals to create homes through additional
    development within existing plots should (amongst other things) maintain
    acceptable living standards for residents and neighbours in terms of privacy. I
    therefore attach significant weight to the conflict with these policies.
33. Policy DP3(3) of the Framework states that development proposals should be
    refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of the policy or
    relevant aspects of the principles in paragraph 2 of the policy, or within any explicit
    design standards set out in the development plan. I find conflict with DP3(1) and
    (2) because the proposal does not respond to its context through the arrangement
    of buildings or support the liveability of the development and because it would
    conflict with the design standards set out in the development plan.
34. Overall, I find that the benefits of approving the development would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision
    making policies in the Framework.
Conclusion
35. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal
    should be dismissed.

E Pickernell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
