Appeal Decision
by M Brooker DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007837
Land south of Caves Lane, Walkeringham, Doncaster DN10 4LU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Martin Collins against the decision of Bassetlaw District Council.
•   The application Ref is 24/01297/COU.
•   The development proposed is the change of use of land to uses as a residential caravan site for one
    Gypsy/Traveller family with two caravans, including no more than one static caravan/mobile home,
    together with laying of hardstanding, erection of ancillary dayroom building and improvement of
    existing access.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
   land to a residential caravan site for one Gypsy/Traveller family with two caravans,
   including no more than one static caravan/mobile home, together with laying of
   hardstanding, erection of ancillary dayroom building and improvement of existing
   access. at Land south of Cave's Lane, Doncaster, DN10 4LU in accordance with
   the terms of the application, Ref 24/01297/COU, subject to the conditions set out in
   the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The parties confirmed that the submitted Statement of Common Ground (SoCG)
   was not agreed.
3. At the hearing it was clarified by all the parties present that the address is properly
   referred to as Caves Lane as opposed to Cave or Cave’s Lane.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the appeal site benefits from appropriate access with
   particular regards to highway safety and the junction of Caves Lane and the B1403
Reasons
5. The appeal site is situated some 200m from the nearest dwelling and some 400m
   from the Walkeringham, a small rural settlement and currently accommodates an
   agricultural barn, with some domestic esq fenestration. Otherwise, the appeal site
   consists of a grassed agricultural field bound by trees, hedgerow and fencing.
6. The appeal scheme would see the widening of the existing access off Caves Lane
   to include a ‘bell mouth’, landscaping, fencing, the building of a day room and the
   siting of a static caravan and a tourer caravan.
7. I saw at the site visit that, in proximity to the appeal site, Caves Lane is
   predominantly a single lane road and that there are no formal passing places with

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007837


     limited informal passing opportunities generally in the form of field gateways.
     Consequently, there is a potential conflict between vehicles travelling along Caves
     Lane.
8. Moreover, I note that there is no separate pedestrian footway or pavement and that
   Caves Lane is not lit by street lighting. As such there is a potential conflict between
   pedestrians and vehicles on Caves Lane and I consider that the road is unattractive
   to future occupiers of the appeal site to use to access the services and facilities of
   Walkeringham on foot, in particular young children and during the winter months.
9. These considerations weigh against the appeal scheme.
10. Regarding the proposed improved access point, the appellant’s submissions refer
    to two images, that appear to be extracts of ‘Google Streetview’, as evidence that
    visibility splays of 2.4 x 45m can be achieved at the access point from the appeal
    site on to Caves Lane. No detailed plans showing the improved layout have been
    submitted in support of the appeal scheme. The site layout plan shows the
    arrangement of the appeal site but at a scale of 1:500 and without detailed
    measurements. The appellant suggests that the details and provision of the
    improved access could be the subject of a suitably worded condition.
11. Based on the evidence before me and that detailed at the Hearing, I am satisfied
    that a new access, including the provision of a refuse collection point, visibility
    splays and other matters to ensure highway safety could be created along the lines
    of that described by the appellant and as agreed by the council.
12. Turning to the junction of Caves Lane and the B1403 (Fountains Hill), the junction
    referred to in the reason for refusal, I note that this is the closest point of access for
    proposed occupiers of the appeal site to the wider road network. The council has
    detailed that the visibility to the north (right) is very poor and that trips generated by
    the appeal scheme, including motor vehicles and caravans, using this junction
    would harm highway safety.
13. Paragraph 116 of the National Planning Policy Framework states that “development
    should only be prevented or refused on highways grounds if there would be an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety, or the residual cumulative impacts on the
    road network, following mitigation, would be severe, taking into account all
    reasonable future scenarios”.
14. I saw at the site visit that visibility at the junction is particularly poor to the right
    where oncoming traffic is obscured by the embanked grassed verge. The B1403 is
    subject to the national speed limit, and at the site visit I saw vehicle speeds, types
    of vehicles and quantum of traffic as would be expected of such a road
    classification.
15. The appellant detailed the likely trips from the site as being to access schooling, to
    access day to day services and some limited trips for medical appointments.
    Moreover, the appellant outlined at the hearing that the majority of these trips would
    be to or through Walkeringham, and not be via the junction of Caves Lane and
    B1403. A route through the village provides a markedly better junction on to the
    B1403 and access to the A161. I therefore consider that this is a reasonable
    alternative and that future residents are likely to choose to use it. Furthermore, it
    was detailed at the hearing that the touring caravan shown on the submitted plans
    would only be moved occasionally.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007837


16. While the deficiencies of the junction of Caves Lane and the B1403 were readily
    apparent at the site visit, the appellant noted the absence of any vehicle accident
    data.
17. I consider that, with the condition referred to previously, Caves Lane while narrow
    provides broadly adequate access for the appeal scheme. As a pedestrian route it
    is poor but I do not consider this to be determinative in this instance. Moreover, that
    an increase in the use of the Caves Lane/ B1403 junction as a result of the appeal
    scheme is harmful to highway safety but I consider that, for the reasons detailed
    above, in particular the availability of a much better junction nearby, the impact on
    highway safety would not be unacceptable or, in cumulation with other road users
    use of the junction, severe.
18. Consequently, I do not consider that the appeal scheme is contrary to the
    provisions of policies ST30 that relates to Gypsy Traveller sites including safe
    access and ST53 that, amongst other matters, relates to safe highways access of
    the Bassetlaw Local Plan (the LP).
       Other Matters
19. It was clarified at the hearing that the appeal site does not in fact currently benefit
    from access to mains services, contrary to details previously submitted.
20. With regards waste water drainage, the appellant has not followed the Planning
    Practice Guidance (PPG). The appellant has not drawn up detailed wastewater
    treatment proposals for the development, seeking to rely on an assumption that a
    connection to a public sewer is not available/feasible and that a package sewerage
    treatment plant or similar will be acceptable.
21. The PPG details that septic tanks or package sewage treatment plants may only be
    considered if it can be clearly demonstrated by the applicant that discharging into a
    public sewer is not feasible (taking into account cost and/or practicability and
    whether the package treatment plant poses a risk to a designated site).
22. On the basis of the evidence conveyed at the Hearing, I consider it likely that the
    public sewer provision ends at the outskirts of the village, some 400m from the
    appeal site, and if this is the case and a connection is not feasible then a package
    sewerage treatment plant is, in the absence of any identified harm, likely to be
    acceptable.
23. Therefore, in this specific instance I am satisfied that a suitably worded condition
    could be attached to any permission resulting from this appeal requiring the
    submission, approval and provision of a waste water solution in accordance with
    the hierarchy detailed in the PPG.
24. Turning to mains electricity, I understand that the appellant has made initial
    approaches to the relevant network operator and intends to install a connection to
    the mains. At the site visit it was apparent that the local area is particularly quiet
    and the use of a static electricity generator would likely harm the living conditions
    of nearby residents and would harm the character and appearance of the area. I
    am satisfied that a condition requiring the provision of a mains electricity
    connection is therefore reasonable in this instance. A connection to the mains
    water is also desirable.
25. I am satisfied that these matters could be controlled by suitably worded conditions.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007837


26. The availability of other Gypsy Traveller public and private sites was the subject of
    some representations from local residents and at the Hearing. The appellant
    confirmed that alternative sites had been considered but many of the sites in the
    Local Plan were the regularisation or expansion of existing plots where new pitches
    were not available to the appellants due to pitches being retained for family
    members or were not available to the appellant for other reasons.
27. While the council confirmed that they can demonstrate a 5-year supply of sites and
    this was not disputed by the appellant, no alternative sites that could accommodate
    the appellants were identified by the council.
28. The site is located within the Walkeringham Neighbourhood Plan (NP) but outside
    of the development boundaries. I note that the NP does not specifically refer to
    Gypsy Traveller sites. The site is well enclosed by existing trees and hedges and
    the appellant has proposed further enhancement of this planting. Moreover, the
    appellant proposes ecological enhancement, and I am satisfied that the appeal
    scheme would not harm the neighbouring Local Wildlife Site.
29. As such, I am satisfied that the appeal scheme would not harm the character and
    appearance of the area, ecology and, for the reasons detailed previously, is not
    contrary to Policy 53 of the Local Plan and consequently is not contrary to the NP
    Policy 1 in so far as it relates to the character of the area and other policies of the
    LP.
Conditions
30. I have had regard to the planning conditions that have been suggested by the
    Council and considered them against the tests in the Framework and the advice in
    the Planning Practice Guidance. I have made such amendments as necessary to
    comply with those documents.
31. In order to define the permission, I have included conditions relating to the life of
    the permission and the approved plans. Moreover, that the appeal scheme
    provides accommodation to Gypsy/ Travellers is key to the acceptability of the
    appeal scheme in policy terms, consequently I have included a condition to control
    the occupation of the site to persons that meet the definition. Also to define the
    permission and in the interests of clarity I have included a condition requiring the
    submission of details of the proposed day/utility room.
32. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, highway safety and to
    define the permission I have included a condition to control the number of caravans
    (2) stationed on the site and that no more than one of the caravans is to be a static
    caravan. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area and in the
    interests of the living conditions of local residents I have including a condition to
    control commercial activities on the site and the keeping of commercial vehicles on
    the site.
33. In the interests of highway safety, I have included a condition preventing
    development taking place until details of the junction at Caves Lane have been
    approved by the council and preventing occupation of the appeal site until the
    access has been created.
34. As requested by the council I have included a condition with regards a Construction
    Environmental Management Plan, in the interests of the environment and nearby


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007837


     residents living conditions. For the same reasons I have included conditions with
     regards external lighting both during construction and thereafter.
35. Also at the request of the council I have included conditions relating to a Habitat
    Management and Maintenance Plan, details of integrated habitat features,
    landscaping, controlling vegetation removal and a contaminated land survey in the
    interests of the environment.
36. In the interests of the environment I have included a condition relating to a detailed
    surface water and foul water drainage scheme in the interests of the environment.
37. In the interests of the environment and the living conditions of local residents I have
    included a condition requiring mains electric and water connection prior to the
    occupation of the appeal scheme.
Conclusion




M Brooker
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007837




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007837


       APPEARANCES

       FOR THE APPELLANT:


       Philip Brown - Philip Brown Associates Limited
       Martin Collins – the appellant


       FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:

       Aya Mohamed - Senior Planning Officer, MPlan, MRTPI
       Amanda Broadhead - Development Management Team Leader, MSc, MRTPI
       Peter Evans - Principal Highways Development Management Officer (Bassetlaw,
       North Notts), BEng(Hons) DipMS


       INTERESTED PARTIES:


       Mr Marzano – Local Resident
       Ms Lister – Local Resident




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007837


                                           Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Site Location Plan dated 2004; Site Layout
              Plan; Post & Rail Fence; and, Amenity Block dated February 2024;
     3)       The site shall not be occupied by any persons other than Gypsies and
              Travellers, defined as persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or
              origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their
              family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased
              to travel temporarily or permanently, and all other persons with a cultural
              tradition of nomadism or of living in a caravan, but excluding members of an
              organised group of Travelling Showpeople or circus people travelling
              together as such, in accordance with Planning Policy for Traveller Sites or
              replacement planning policy or guidance.
     4)       No more than 2 caravans, as defined in the Caravan Sites and Control of
              Development Act 1990 and the Caravan Sites Act 1968 (of which no more
              than 1 shall be static caravans) shall be stationed on the site at any time.
              Any caravans positioned on the site shall be capable of being lawfully moved
              on the public highway, without division into separate parts.
     5)       No commercial activities shall take place on the land, including the storage of
              material.
     6)       No more than one commercial vehicle per plot shall be kept on the land for
              use by the occupiers of the caravans hereby permitted, and they shall not
              exceed 3.5 tonnes in weight.
     7)       No development shall take place until details of utility block have been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details and
              within any such timescale as specified by the local planning authority.
     8)       Development shall not take place until details of the junction between the
              proposed service road and the highway shall have been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority; details shall include but
              not limited to visibility splays, materials and refuse collection point; and the
              development shall not be occupied until that junction has been constructed in
              accordance with the approved details. The junction shall thereafter be
              retained.
     9)       Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved, a
              Construction Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) shall be submitted to
              the Local Planning Authority for its written approval. This CEMP shall include
              details of the proposed access, parking and storage arrangements; traffic
              routing plans; named contact details; hours of construction, delivery timings;
              measures to manage the dispersal of dust and other pollution on
              neighbouring properties and the public highway; details of wheel-washing
              facilities and procedures, if proposed; and waste management protocols. The
              CEMP shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the approved
              details.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    8
Appeal Decision 6007837


     10)      Prior to the installation of any lighting equipment during construction, details
              of the proposed location, specifications and illumination levels shall first be
              submitted to the Local Planning Authority for its written approval, and the
              lighting shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the approved
              details.
     11)      Prior to the erection of any external lighting a light mitigation strategy,
              including measures to reduce light spillage onto habitats for wildlife, shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
     12)      No development shall commence until a Habitat Management and
              Maintenance Plan (HMMP), prepared in accordance with the statutory Gain
              Plan, has first been submitted to the Local Planning Authority for its written
              approval. The HMMP shall include:
              - the roles and responsibilities of the people or organisation(s) delivering the
              HMMP;
              - the planned habitat creation and enhancement works to achieve the
              minimum 10% biodiversity net gain in accordance with the approved
              Biodiversity Gain Plan;
              - the management measures to maintain the habitat in accordance with the
              approved Biodiversity Gain Plan for a period of 30-years from the completion
              of development; and
              - the monitoring methodology and frequency in respect of the created or
              enhanced habitat.
     13)      Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved, details of
              the integrated habitat features (bat / swift boxes, hedgehog highways etc)
              shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for its written approval. The
              development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the approved
              details and in any case prior to the occupation of the dwelling.
     13)      No development or site clearance shall take place until there has been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority a scheme
              of landscaping. The scheme shall include indications of all existing trees
              (including spread and species) and hedgerows on the land, identify those to
              be retained and set out measures for their protection throughout the course
              of development.
              All planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the approved details of
              landscaping shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding seasons
              following the occupation of the buildings or the completion of the
              development, whichever is the sooner; and any trees or plants which within a
              period of 5 years from the completion of the development die, are removed or
              become seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the next planting
              season with others of similar size and species.
     14)      Any vegetation removal or site clearance activities shall only be undertaken
              outside of bird nesting season (1 March to 31 August).
     15)      Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved, a LCRM
              Stage 1 Risk Assessment, Stage 2 Options Appraisal (if required) and Stage
              3 Remediation Strategy (if required) shall be submitted to the Local Planning
              Authority for its written approval. Measures identified in the Stage 3


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007837


              Remediation Strategy shall be implemented in accordance with the approved
              details, and a Verification Report shall be submitted to the Local Planning
              Authority for its written approval prior to the occupation of the first unit on the
              site.
     16)      Prior to commencement of the development hereby approved, a detailed
              surface water and foul water drainage scheme shall be submitted to the
              Local Planning Authority for its written approval and implemented prior to the
              occupation of the appeal site.
     17)      The site shall not be occupied until a water supply and electricity supply have
              been provided in accordance with schemes which have been submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.


                                           End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     10
