 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 7 August 2026
 by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6007567
 Glenmarry, Theifgate Lane, Saddlebow Norfolk PE34 3AP
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a
     refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Trevor Moses against the decision of the Borough Council of
     Kings Lynn and West Norfolk.
 •   The application reference is 26/00084/F.
 •   The development proposed is described on the Application Form as a ‘Proposed fence
     abutting highway - retrospective.’

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matter
2. The boundary treatment as described in this appeal has already been installed, as
   confirmed within the Application Form and on my site visit. As such the scheme is
   retrospective, with the Council having made their decision on this basis, and to
   which I have also.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the boundary installation upon the existing building
   and the character and appearance of the locality.
Reasons
4. The Appeal Site is located along a bend in Thiefgate Lane, a rural road with no
   street lighting or kerbs that meanders through the countryside. The appeal site
   contains a detached dwelling which is located amongst a small group of dwellings
   alongside a former farm which according to the Appellant’s Statement is now used
   for industry. The dominant characteristic of this locality is the rural experience with
   long distance views across agricultural fields and a spaciousness where even at
   the curve in Thiefgate Lane, dwellings are detached and well-spaced emphasising
   the rural character. At the bend where the appeal site and a scattering of houses
   are located, there are large mature trees along the road edge, with the front
   boundaries of the few properties adjacent to the appeal site having hedging with
   one dwelling having a low picket fence with a large hedge behind. The spacious
   and well vegetated rural character and appearance in and around dwellings
   provides some of the positive characteristics and distinctiveness of the locality.
5. In undertaking alterations to existing dwellings and associated boundaries, the
   Kings Lynn and West Norfolk Local Plan (LP) Policies LP18 and LP21 are both
   design led policies that seeks that a number of principles are adhered to such as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            1
 Appeal Decision: 6007567


     basing proposals on a thorough special qualities, context and character; providing
     good design principles appropriate to the local setting, scale and function, and
     responding to local character and landscape, amongst others. I note that the
     Council’s Decision Notice refers to LP Policy LP35 which relates specifically to
     enlargement or replacement dwellings in the countryside. The scheme for a
     boundary fence to me does not constitute an enlargement or replacement of a
     dwelling, and therefore is not relevant to this assessment.
6. Given the positive elements of the surrounding locality with the predominant
   characteristics being a rural experience consisting of vegetated and open forms;
   the use of close boarded timber fencing at 2 metres tall has a very poor and
   defensive appearance which is alien to this particular rural environment. The fence
   which has an overall length of over 20 metres gives an uncomfortable and stark
   appearance within the street scene which is very defensive in appearance which is
   completely solid. Whilst I agree that timber is a material which is used throughout
   the countryside, the approach adopted here is quite poor and has little relationship
   to the inherent rural character of the locality and would be inappropriate within this
   context.
7. I acknowledge the Appellant’s comments that hedging on adjacent properties
   screens dwellings; however, hedging and vegetation has a much softer appearance
   to a closed boarded fence when experienced along Thiefgate Lane so far that they
   do not give an urban feature as suggested by the Appellant. The fence is highly
   visible, particularly when travelling along Theifgate Lane. I can appreciate that
   permitted development rights allow a fence of 1 metre, however this is a different
   assessment whereby the fence as built is double the height. Whilst I appreciate that
   the fence will weather over time, the harm derives from the visual massing, height
   and bulk of the closed timber boarded fence which detracts from the character and
   appearance of this specific locality.
8. Consequently, and in conclusion of this matter, the combined height, design and
   visual bulk of the fence are incongruous to the character and appearance of the
   street scene and would not reinforce the qualities of local character and
   distinctiveness and would be harmful to the character and appearance of the
   building and the greater locality. This would be contrary to LP Policies LP 18 and
   LP21 as described previously.
Conclusion
9. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal be dismissed.

J Somers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
