Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 4 August 2026
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Sarah Manchester BSc MSc PhD MIEnvSc
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6007704
Cross Gaits Inn, Beverley Road, Blacko, Lancashire BB9 6RF
•          The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
           against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•          The appeal is made by John Kay against the decision of Pendle Borough Council.
•          The application Ref is 25/0646/FUL.
•          The development proposed is conversion of existing public house (Sui Generis) to 1 no. dwelling
           (Use Class C3) and associated works.
Appeal B Ref: 6007757
Cross Gaits Inn, Beverley Road, Blacko, Lancashire BB9 6RF
•          The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas)
           Act 1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•          The appeal is made by John Kay against the decision of Pendle Borough Council.
•          The application Ref is 25/0647/LBC.
•          The works proposed are conversion of existing public house (Sui Generis) to 1 no. dwelling (Use
           Class C3) and associated works.

Decision
1. Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion of existing
   public house (Sui Generis) to 1 no. dwelling (Use Class C3) and associated works
   at Cross Gaits Inn, Beverley Road, Blacko, Lancashire BB9 6RF in accordance
   with the terms of the application, Ref 25/0646/FUL, subject to the conditions set out
   in the first schedule attached below.
2. Appeal B is allowed and listed building consent is granted for conversion of existing
   public house (Sui Generis) to 1 no. dwelling (Use Class C3) and associated works
   at Cross Gaits Inn, Beverley Road, Blacko, Lancashire BB9 6RF in accordance
   with the terms of the application Ref 25/0647/LBC and the plans submitted with it
   subject to the conditions set out in the second schedule below.
Applications for costs
3. An application for an award of costs was made by John Kay against Pendle
   Borough Council. That application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
4. In November 2025, planning permission and listed building consent were dismissed
   on appeal1 for the change of use of existing grade II listed Cross Gaits pub from sui
   generis public house to C3(a) dwelling house and erection of new C3(a) dwelling
   house on existing carpark.

1
    Refs APP/E2340/W/25/3368853 and APP/E2340/Y/25/3368857

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


5. The planning application and listed building consent subject of these appeals
   similarly originally proposed the conversion of the public house to a single dwelling
   and the erection of a dwelling on the car park. However, the Council accepted
   amended plans that omitted the new dwelling on the car park. I have therefore
   adopted the agreed amended description in the banner heading above.
6. The proposal subject of these appeals also differs from the earlier dismissed
   scheme insofar as a marketing and viability assessment has been submitted to
   address the concerns of the previous Inspector.
7. As the appeal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to section 16(2)
   and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   (the Act).
8. On 17 August 2026, the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published. This is a material consideration in the determination of
   these appeals. After the hearing, the parties were provided with the opportunity to
   comment on the implications of the revised Framework to their cases and I have
   taken their comments into account. I am satisfied that the interests of neither party
   will be prejudiced by the changes to the Framework.
Main Issues
9. After the appeals were made, the Council advised of its intention to withdraw from
   the appeal against the refusal of planning permission. However, while it did not
   defend the planning application reason for refusal in the appeal, it did not withdraw
   the reason for refusal.
10. Therefore, the main issues are:
       i)       In appeal A, whether there is a clear and convincing justification for the loss
                of the public house and community facility, with particular regard to
                economic viability; and
       ii)      In Appeal A and Appeal B, whether the proposal would preserve a Grade II
                listed building “Cross Gaits Inn” (ref 1273141) (the LB) and any of the
                features of special architectural or historic interest that it possesses.
Reasons
Loss of the public house and community facility
11. The Cross Gaits Inn public house ceased trading in January 2023 and it has been
    vacant since that time. It was registered as an Asset of Community Value that
    same month. The Inn is in a prominent position at the junction of Beverley Road
    and Barnoldswick Road in the open countryside outside the settlement of Blacko.
12. Policy DM35 of the Pendle Local Plan (2021-2040) Adopted December 2025 (the
    LP) supports the change of use of a building which is already in cultural or
    community use provided accessible and similar replacement facilities are provided,
    or it is evidenced that there is no need or demand for the facility to remain in that
    use, or the existing use is no longer viable and cannot reasonably be made viable.
13. The appellant purchased the Inn in March 2023. It was previously owned by
    Admiral Taverns and operated by successive tenants who paid below market rent.
    As noted by the previous Inspector, the brewery’s decision to sell was based on

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


        historically weak food and drink sales, insufficient returns and the level of
        investment and refurbishment required. Notwithstanding, in the previous appeals,
        both the Council and the Cross Gaits Community Pub Group (CPG) argued that the
        public house was not demonstrably unviable.
14. The previous Inspector acknowledged the many and various factors that affect the
    viability of rural public houses including rates, energy costs, lifestyle and leisure
    changes, restricted local customer base and lack of passing of trading. They also
    noted that the status of the Cross Gaits Inn as a listing building and Asset of
    Community Value may deter some purchasers. They accepted that it might be the
    case that the public house use is unviable but no detailed viability appraisal had
    been provided to adequately demonstrate that.
15. The appellant has now provided a marketing and viability report (Brent Forbes,
    August 2025). This takes into account trading performance in the years before the
    public house closed, location and competition, the condition of the building and the
    estimated costs of repair and refurbishment2, and operational costs and likely
    income. It concludes that due to the lack of trade, poor layout of accommodation
    and the cost of essential repairs, the public house can no longer trade viably.
16. In its officer report, the Council raised a number of concerns including in relation to
    the market value of the premises and the high refurbishment cost, which it
    considered reflected a desirable standard of improvement rather than the minimum
    required for reopening. It accepted that a traditionally operated public house use
    may be unviable but considered that options for a more modest refurbishment
    scheme or alternative business models or diversification had not been tested. In
    this regard, it noted that CPG was prepared to buy the Inn at a reasonable price
    and considered that an alternative model based on community ownership and
    external funding offered a potentially viable path. It therefore concluded that the
    loss of the community facility was not justified.
17. However, the Council now advises that it does not dispute any of the evidence in
    the appellant’s marketing and viability report or refurbishment quote. It accepts that
    the existing use is no longer viable and cannot reasonably be made viable for the
    purposes of LP policy DM35. Each clause in policy DM35 is an alternate pathway
    by which a proposal can meet the requirements of the policy as a whole. Proposals
    are not required to meet all of the clauses. Therefore, by satisfying clause 3(c), the
    proposal accords with LP policy DM35.
18. Nevertheless, there is demand for the public house to remain, as evidenced by the
    third party representations to the applications and the appeals. Moreover, despite
    its position prior to the hearing, on the day both the Council and the CPG continue
    to argue that a community owned and operated public house could potentially be
    viable and thereby retain the community facility.
19. The previous Inspector commended CPG’s intentions but found no compelling
    evidence that its proposal for the premises was viable. Particular concerns related
    to the absence of a demonstrably robust assessment of the costs of purchase and
    renovation, the funding and the business plan. CPG has now provided further
    information in the form of a RICS valuation report3, Updated Business Plan (May
    2026), community survey and spend analysis.

2
    DS Developments, August 2025 – rough costings
3
    Dabro and Associates, March 2024. Business Buyer and Market Appraisal Valuation Report.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


20. The Inn was first marketed in November 2023 for £595,000, a figure apparently
    advised by Trevor Dawson and Pettys who are both independent local agents. This
    price was considerably above the £405,000 paid by the appellant in March 2023
    and it has not been demonstrated how either agent arrived at this higher valuation.
    Notwithstanding concerns about the initial asking price, the Inn has been nearly
    continuously marketed since November 2023 and latterly on the basis that
    substantial or reasonable offers would be considered.
21. The previous appeal decision records that there was some early interest in the
    property as a restaurant or venue, but none progressed due to concerns about the
    remoteness of the site and the costs of refurbishment. Although subsequently open
    to reasonable offers, there appears to have been little further interest and no offers
    except for those made by CPG. CPG state that an anonymous prospective
    operator was recently told by the estate agent that offers under £500,000 would not
    be considered. However, this is disputed by the appellant and neither the estate
    agent nor the anonymous person confirms it. The Council raises no concerns in
    relation to the appropriateness of the marketing and, based on the evidence, I see
    no reason to disagree.
22. The CPG RICS report provided a range of valuations depending on whether the
    premises were operating or closed in default. The lowest estimate is £295,000, but
    the RICS report considers that an achievable purchase price may well be nearer
    £350,000. CPG’s proposed purchase price of £225,000 is therefore well below
    even the lowest of the RICS valuations and the price the appellant paid for the
    property. As the previous Inspector noted, CPG’s offer of £225,000 has
    unsurprising been rejected. Even accepting that the November 2023 asking price
    was too high, there is little justification for CPG’s low proposed purchase price.
23. CPG budgets £430,000 for building refurbishment and considers a phased
    approach is feasible. In the absence of detailed costings or quotes, it is not clear
    that this figure is robust, particularly given the appellant’s refurbishment quote of
    £610,800 which is not disputed by the Council. Given the poor and deteriorating
    condition of the Inn and the need for extensive repair and refurbishment, it is also
    not clear that a phased approach could be reconciled with the need to attract the
    best operator and to provide a high quality offer from the outset to attract customers
    from outside the area who typically require a strong food offering, spacious and
    modern dining environments and children’s play equipment.
24. The CPG funding structure is based on a community share offer, grant funding and
    a loan. This would meet the total capital requirement identified by CPG but, for
    reasons set out above, this figure appears unrealistic. While there are pledges of
    support, there is little evidence that the funding structure would be adequate to
    meet the costs or that the necessary funding could be secured.
25. I acknowledge that the RICS report considers that the Inn has the potential to
    achieve a sustainable level of trade. However, this is subject to numerous caveats
    including that the very best operator would have to be found. CPG refer to an
    individual who is interested in re-opening the pub and who has put together a
    business plan. However, in the absence of details, it is not clear this anonymous
    person is suitably experienced or that their business plan is robust or aligns with
    the aspirations of CPG in terms of catering to diverse community interests.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


26. The CPG business plan projects a turnover of £277,000. This appears consistent
    with the fair maintainable trade figure in the appellant’s viability report. It is also
    within the estimated annualised survey spend of £156,420-£312,180, albeit it at the
    higher end of the range. The five-year turnover and operating cost projections
    illustrate a profit, but the trading assumptions revenue and operating cost
    projections appear to differ from those in the five-year turnover projections. CPG
    includes annual tenancy rent in the first year, although the RICS report advises that
    the new tenant would reasonably expect a rent free period. The projections also
    assume the venture would be profitable from year 1, whereas the RICS report
    notes the business would be starting from a nil base and the period where the
    business achieves break-even should be considered.
27. CPG’s loan repayment would be serviced from rental income, discussed above,
    and field income. However, it is not clear that the costs of initial set up of a secure
    dog walking facility have been accounted for or that planning permission for a dog
    walking field would be granted. There is also little detail in relation to how the dog
    walking field would operate, including in terms of pricing or its compatibility with the
    operation of the public house community facility.
28. Based on the evidence before me, the reopening of the Cross Gaits Inn as a
    community owned facility would depend upon CPG acquiring the building for a
    below market price and the necessary repair and refurbishment works falling within
    its budget. However, there is considerable uncertainty around the capital
    requirement and funding. There is little compelling evidence that CPG could
    purchase the Cross Gaits Inn and refurbish it to the high standard required to
    re-open as a destination venue to which customers would regularly travel. Nor am I
    persuaded that CPG could attract an operator with the requisite business and
    hospitality experience or that an operator was involved in the preparation of the
    business plan.
29. CPG has clearly expended time and effort to flesh out its case and I have no doubt
    that it wants to purchase the Inn and run it as a successful community facility.
    However, by its own admission it does not contend that acquisition is imminent, that
    funding is secured, or that a tenant has been appointed. It explicitly states that it
    does not contend that reopening let alone future success is guaranteed.
30. I understand that community owned public houses operate successfully elsewhere.
    However, there is little evidence before me that any are directly comparable to the
    Cross Gaits Inn including in terms of its somewhat isolated location and
    accessibility, facilities, condition, and the repair and refurbishment costs associated
    with a listed building. Community facilities elsewhere do not provide a justification
    to dismiss the appeals.
31. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal demonstrates that the existing use of the
    Cross Gaits Inn as a public house is no longer viable and cannot reasonably be
    made so. In the absence of compelling evidence to the contrary, there is a clear
    and convincing justification for the proposed change of use and thereby loss of the
    public house and community facility. As such, the proposal would be in accordance
    with the relevant requirements of LP Policy DM35. It would also accord with policy
    HC6 of the Framework in relation to there being no reasonable prospect of the use
    being retained because it is no longer viable.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


The designated heritage asset
32. The Cross Gaits Inn is a rural public house dating from the 18th century, as
    illustrated by the inscribed AD 1736 datestone above the doorway. It is a 2-storey
    coursed rubble building with a stone slate roof. Its square headed doorway is
    accessed via 7 stone steps and its front elevation features 3 modern square
    windows to the ground floor with 3 3-light flat stone mullion windows above. A
    blocked doorway between the left hand ground floor windows suggests the public
    house was historically 2 dwellings.
33. The rear elevation has been altered through 19th and 20th century extensions and
    the LB has also been extensively altered internally. Few original historic features
    remain but include structural timbers, occasional door frames, the strap hinge and
    pintle to the replacement front door, timber filleted ceilings, and decorative wall
    treatment with stag’s head in the lobby. Given the above, and insofar as relevant to
    the appeals, I find that the special interest of the LB is primarily associated with its
    historic fabric and form, vernacular architecture and visible evidence of earlier
    residential use, and its long history of public house use.
34. The proposed conversion of the building to a single residential dwelling would
    involve both internal and external alterations. As noted by the previous Inspector,
    internal alterations would be kept to a minimum and repairs would be like for like
    but there would be some loss of historic fabric. However, the removal of the
    unsympathetic later extensions would better reveal the historic building, and the
    protection and retention of the remaining internal historic features could be secured
    through the imposition of planning conditions.
35. Nevertheless, the loss of the long-standing public house use would erode the
    special interest of the LB, which in large part derives from its historic function as a
    focal point for the community. The historic and communal value of the LB would be
    significantly diminished because it would not be possible to experience the Cross
    Gaits Inn as a historic public house. The loss of the public house use would
    therefore harm the designated heritage asset. Given the above, I find that the
    proposal would fail to preserve the special interest of the listed building.
36. Policy HE6 of the Framework advises that when considering the potential effect of
    a development on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial
    weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE5 advises that in
    making the assessment, it is the effect on a heritage asset’s significance rather
    than the scale of development which should be considered. The degree of harm
    would be limited because the building, its principal historic form and most surviving
    features would be retained, while the loss relates principally to the experiential and
    communal value associated with its historic public house use. Even so, as directed
    by the Framework, I give this harm considerable importance and weight in the
    planning balance of these appeals.
37. At the time of the hearing, paragraph 215 of the superseded Framework required
    that less than substantial harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset
    should be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal including, where
    appropriate, securing its optimum viable use. Accordingly, the hearing explored the
    parties’ positions in relation to what would be the optimum viable use of the LB.
38. However, paragraph 215 has been replaced by policy HE6 of the 2026 Framework.
    This requires that where a proposal would harm the significance of a designated

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


     heritage asset, the effect should be weighed against any public benefits resulting
     from the proposal. It advises that important public benefits can include securing the
     long-term reuse of a vacant or underused listed building, and enabling energy
     efficiency and low carbon heating measures. Notably, reference to optimum viable
     use has been removed.
39. The Cross Gaits Inn has been empty for well over 3 years and it is in a poor and
    deteriorating state of repair. Its use as a dwelling would enable its sensitive repair
    and renovation and it would secure the long-term conservation of the heritage
    asset. This would be an important public benefit. The removal of the unsympathetic
    rear extensions to better reveal the historic building would be a public benefit. While
    there is rudimentary accommodation above the public house, the proposed family
    dwelling house would contribute to the supply of housing. There would be
    short-term economic benefits during works and future occupiers would support
    local services and facilities in nearby villages and towns. While the proposal would
    be a single dwelling, nevertheless the contribution to the supply of housing and the
    economic and social benefits would be public benefits.
40. The harm to the listed building relates primarily to the loss of the historic public
    house use. However, on the basis that the existing use of the building as a public
    house is not viable and it cannot reasonably be made so, the loss of the historic
    and communal value cannot reasonably be avoided. There is agreement that the
    visible evidence of an earlier dwelling house use contributes to the special interest
    of the listed building. Given the demonstrated lack of a reasonable prospect of
    retaining the public house use, residential use is compatible with the building’s
    early historic use and provides a realistic means of securing its conservation.
    Consequently, while the benefits may appear individually modest, I find that
    collectively they are sufficient to outweigh the harm to the significance of the
    listed building.
41. Given the above I conclude that, having applied the statutory duty, the development
    plan and the Framework, the proposal would preserve the special historic interest
    of the Grade II listed building. This would satisfy the requirements of the Act,
    paragraph HE6 of the Framework 2026 and would not conflict with LP policies
    SP11, DM16 and DM18 which seek, among other things, to conserve and enhance
    heritage assets, respect the form of existing buildings and promote local character
    and distinctiveness. As a result, the proposal would be in accordance with the
    development plan.
Conditions
42. The Council suggested conditions in the event that the appeals were allowed. I
    have considered these against the tests set out in the Framework 2026 and they
    were discussed at the hearing.
43. In respect of both appeals, I have imposed conditions specifying the time limits and
    approved plans in the interests of certainty.
44. In respect of Appeal A, condition No 3 (details of external materials) and condition
    No 5 (landscaping) are necessary in the interests of the character and appearance
    of the building and the area. Condition No 4 is necessary in the interests of tree
    protection. Conditions No 6 (construction method statement), No 7 (restriction on
    deliveries) and No 8 (parking spaces and turning areas) are necessary to protect
    amenity and highway safety. Conditions No 9 (cycle storage) and No 10 (electric

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


     vehicle charging point) are necessary in the interests of sustainable transport and
     the character and appearance of the building. Condition No 11 (external lighting) is
     necessary to safeguard the character and appearance of the building.
45. However, I have not attached the Council’s suggested condition requiring a
    preliminary bat roost and barn owl assessment. This is because there is no
    evidence to suggest that there are bat roosts or barn owls in the building or that
    these species would be affected by the development. Hence, such a condition
    would not pass the Framework in relation to being necessary and related to the
    development. Notwithstanding, the appellant and all site workers should be aware
    that the legislative protection afforded to bats and their roosts applies at all times.
46. In respect of Appeal B, in addition to time limits and plans conditions, conditions No
    3 (window details), No 4 (details of repair, alteration and demolition), No 5 (building
    recording) and No 6 (retention of historic fabric and features) are necessary to
    protect the special architectural and historic interest of the listed building.
Conclusion
47. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal under Appeal A is in
    accordance with the development plan and in accordance with Policy S3 of the
    Framework and it should be allowed subject to the conditions in the attached
    schedule 1. In addition, Appeal B should be allowed subject to the conditions in the
    attached schedule 2.



Sarah Manchester
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


APPEARANCES

For the appellant

Mr John Kay (appellant)
Mr Freddie Humphreys (Barrister)
Ms Janine Dykes BA (Hons) MSc IHBC (Heritage)
Mr Brent Forbes BSc MRICS (Viability)
Mr Daniel Connolly BA (Hons) Dip TP MRTPI (Planning)

For the Council

Ms Laura Barnes BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI (Senior Planning Officer)
Ms Bethan Frost MSc IHBC (Heritage Consultant)

Interested parties

The Cross Gaits Inn Community Pub Group (objecting)
Mr Nicholas Livesey (neutral local resident)




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


Schedules of Conditions


Schedule 1

    1. The proposed development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration
       of three years from the date of this permission.

    2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans: 23.113_04_101A (location plan); 23.113_04_103D
       (proposed site plan); 23.113_03_105A (proposed ground floor plan);
       23.113_03_106A (proposed first floor plan); 23.113_03_107A (proposed south
       and west elevations); 23.113_03_108A (proposed north and east elevations);
       BTC3075-TCP (tree constraints plan).

    3. Notwithstanding any indication on the approved plans and application form, prior
       to any external works commencing, samples of all the external materials and
       finishes to be used on the elevations and roof shall be submitted to and approved
       in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall thereafter be
       carried out in strict accordance with the approved materials.

    4. The development hereby approved shall be carried out in strict accordance with
        the recommendations of the Arboricultural Constraints Appraisal (Bowland Tree
        Consultancy Ltd, October 2024) and BTC3075-TCP (tree constraints plan). The
        protective fencing shall be maintained during the period of construction.

    5. The development hereby permitted shall not be commenced until a detailed
        landscaping scheme has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority. The scheme shall be submitted at a scale of 1:200 and shall
        include the following:

              a. the exact location and species of all existing trees and other planting to be
                 retained;
              b. all proposals for new planting and turfing indicating the location,
                 arrangement, species, sizes, specifications, numbers and planting
                 densities;
              c. an outline specification for ground preparation;
              d. all proposed boundary treatments with supporting elevations and
                 construction details;
              e. all proposed hard landscape elements and pavings, including layout,
                 materials and colours;
              f. the proposed arrangements and specifications for initial establishment
                 maintenance and long-term maintenance of all planted and/or turfed areas.

         The approved scheme shall be implemented in its entirety within the first planting
         season following the substantial completion of the development. Any tree or other
         planting that is lost, felled, removed, uprooted, dead, dying or diseased, or is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


         substantially damaged within a period of five years thereafter shall be replaced
         with a specimen of similar species and size, during the first available planting
         season following the date of loss or damage.

    6. Prior to the commencement of development, a construction method statement
       shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning which shall
       include the following:
           a. the parking of vehicles of site-operatives and visitors;
           b. loading and unloading of plant and materials;
           c. storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development;
           d. the erection and maintenance of security hoardings including decorative
              displays, where appropriate;
           e. wheel-washing facilities;
           f. measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during construction;
           g. a scheme for re-cycling/disposing of waste resulting from demolition and
              construction works;
           h. hours of operation;
           i. measures to control noise and vibration.

         The development shall proceed strictly in accordance with the approved method
         statement.

    7. No Heavy Goods Vehicle (HGV) deliveries associated with the construction of the
       development hereby approved shall be made to or from the site outside the hours
       of 09:00 and 14:30 on any day.

    8. Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, the parking and
       turning areas shown on the approved plans shall be constructed, surfaced and
       made available for use. The parking spaces and turning areas shall thereafter
       always remain unobstructed and available for parking and turning purposes.

    9. Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, details of secure
       and covered cycle storage for a minimum of two cycles shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved cycle storage
       shall be installed and made available for use prior to first occupation and shall
       thereafter be retained for that purpose.

    10. Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, details of an electric
        vehicle charging point shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority. The charging point must have a minimum power rating output
        of 7kW and be fitted with a universal socket that can charge all types of electric
        vehicle currently available.

    11. Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, an external lighting
        scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority. The scheme shall include the location, height, design, specification,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


         luminance levels, direction and angle of illumination of all lighting. The lighting
         shall thereafter be installed, operated and maintained strictly in accordance with
         the approved details, and no additional external lighting shall be installed without
         the prior written approval of the Local Planning Authority.

End of Schedule 1




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


Schedule 2

    1. The works hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of three years
        from the date of this permission.

    2. The works hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the following
        approved plans: 23.113_04_101A (location plan); 23.113_04_103D (proposed
        site plan); 23.113_03_105A (proposed ground floor plan); 23.113_03_106A
        (proposed first floor plan); 23.113_03_107A (proposed south and west
        elevations); 23.113_03_108A (proposed north and east elevations); BTC3075-
        TCP (tree constraints plan).

    3. The works hereby approved shall not be commenced until detailed plans and
       sections of the proposed and altered windows and doors (internal and external) at
       a scale not less than 1:20 (and including details of all mouldings, transoms,
       mullions and opening mechanisms, and proposed finishes) have been submitted
       to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The works shall
       thereafter be carried out in accordance with the approved details.

    4. The works hereby approved shall not be commenced until a detailed schedule
       and methodology for all proposed repair, alteration and demolition works to the
       exterior and interior of the building, shall be submitted to and approved in writing
       by the Local Planning Authority. The submitted details shall include, detailed
       plans, sections and elevations, with the details of the extent and method of any
       demolition or removal of fabric, repair techniques, proposed materials and
       finishes, and details of any proposed thermal, acoustic or other upgrading works,
       including how such works would be fixed, ventilated and integrated with the
       existing historic fabric. The works shall thereafter be carried out in accordance
       with the approved details.

    5. The works hereby approved shall not be commenced until a Level 2 descriptive
       record of the listed building has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
       Local Planning Authority. The recording shall be undertaken by a suitably qualified
       heritage professional and shall include, as a minimum, a written description,
       photographic record, measured survey, and a record of all historic fabric, fixtures,
       fittings or features.

    6. All historic fabric, fixtures, fittings and features identified as contributing to the
       special architectural or historic interest of the listed building shall be retained in
       situ and shall not be removed, altered, covered, concealed, repaired, refinished,
       relocated or otherwise disturbed.
       For the avoidance of doubt, this includes but is not limited to: the hand-hewn joists
       and purlins, moulded door frames, hooks in the ceiling of the south-easterly room,
       timber filleted ceilings at ground floor level, the door frame to the internal lobby at
       ground floor level, the strap hinge and pintle to the replacement front door, the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decisions 6007704 and 6007757


         stag’s head attached to the west wall in the lobby, and the decorative treatment to
         the walls in the lobby.
         A scheme for the protection of the historic features from damage during the course
         of the works shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
         Authority prior to the commencement of the works hereby approved. The works
         shall be carried out fully in accordance with the approved protection measures.

    End of Schedule 2




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
