Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 July 2026
by A Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007403
Land south of Morkery Lane, Castle Bytham, Grantham NG33 4SP
      •       The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
              amended) against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
     •        The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Bradley against the decision of South Kesteven District
              Council.
     •        The application Ref is S25/1902.
     •        The development is a proposed residential development for up to 3 dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr & Mrs Bradley against South Kesteven
   District Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. I have taken the site address in the banner heading above from the Decision Notice
   of the Council as it describes the location of the site in a more precise manner than
   that on the Application Form.
4. The appeal scheme relates to an outline proposal, with all matters reserved for
   future consideration. While a proposed site plan has been provided, the appellant
   has confirmed that this is indicative. I have considered the appeal accordingly.
5. The appeal was submitted with new information, in the form of a Visual Impact
   Assessment (VIA) and a revised indicative site plan. This new evidence seeks to
   the address the reason for refusal. It does not substantially alter the proposal and,
   as the appeal parties have had an opportunity to comment on it through the appeal
   process, consideration of it would not give rise to procedural unfairness. I have
   therefore had regard to this evidence in my decision.
6. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
   appeal have been amended. As a result, parties have been provided with an
   opportunity to make further submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the
   Framework where relevant in this appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007403


Main Issue
7.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the surrounding area, including the setting of Castle Bytham Conservation Area
       (CA).
Reasons
8. The appeal site adjoins the settlement boundary of Castle Bytham, the boundary of
   the CA and the boundaries of Nos 2-8 Cumberland Gardens (evens). It
   compromises an irregular shaped parcel of land that is part of a larger field, with no
   boundary treatment along the northern edge of the site. There is an area of
   woodland located to the west and Morkery Lane to the east. This is an unlit rural
   road with narrow grass verges either side and no pedestrian footpath.
9. The Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the conservation of
   heritage assets. Any harm to, or loss of, the significance of a designated heritage
   asset (including from development within its setting), should require clear and
   convincing justification.
10. The CA encompasses the whole settlement of Castle Bytham, including some
    surrounding fields. It has an entirely rural setting within an undulating landscape
    characterised by large fields enclosed by hedgerows with deciduous ancient
    woodlands and commercial plantations occupying the higher ground. The Castle
    Bytham Conservation Area Appraisal (May 2010) (CBCAA) explains that the village
    has developed along the floor and western hillside of the Glen Brook Valley. The
    eastern hillside is dominated by the earthwork remains of a Norman castle.
11. Buildings are generally constructed of limestone with clay pantile or Collyweston
    slate roofs which reflect the vernacular architectural character of the village and
    contribute to the harmonious street scene. The significance of the CA, insofar as it
    relates to this appeal, derives from the verdant rural setting and consistency of
    buildings both in terms of their scale, detailed design and materials.
12. Low density residential development within Cumberland Gardens is located directly
    to the south of the appeal site. This is a relatively modern cul-de-sac development
    that is green and spacious and is consequently less dense than the more historic
    parts of the CA. The northern boundary of Nos 2-8, abutting the appeal site, is
    positioned at the peak of a slope and is well defined by a mix of hedgerows and
    trees, providing a definitive edge to the settlement.
13. The indicative layout shows that the three proposed dwellings would be spread
    across the appeal site in relatively sporadic manner delivering a low-density
    development. Whilst this would not be dissimilar to the adjacent Cumberland
    Gardens, given that the site slopes down away from the village the development
    would give the impression of built form ‘spilling over’ the current settlement edge
    into the wider countryside. The development would be highly prominent when
    viewed from Morkery Lane as road users head south towards the village and also
    from the public right of way located to the north of the appeal site. The proposal
    would be an obtrusive extension of the village into the countryside in an
    unsympathetic manner. This would detract from the current attractive rural setting
    of Castle Bytham and its contribution to the significance of the CA.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007403


14. To minimise any harm the inclusion of soft landscaping along the northern
    boundary has been suggested. However, this would further block views into the
    Conservation Area and reduce views towards the woodland and dismantled railway
    line which is identified as a key view within the CBCAA. Furthermore, given the
    outline nature of the proposal no detailed landscaping scheme has been presented.
15. Whilst access is reserved for future consideration, it has been indicatively
    suggested that it would be provided from Morkery Lane which would require the
    removal of a section of hedgerow. By virtue of the level of separation, this access
    would feel disconnected from the remainder of the village which adds to the
    incongruous nature of the development. It is noted that the inclusion of a pedestrian
    footpath linking to the village has been suggested but no details have been
    provided, therefore no meaningful weight can be given to this.
16. The proposal introduces development beyond the boundary of the CA which would
    be highly prominent thereby eroding the rural character of Morkery Lane. Whilst the
    scale and layout is not confirmed at the stage, the development will also impact on
    views into the CA. Given that the green rural landscape is integral to the wider
    setting of the CA and accounting for the outline nature of the proposal, it would
    cause harm to the setting of this designated heritage asset.
17. While the submitted Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA) suggests that there would
    be a neutral impact on the setting of the CA, this does not adequately take into
    account the topography of the site and the importance of a green edge to the CA.
18. The submitted Visual Impact Assessment (VIA) concludes that after 15 years with
    an appropriate design and landscaping scheme the development would will restate
    its current function as the soft definition of the settlement and CA and thereby have
    a neutral impact. The VIA does not adequately address the importance of the
    topography of the parcel of land and the extensive landscaping proposed would
    merely block views into the Conservation Area.
19. I conclude that the proposal materially harms the character and appearance of the
    area, including the setting of the CA. The development is contrary to Policies SP4,
    EN1, EN6, and DE1 of the South Kesteven District Council Local Plan 2011-2036
    (January 2020). Amongst other matters, these policies set out that edge of
    settlement developments should not obtrusively extend into the open countryside
    but should be appropriate to the landscape character of the area, protect and
    enhance heritage assets and their settings and ensure that high quality design is
    achieved.
20. Policy HE6 of the Framework states that where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. In this case the proposal would deliver three additional houses,
    contributing to housing supply where there is unmet need and supporting the
    Framework’s objective of substantially increasing the supply of homes. The
    development would also provide economic benefits during both the construction
    phase and in future occupation. However, given the proposal is for just three
    dwellings, the benefits would be modest in extent and would not outweigh the harm
    identified to the setting of the CA.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007403


Planning Balance and Conclusion
21. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development outside settlements, this means that policy S5 of
    the Framework should be applied.
22. Policy S5 sets out that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements, these are listed under criteria (a)-(j). In this case criterion (j) is
    relevant as the Council does not currently have a 5-year housing land supply.
    However, criterion (j)(i) goes on to state that developments should be physically
    well-related to an existing settlement. For the reasons set out above, the proposal
    would detract from the current attractive rural setting of Castle Bytham and its
    contribution to the significance of the CA. The development would thus not be
    physically well-related to the existing settlement. Accordingly, the proposal is not
    supported by criterion (j)(i), nor does it fall within any of the other listed criteria.
23. Where a development proposal does not fall within one of the categories set out in
    Policy S5, it should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects. As set
    out above, the contribution to the housing supply and economic benefits would be
    modest. These benefits would not substantially outweigh the identified adverse
    effects to the CA and there are therefore no exceptional circumstances in this case.
24. Consequently, the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out within Policy S3 of the Framework.
25. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore,
    the appeal is dismissed.

A Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
