Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by L Clark BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9th September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6007494
47-65 Seven Sisters Road, London N7 6BH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 20, Class AB of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Geo Group Property Investments Ltd. against the decision of the Council of
     the London Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/2894/PRA.
•    The development proposed is Prior Approval Application Under Schedule 2, Part 20, Class AB of
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 2015 (As Amended) relating to
     the construction of a two-storey vertical extension to provide 16 new residential flats (12 x Studio
     Units & 4 x 1-Bed Units).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Geo Group Property Investment Ltd against
       the Council of the London Borough of Islington. This application is subject of a
       separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. The planning application form relies upon the Covering Letter and Planning
   Statement for the description of development. In my mind, this does not provide a
   clear description of the proposed works and, for the sake of clarity, I have used the
   description of development detailed on the Decision Notice. This more accurately
   describes the proposal and ensures that it accurately captures the scope of the
   proposal.
4. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised in August
   2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of the main parties were
   prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the changes, and this has
   informed my determination of the appeal.
5. The appellant has requested I consider changes which include amended floor plans
   and elevations of the appeal site showing the proposed development without side
   windows1, Floor and Roof Plans and Elevations and Cross Sections associated with
   1 Axminster Road2 (No 1), and an updated Daylight, Sunlight & Overshadowing
   Assessment, undertaken by NRG Consulting Report dated February 20263.

1
  799 CDA ZZ XX DR A 05-0102 Rev 4, 799 CDA ZZ XX DR A 05-0200- Rev 4, 799 CDA ZZ XX DR A 05-0201 Rev 4 and 799 CDA
ZZ XX DR A 05-0202 Rev 05
2
  35246 MBS Rev 1 Sheet 7 and 35246 MBS Rev 1 Sheet 8
3
  Reference: PP2626/SSR/DL/202602-AV

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007494


6.     With regard to the amended plans and side windows, on the 2 December the
       Council wrote to the applicant highlighting the presence of the side windows and
       the wording of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development)
       (England) Order 2015, as amended (the GPDO). The applicant subsequently
       submitted amended plans on 4 December, omitting windows in any wall or roof
       slope forming a side elevation. Amended plans were received by the Council prior
       to the determination of the application on the 8 December. For that reason, I am
       satisfied there would be no procedural unfairness to anyone involved in the appeal,
       including those consulted on the original application. I have therefore determined
       the appeal on the basis of submitted plans.
7.     With regard to No 1, these plans support the appellant’s Daylight, Sunlight &
       Overshadowing Assessment dated May 2025 with regard to the relationship
       between windows and habitable rooms. I have considered the proposed changes
       taking into consideration the tests on Holborn Studios Ltd4. Given that the updated
       plans do not involve a fundamental change to those considered by the Council, I
       am satisfied there would be no procedural unfairness to anyone involved in the
       appeal, including those consulted on the original application. I have therefore
       determined the appeal on the basis of submitted plans.
8.     With regard to the updated Daylight, Sunlight & Overshadowing Assessment (the
       Assessment), this has been submitted in support of the appeal and includes,
       amongst other things, floorplans relating to No 1, updated unit numbers5 and
       updated target illuminance factors for each unit. I have considered the proposed
       changes taking into consideration the tests on Holborn Studios Ltd. Whilst the
       procedural guide6 advises that the appeal process should not be used to evolve a
       scheme, the updated assessment and target illuminance factors support the
       amended plan which was before the Council at the time it took its decision. I am
       therefore satisfied that in my acceptance of this there would be no procedural
       unfairness to anyone involved in the appeal, including those consulted on the
       original application. I have therefore determined the appeal on the basis of the
       assessment dated February 2026.
9. I am mindful that the original Daylight and Sunlight Assessment7 referred to 17
   units, whilst the proposed development is for 16 units. In doing so it omitted unit 9.
   While the updated assessment8 now mainly uses the same unit numbers as those
   shown on the submitted plans, it does retain unit 17 but the proposed development
   still relates to 16 units. Given unit 17 follows unit 4.7, I have taken unit 17 to be unit
   4.8.
10. The Council refers to policies of the development plan, however the principle of
    development is established through the grant of permission by the GPDO. I am
    required to assess the proposal as a prior approval application as set out within the
    parameters of the GPDO. Regard can be given to development plan policies insofar
    as they are material considerations; however, they are not in themselves
    determinative.



4
  Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin)
55
   Page 15
6
  Procedural Guide: Planning appeals - England
7
  May 2025
8




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
Appeal Decision 6007494


Background and Main Issue
11. Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 20, Class AB of the GDPO permits development
    consisting of works for the construction of new dwellinghouses immediately above the
    topmost storey on a terrace building in commercial or mixed use, subject to limitations
    and conditions.
12. Paragraph AB.2(1) requires the developer to apply to the local planning authority for
    prior approval as to, amongst other matters, the transport and highway impacts of the
    development, the provision of adequate natural light in all habitable rooms of the new
    dwellinghouses, the impacts of the introduction of, or an increase in, a residential use
    on the carrying on of any trades, business.
13. Paragraph B.(3) of the procedure for applications for prior approval under Part 20 in
    the GPDO (the GPDO procedure) sets out that the local planning authority may refuse
    an application where, in the opinion of the authority — (a) the proposed development
    does not comply with, or (b) the developer has provided insufficient information to
    enable the authority to establish whether the proposed development complies with,
    any conditions, limitations or restrictions specified in this Part as being applicable to
    the development in question.
14. The main issue in this appeal is whether the proposal would be permitted
    development under Schedule 2, Part 20, Class AB of the GDPO.
Reasons
15. The appeal site (Nos 47-65) comprises a three-storey building which extends from
    Axminster Road to Salterton Road. The ground floor is predominantly commercial,
    with two floors above mainly comprising of flats. From the evidence before me there
    are pedestrian access points from Seven Sisters Road, Axminster Road and Salterton
    Road to the residential units above. While access to the commercial units is largely
    from the front onto Seven Sisters Road, I did see doors within the rear elevation. The
    rear elevation is accessed from Axminster Road and via a rear lane. Whilst the rear
    lane had gates, these were in the open position9 at the time of my site visit. There was
    no signage indicating any restrictions on the use of the rear lane and I was able to
    walk down its full length.
16. I saw that one door to the commercial units was open and signage on another door
    referred to it being a fire exit. The location and signage on these doors lead me to
    believe that these are likely secondary doors and used ancillary to the main access to
    the front.
17. There were two vehicles parked in the lane at the time of my site visit, together with a
    number of large and domestic scale refuse bins, a cage containing three barrels, and
    a significant amount of detritus including several binbags and a discarded shopping
    trolley. I saw that the lane also provides access to three roller shutter doors. During
    my site visit a vehicle turned up and parked at an angle between the existing vehicles,
    and its occupant proceeded to walk out of the access gates. All vehicles remaining in
    situ for the duration of my visit.
18. I also saw a number of recessed doorways which, from my reading of the Proposed
    Plan10, shows these to be associated with the rear access to the residential units

9
    Site visit undertaken mid-afternoon on a weekday.
10
     799 CDA ZZ XX DR A 05 0100 Rev 01


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6007494


        above. Each of these doorways and recessed areas were significantly obstructed by
        discarded commercial and domestic paraphernalia.
19. Traffic movement on Seven Sisters Road is one-way (northeast bound), with the road
    comprising two lanes of vehicle traffic, one of which is clearly marked as a Bus Lane,
    and an area separated by bollards for bicycles. Parking restrictions are also in place
    on Axminster Road and Salterton Road which include additional controls on match
    days.
Transport and highway impacts
20. Paragraph B.(5) of the GPDO procedure sets out that where the application relates to
    transport and highway impacts, where the local planning authority on receipt of the
    application is in the opinion that the development is likely to result in a material
    increase or a material change in the character of traffic in the vicinity of the site, it
    must consult, amongst other things (b) the highway authority or the local highway
    authority.
21. Policy TR4 of the Framework sets out that development should contribute to creating
    well-designed places, transport considerations should be integral to the design of
    development. Criteria 1.d. sets out that proposals should allow for the efficient delivery
    of goods, and ease of access by service and emergency vehicles, in ways which do
    not compromise key place-making principles (set out in policy DP3(2)).
22. Policy DP3 of the Framework relates to well-designed places. Without anything to the
    contrary from either party, in my mind, criteria d. is relevant to this main issue. This
    requires development to provide transport infrastructure and choices which support
    the design vision for the site, provide good connections to the wider settlement (or
    those nearby), and prioritise walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport.
23. Policy TR3 criteria 1.c. of the Framework sets out that any significant adverse impacts
    from the development on the transport network (in terms of capacity and congestion),
    or on highway safety, should be mitigated to an acceptable degree using a vision-led
    approach.
24. Moreover, Policy TR6 of the Framework requires that development proposals should
    be refused if they would have a severe adverse impact on the transport network (in
    terms of capacity and congestion, including cumulative impacts), or an unacceptable
    impact on highway safety, taking into account any mitigation measures proposed as
    well as any wider network improvements, including measures to support sustainable
    patterns of movement.
25. I saw that signage the same side as the appeal site on Seven Sisters Road, indicates
    that it is a Red Route with no stopping between the hours of 7am - 7pm Mon – Sat,
    except between 7am - 1pm where loading can take place for a maximum of 20 mins
    and disabled parking for a maximum of 3 hours.
26. The Council sets out Transport for London (TfL) as the local highway authority and as
    such consulted them on the proposed development. The appellant describes the
    existing appeal site to comprise a mix of commercial units and residential units11. The
    consultation response from TfL described the creation of 16 new residential units
    would likely generate increased traffic in the vicinity of the site and it sought further


11
     Approximately 13 units on the first and second floor.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                     4
Appeal Decision 6007494


        details with regard to delivery and servicing giving the reason for its request as to
        minimise transport impacts and ensure highway safety on the network.
27. I travelled to the appeal site via public transport (bus). While I was on route a Luton
    type van was parked outside the appeal site in the Bus Lane. I saw that the use of the
    Bus Lane for loading/unloading resulted in it having to wait for a space in the traffic
    before being able to pull out to overtake and carry on its route. This held up not only
    my bus but others behind and vehicles in the free lane which stopped to allow the
    overtaking.
28. The appellant contends that existing deliveries take place from the carriageway on
    Seven Sisters Road, Axminster Road and Salterton Road and not the rear. They also
    consider the existing servicing strategy for the existing residential units to be sufficient
    for the proposed development. The appellant offers no mitigation in their Transport
    Statement Technical Note12 (the Transport Statement), with regard to domestic
    servicing such as online deliveries.
29. Taking my observations together with the concerns of TfL, I have little before me to
    persuade me that the cumulative impact of servicing and delivery to/from the
    additional 16 units would not result in an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
30. With regard to the location and type of cycle parking, the submitted plan13 shows that
    this would be at the rear and would comprise of approximately 16 outdoor cycle
    parking racks, 1 Cargo/non-standard parking space and 3 accessible cycle parking
    spaces.
31. I am mindful of paragraph B. (18) of the GPDO procedure sets out that the local
    planning authority may grant prior approval unconditionally or subject to conditions
    reasonably related to the subject matter of the prior approval. Therefore, even if the
    proposed cycle parking would not be accessible to all, I am satisfied that the matter of
    the type of cycle parking spaces could be addressed by a suitably worded condition if
    I were minded to allow the appeal.
32. I conclude that whilst the proposed development could provide suitably accessible
    cycle provision, the appellant has not demonstrated that the transport and highway
    impacts of the development with regard to servicing would not comprise the network
    efficiency or increase congestion which cumulatively would have a harmful effect on
    highway safety. The proposed development therefore fails to comply with paragraph
    AB.2(1)(a) of the GPDO. In this respect, the proposal would also conflict with policies
    TR3 and TR4 of the Framework, which seeks to ensure that transport considerations
    should be integral to the design of development, and that any significant adverse
    impacts from the development on the transport network (in terms of capacity and
    congestion), or on highway safety should be mitigated to an acceptable degree using
    a vision-led approach.
Impact on Trade and Business
33. The Council contend that the location and detailed design of the cycle parking would
    leave only a small amount of space for servicing to the rear of the building,
    potentially blocking the southern end of the access road from vehicular access, and
    that servicing vehicles may also block access to the cycle parking, particularly the
    accessible spaces.
12
     Kronen dated May 2025.
13
     799 DCA ZZ XX DR A 20 0100 Rev 02


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
Appeal Decision 6007494


34. The appellant’s Transport Statement states that the existing ground floor
    commercial space has, amongst other matters, vehicle access serving a rear
    service road from/to Axminster Road. This would correspond with the Land
    Registry14 details submitted by the appellant which show commercial units Nos 55,
    57 and 59 have additional land/buildings beyond the rear lane. Those areas marked
    on the submitted plans were in the approximate location of the roller shutters I saw
    on site.
35. Whilst I note that the appellant describes access to the rear service road as
    restricted, I have found above that the gates were open which allowed unrestricted
    access. I have also found that there was also no longer any signage outside the site
    restricting access, as shown in the appellant’s Google Street View imagery15. Even
    with signage displayed outside the site, as shown in three out of four of the Google
    Street View images, the gates in these images are open and, in all images, there
    are vehicles parked within the rear service road. Moreover, the 2016 image shows
    cars parked alongside each other with the likelihood of completely blocking further
    access. The appellant offers little explanation to the presence of those vehicles.
36. Even if new gates could be installed to restrict access, the location of the cycle
    parking would likely restrict the width of the rear lane. I have little before me to
    demonstrate what the additional land/buildings associated with the commercial units
    Nos 55, 57 and 59 is used for. I therefore cannot be certain whether the reduction in
    lane width would impact the carrying out of any trade associated with these
    commercial units.
37. I have considered the appellant’s suggestion that a Delivery and Servicing Plan
    could be dealt with by condition, however, given my observations and from the
    evidence before me and without anything to the contrary, I am not persuaded that
    otherwise unacceptable development could be made acceptable through the use of
    a condition.
38. I conclude that the appellant has not demonstrated that the location of the proposed
    cycle provision would not negatively impact the carrying out of any trade, business,
    or other use of land in the area. The proposed development fails to comply with
    AB.2(1) (i) of the GPDO and, in this respect, the proposal would not accord with
    policies TR3 and TR4 of the Framework which seek to ensure that transport
    considerations should be integral to the design of development.
Floor to ceiling height and inclusion of side windows.
39. Given that I have accepted the appellant’s amended plans which show the omission
    of side windows, the proposed development complies with paragraph AB.2(3) of the
    GPDO.
40. The GPDO within Section 3. – Permitted Development paragraph 9A (b) outlines,
    that Schedule 2 does not grant permission for, or authorise any development of, any
    new dwellinghouse, that does not comply with the Nationally Described Space
    Standard (NDSS) issued by the Department for Communities and Local
    Government on 27th March 201516.



14
   Title numbers AGL283805, AGL286487 and AGL352861, Ordinance Survey map ref TQ3086SE
15
   Dated 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017
16
   "Technical housing standards – nationally described space standard"


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          6
Appeal Decision 6007494


41. Plan 799 CDA ZZ XX DR A 01 040017 shows existing floor to ceiling heights vary,
    not only across the same floor, but also across each of the existing floors. This plan
    shows that the minimum floor to ceiling height is approximately 2.44 metres on the
    second floor and the maximum height is approximately 3.02 metres on the ground
    floor.
42. I am mindful that the proposed sections were not provided, however the Council do
    not dispute that it is likely that the units would have a floor to ceiling height of over
    2.3 metres. Moreover, I note that drawings18 listed on the Decision Notice show
    finished floor levels (FFL) and ceiling levels (CL) of the proposed two additional
    floors and the proposed lower parapet19 alongside a measurement of 2.4 metres.
    Even if the CL of both floors abut the top of the window, submitted drawings also
    show a gap between the CL at Level 03 and the FFL at Level 04. I am therefore
    satisfied that there would be sufficient space above the CL of Level 03 and FFL of
    Level 04, and between the CL of Level 04 and lower parapet, to accommodate
    marginally higher ceilings.
43. I am therefore satisfied that the floor to ceiling heights of the proposed two floors
    would be 2.4 metres and would not exceed the minimum floor-to ceiling level of the
    principal part of the existing building; or 3 metres as required by paragraph AB.1(d)
    of the GPDO. I am also satisfied that it would comply with the NDSS and paragraph
    L2 of the Framework where it indicates, amongst other matters, that development
    proposals which create additional homes or floorspace by using the airspace above
    existing residential and commercial premises should (ii) provide acceptable living
    standards for residents.
44. For reasons given above, I conclude that the appellant has demonstrated that the
    proposed development would not have windows in any wall or roof slope forming a
    side elevation; and that the floor to ceiling height of the two additional floors would
    be 2.4 metres. There would be no conflict with either paragraphs AB.2(3) or AB.1(d)
    of the GPDO.
Adequate natural light
45. The Council, in its third reason for refusal, relies upon paragraph AB.2(1)(f) of the
    GPDO and describes its concerns with regard to its impact upon surrounding
    residential properties, however paragraph AB.2(1)(f) relates to the provision of
    adequate natural light in all habitable rooms of the new dwellinghouses. Rather,
    paragraph AB.2(1)(g) of the GPDO, requires development to be assessed against
    the impact on the amenity of the existing building and neighbouring premises
    including, amongst other matters, the loss of light.
46. With regard to paragraph AB.2(1)(f), I am mindful that the Council sets out concerns
    with regard to the potential loss of side windows in units 3.1, 3.2, 3.7, 3.8, 4.1, 4.2,
    4.7, and 4.8, and that these would become single aspect through the omission of
    the side windows. I also note concerns that units 3.1, 3.7, 4.1 and 4.7 specifically
    would become single aspect north-facing units, which it describes as likely to
    experience poor levels of natural light and which are resisted under Local Policy H4
    Part I.


17
   Existing Section AA and Existing Section BB
18
   799 CDA ZZ XX DR A 05 0201 Rev 03 and 799 CDA ZZ XX DR A 05 0202 Rev 04
19
   Measurement 44.54


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          7
Appeal Decision 6007494


47. I acknowledge that units 3.1, 3.2, 3.7, 3.8, 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, and 4.8 would be single
    aspect and that units 3.1, 3.7, 4.1 and 4.7 would be single aspect and north-facing.
    However, the appellant’s updated assessment, acknowledges the loss of the
    windows but finds that all habitable rooms including those which would be north-
    facing would be BRE compliant. Without anything to the contrary from the Council, I
    have no reason to take a different view, that there would be adequate natural light in
    all habitable rooms of the new dwelling house.
48. With regard to existing occupants in No 1, paragraph AB.2(1)(g) of the GPDO
    requires development to be assessed against the impact on the amenity of the
    existing building and neighbouring premises including, amongst other matters, the
    loss of light.
49. I acknowledge that floor plans may not have been submitted detailing No 1 at the
    time the Council made its decision, however the original assessment did state
    windows 3, 7 and 11 are non-habitable and that other windows were secondary.
50. Plans submitted20 alongside the appeal show windows 3, 7 and 11 are non-
    habitable and that windows 6 and 10 are secondary to the main Living/Kitchen on
    the upper floors. Whilst I concur that no assessment is required on non-habitable
    windows/rooms21, even if the assessment has found that windows 4/5 and 8/9 meet
    the BRE criteria, given that windows 6 and 10 associated to a habitable room are
    perpendicular to the new extension, even if they are secondary, an assessment of
    the lighting levels in these rooms is required to ensure that the whole room achieves
    optimum daylighting.
51. Without such a robust assessment, I cannot be certain that the amenity of existing
    occupants in No 1 with regard to light levels would not be affected by the proposed
    development as required by paragraph AB.2.(1)(g) of the GPDO.
52. In coming to this conclusion, I have born in mind the caselaw of Rainbird vs Tower
    Hamlets [2018] and the ‘Effective Use of Land’ section in the Planning Practice
    Guidance which the Council have drawn my attention to.
53. For the reasons given above, whilst I have found that the proposed development
    would provide future occupants of the new dwellings with adequate natural light in
    all habitable rooms, I have found that insufficient information has been submitted to
    persuade me that the amenity of existing neighbouring premises with regard to light
    would be retained. The proposed development therefore fails to comply with
    paragraph AB.2(1)(g) of the GPDO. There would also be conflict with Policy L2 of
    the Framework which requires homes created by using the airspace above existing
    residential and commercial premises to, amongst other matter, ensure acceptable
    living standards for neighbours in terms of access to daylight and sunlight.
Other Matters
54. There would be benefits to the proposal including boosting housing and increased
    spend through an increased local population and construction. All of these aspects
    of the proposal are supported by the Framework. Nonetheless, they do not form part
    of matters under consideration as specified by the GPDO. As such, they do not alter
    my assessment of the proposal.


20
     mKsurveys plan Sheet 7 Rev 1
21
     Windows 3, 7 and 11


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007494


55. Moreover, whilst I acknowledge that the proposal would comply with certain
    limitations and conditions, the GPDO requires compliance with the Class in its
    entirety and, where any limitation or condition of the Class is not satisfied, the
    development falls outside the scope of the permitted development right and
    planning permission is required.
Conclusion
56. For the reasons given above, and having regard to all other matters raised, the
    proposal would not comply with paragraphs AB.2(1)(a), AB.2(1) (i) and AB.2(1)(g) of
    the GPDO and consequently prior approval cannot be given for the proposal. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

L Clark
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
