Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 September 2026
by John Pearce MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007590
42 Potter Street, Harlow, Essex CM17 9AQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Dr Vishanth Weerakkody against the decision of Harlow District Council.
•    The application Ref is HW/FUL/25/00481.
•    The development proposed is Change of use of an existing residential annex to a mixed use as an
     annex and short-term holiday let, to allow occupation as an annex for six months of the year and use
     as visitor accommodation for the remainder.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
       an existing residential annex to a mixed use as an annex and short-term holiday
       let, to allow occupation as an annex for six months of the year and use as visitor
       accommodation for the remainder at 42 Potter Street, Harlow, Essex CM17 9AQ
       in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref HW/FUL/25/00481, subject to
       the conditions in the attached Schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       in August 2026. The revised Framework is a material consideration which should
       be taken into account from the day of publication. Having considered the revisions
       and in light of the principles of natural justice, the parties have been provided with
       an opportunity to comment on the revised Framework.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is whether the site is a suitable location for the development, with
       regard to development plan policy.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site comprises a dwelling with a single-storey outbuilding positioned
       perpendicular to Potter Street. The outbuilding has planning permission for use as
       an annex associated with the dwelling at No 42 Potter Street (No 42). The dwelling
       and the annex share the same vehicular access and parking area. The site is
       within a predominantly residential area.
5.     The proposal is for the mixed use of the building as an annex and for short-term
       holiday let. The annex would be used for six months of the year with the building
       used for tourist accommodation for the remainder of the year. No physical works
       are proposed to the building or other parts of the site.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007590


6.       Policy H7 of the Harlow Local Development Plan 2020 (HLDP) sets out the criteria
         that development for the provision for a domestic annexe must meet. The use of
         the building for tourist accommodation would not accord with criteria (a) and (c)
         given that such a use would not have a clear functional dependence to the
         principal dwelling and the occupants would be unlikely to be a relative dependent,
         or carer, of the principal dwelling. In this respect, the proposal would conflict with
         Policy H7.
7.       However, for part of the year the building would remain in use as an annex
         associated with the principal dwelling. The supporting text to Policy H7 states that
         the key issue is that the annexe should not become a self-contained dwelling.
         While the building would not be occupied solely as an annex, the use for tourist
         accommodation could be secured by conditions, if I were to allow the appeal. This
         would ensure that the building would not become a self-contained dwelling, wholly
         separate from the principal dwelling at No 42. Consequently, whilst the proposal
         would not fully accord with Policy H7, the degree of conflict would be limited.
8.       I conclude that the site would not be a suitable location for the proposal, with
         regard to development plan policy. The development conflicts with Policy H7 of the
         HLDP as set out above.
Planning Balance
9.       For the reasons set out above, the site would not be a suitable location for the
         development due to conflict with Policy H7 of the HLDP. However, the harm in this
         regard would be minor.
10. The proposal would make use of an underused building, without any physical
    alterations to the building and the wider site. When in use for tourism
    accommodation, the proposal would also generate economic benefits to the local
    area. Policy ED4 of the HLDP states that proposals which enhance Harlow’s visitor
    economy will be supported where they are of a scale, type and appearance
    appropriate to the locality, provide local economic benefits and are underpinned by
    appropriate infrastructure. The benefits attributed to this consideration are limited
    by the small scale of the proposal.
11. The proposal relates to the Outbuilding South East of White House, London Road,
    a Grade II listed building1, whilst the principal dwelling is also a Grade II listed
    building2. Section 66 (1) of the Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas)
    Act 1990 requires special regard be had to the desirability of preserving listed
    buildings, their setting and any features of special architectural or historic interest
    which they possess.
12. Policy HE4 of the Framework states that heritage assets, as an irreplaceable
    resource, should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance. Policy
    HE6 states that when considering the potential effect of a development proposal
    on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be
    given to the asset’s conservation.
13. The outbuilding is a timber framed building with a brick rear elevation in a Flemish
    bond. Three sides of the building are finished with horizontal weatherboarding
    beneath a tiled roof. No 42 is a seventeenth century timber-framed and plastered
1
    List Entry Number: 1111661
2
    List Entry Number: 1111660


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6007590


       two-storey dwelling. The special interest of the listed buildings arise in part from
       their historical and architectural interest, which, despite alterations remains legible
       and illustrative of their original design. The outbuilding and dwelling at No 42 are
       proximate to each other and are important components of each other’s setting.
       They therefore provide an understanding of how the site functioned historically.
       Consequently, each of the listed buildings contribute positively to the other’s
       significance.
14. The proposal includes the mixed use of the outbuilding, with no physical alteration
    to either the buildings or the wider side. Given the lack of physical alterations and
    the retained association of the outbuilding with No 42, the proposal would not harm
    the significance of either heritage asset. The more regular use of the outbuilding
    may provide a source of income that could assist in the ongoing maintenance of
    the building whilst ensuring that the building is adequately heated and ventilated
    and not left vacant for long periods of time would be positive for the fabric of the
    building. However, no substantive evidence has been presented that details the
    condition of the building and the costs involved in its maintenance. Accordingly,
    this consideration carries limited weight.
15. The proposal would not wholly accord with the development plan. However, in this
    particular case, the considerations set out above outweigh the minor conflict with
    Policy H7 for this specific proposal. In these circumstances this indicates that
    planning permission should be granted.
Conditions
16. Suggested planning conditions have been provided by the Council. I have
    considered the conditions having regard to the Framework and advice contained in
    the Planning Practice Guidance. I have adjusted the wording of some conditions to
    improve precision.
17. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have imposed Condition 2
    requiring that the development is carried out in accordance with the approved
    plans. This is in the interests of certainty.
18. Conditions 3-6 are necessary to ensure that the development is occupied for the
    proposed purposes to prevent the use of the accommodation as a permanent
    residential unit and managed in accordance with the Management Plan submitted
    to safeguard the living conditions of occupants of neighbouring properties.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

John Pearce
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007590


Schedule of Conditions

    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawing number 42PS – 001.

    3) The use of the outbuilding for short-term visitor accommodation shall not exceed
       a total of six months in any twelve-month period.

    4) The short-term visitor accommodation shall be limited to a maximum of two
       adults or a single household at any time and shall not be occupied by any
       person or persons for a continuous period exceeding 14 days in any calendar
       year.

    5) The short-term letting shall be operated in accordance with the submitted
       Management Plan and shall be managed and supervised by the occupiers of
       The White House. The annex shall not be leased, rented, or let to any
       management company or third party for independent operation.

    6) The owner/occupier of The White House shall maintain an up-to-date register of
       all guests occupying the annex for short-term letting purposes. The register shall
       include the names of all guests, main home addresses, dates of arrival and
       departure, and duration of each stay. The register shall be made available for
       inspection by the local planning authority upon written request.

End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
