Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 June 2026 by Scott Wilson LL.B. MSc MRTPI
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007835
2 New House Cottages, Newhaven Road, Beddingham, East Sussex BN8 6JX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Louise Arnold against the decision of the South Downs National Park
    Authority.
•   The application Ref is SDNP/25/04784/HOUS.
•   The development proposed is single storey rear extension, detached garage and porch, and access
    drive.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the access drive.
2. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted single storey rear
   extension, detached garage and porch at 2 New House Cottages, Newhaven Road,
   Beddingham, East Sussex, BN8 6JX in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref SDNP/25/04784/HOUS, and the plans submitted with it, subject to
   the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved plans: 181125/01 and 181125/04
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the details of materials specified on the submitted application form.
Appeal Procedure
3. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Procedural Matter
4. The most recent iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework was published
   in August 2026 (the Framework). The policies relating to the main issues of this
   appeal are not materially different from those in the previous iteration of the
   Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation
   with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective cases would
   not be prejudiced.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007835


Main Issue
5. The main issues are:
          •    The effect of the proposed development on the housing stock and character
               of the South Downs National Park (NP).
          •    The effect of the proposed development on highway safety.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
6. The appeal site comprises a two-storey semi-detached residential property located
   outside of a defined village and in a secluded position, on the east side of the A26
   highway. Despite its location adjacent to the highway, its secluded position gives it
   a rural character.
7. In order to, amongst other things, safeguard the intrinsic special qualities and rural
   character of the NP, the National Park Authority seeks to restrict the cumulative
   increase in the size of dwellings. To that end, the South Downs Local Plan 2014-
   2033 (2019) (Local Plan), Policy SD31 sets out that extensions to dwellings will be
   permitted provided that they are appropriate to the existing dwelling and its
   curtilage and that extensions to dwellings outside defined villages will be permitted
   if they do not increase floorspace by more than approximately 30%. Proposals for
   outbuildings should demonstrate that they are required for purposes incidental to
   the use of the host dwelling.
8. The supporting text to the policy sets out that the purpose of Policy SD31 is to
   avoid the over-extension of existing dwellings and the adverse impact that has on
   the character and appearance of settlements and the countryside. This policy is
   consistent with Policy SD27 which seeks to protect the limited supply of small and
   medium sized homes within the South Downs National Park (NP).
9. The supporting text contained within paragraph 7.89 of the Local Plan helpfully
   defines “small” new dwellings as having a Gross Internal Area (GIA) of 120sqm or
   less. Whilst I acknowledge that the proposal is for an extension, knowing what
   constitutes a “small” new dwelling is helpful in this case given the stated purpose of
   Policy SD31.
10. The supporting text at paragraph 7.93 sets out that modest proposals for an
    extension above the 30% threshold may be permitted where there will be no
    harmful intrusive impact in the landscape and there is an enhancement in the
    appearance of the host dwelling.
11. The parties’ calculations of the increased floorspace differ slightly, at 37% and
    39.58%, respectively. Whilst these figures are above the threshold set out in the
    relevant Policy, they are not substantially greater than allowed by the Policy. Even
    with the proposed extensions, the resulting dwelling would be less than 120sqm
    and remain within the Local Plan supporting text definition of a “small” dwelling. I
    therefore conclude that there would not be the loss of a “small” dwelling as a result
    of the proposal.
12. The modest rear extension proposed would be at the back of the dwelling with
    limited public visibility. The porch would be limited in size and appropriate in design


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007835


     to the host dwelling. The garage would be proportionate relative to the size of the
     host dwelling and of simple, complementary design. Cumulatively, these additions
     would be appropriate to the existing dwelling and would respect the established
     character of the area. Consequently, the proposal would not have a harmful
     intrusive impact on the landscape and would have at worst a neutral impact on the
     appearance of the host dwelling.
13. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would have a neutral effect on the
    housing stock of the NP and would conserve the character of the NP. Accordingly,
    the proposal would comply with Policy SD31 of the Local Plan, insofar as it seeks
    to safeguard the long-term future of the countryside and the intrinsic character of
    the NP and seeks to ensure good design that protects the distinctiveness and
    special rural character of the NP.

Highway Safety
14. The appeal property benefits from a lay-by located directly to the front of both the
    appeal dwelling and its semi-detached neighbour. However, there is no substantive
    evidence before me to demonstrate that this lay-by serves the exclusive use of
    either property. Furthermore, I observed no signage on site indicating any
    restriction on its use by the general public. During my site visit, which I
    acknowledge represents a snapshot in time, the A26 was consistently highly
    trafficked in both directions and restricted to the national speed limit.
15. The proposal includes the formation of a vehicular crossover onto the layby, to
    facilitate access and egress onto the A26. In this regard, I note the presence of a
    bend in the road to the north, together with a mature, vegetated verge, which
    materially restricts visibility for drivers travelling southbound such that they would
    not see the lay-by until very close to it, while still travelling at considerable speed.
    Owing to the proximity of the bend and the established vegetation, the presence of
    the lay-by would be an unexpected feature for vehicles approaching at the national
    speed limit. Similarly, drivers emerging from the proposed access and seeking to
    travel northbound would experience restricted visibility arising from these same
    features.
16. Whilst the appellant’s agent contends that the visibility splays would be adequate, it
    has not been demonstrated what splays are available. Nor has it been shown that
    the visibility would be sufficient to allow oncoming traffic to slow sufficiently to
    contend with vehicles exiting the proposed access. This factor in itself would give
    rise to an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
17. I also note that other vehicles may be parked within the lay-by. In such
    circumstances, visibility to the north when exiting the site would be further
    constrained, in addition to the limitations already imposed by the bend and adjacent
    vegetation. This could result in drivers having to take undue risks when joining the
    A26, thereby exacerbating the harm to highway safety identified above.
18. I acknowledge that the available evidence in respect of the Authority’s highway
    consultation is limited, comprising only a brief summary provided by the Authority’s
    planning officer. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that, based on my observations during
    the site visit, I have been able to adequately assess the highway safety implications
    of the proposal, notwithstanding the absence of more detailed evaluative input.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007835


19. The appellant draws my attention to vehicular access onto the highway either side
    of the appeal property. However, these appear to be of some age, and their
    position offers greater visibility in at least one direction compared with the proposal.
    Consequently, they are not demonstrably comparable to the proposal before me
    and do not justify the harm I have identified.
20. Vehicles exiting the existing layby may choose to pull across both lanes of the A26
    to travel in the opposite direction, and the appellant contends that the proposal
    would be safer than this. However, I have been provided with no persuasive
    evidence to demonstrate that it would not be possible to exit the lay-by in a
    southerly direction and change direction at an alternative, more suitable location. In
    any event, the layby would remain in use even with the proposed access, so such
    manoeuvres could continue irrespective of the decision on this appeal. Therefore,
    the proposal would not improve highway safety in this respect.
21. The appellant also asserts that the proposal would result in improved pedestrian
    safety. However, based on the evidence before me, I have not been directed to any
    clear or convincing explanation as to how such an improvement would be achieved.
22. I conclude that the proposal would have an unacceptable impact on highway
    safety. Accordingly, the proposal conflicts with Policy TR6 of the Framework, which
    seeks to prevent or refuse development that would have an unacceptable impact
    on highway safety. I have not been directed to any policies of the Local Plan
Other Matters
23. I acknowledge the appellant’s apparent frustrations with the Authority’s
    communication and the way in which it handled the planning application. However,
    these are not matters that are for my consideration in relation to this appeal.
24. The appeal proposal would offer economic benefit associated with the construction
    activity and expenditure. Furthermore, the proposal may improve the energy
    efficiency of the appeal building. However, given the limited nature of the proposal
    these benefits would also be limited and would not outweigh the harm identified.
25. The lack of objections, lack of harm to neighbouring living conditions, and lack of
    environmental harm are neutral factors that do not weigh in favour of the proposal.
Conclusion and Recommendation
26. While the proposal would comply with Local Plan Policy SD31, it would conflict with
    the Framework in relation to highway safety. The Framework is a significant
    material consideration which directs refusal in these circumstances. Therefore, for
    the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Scott Wilson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
27. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and
    agree with the reasoning for both main issues. The proposed porch, rear extension
    and garage comply with the relevant policies of the development plan and are


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007835


     clearly severable from the proposed access drive, and I am therefore in a position
     to issue a split decision and allow those parts of the proposal which do not result in
     harm and comply with relevant policy. The proposed access drive would however
     result in unacceptable harm to highway safety and would conflict with the
     Framework in this respect. There are no other material considerations that justify
     granting permission for this element of the proposal. Therefore, I will dismiss the
     appeal in relation to that part only.
28. For the single storey rear extension, detached garage and porch, conditions would
    be necessary relating to implementation and compliance with the approved plans,
    in the interests of certainty. A condition to secure the specified materials is
    necessary to safeguard the character and appearance of the area.
29. On that basis the appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the proposed access
    drive and is allowed, subject to conditions, in relation to the single storey rear
    extension, detached garage and porch.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
