Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007423
11 Quantock Road, Weston-super-Mare, North Somerset BS23 4DN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by P Millier, Easymill Ltd against the decision of North Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/P/0180/FUL.
•    The development proposed is demolition of a detached garage, Demolition of rear store for ground
     floor flat and entrance lobby for first floor flat. Erection of a new entrance lobby for first floor flat.
     Alteration to layout of ground floor flat and windows and erection of a new single storey dwelling to
     the rear of 11 Quantock Road, Weston-super-Mare.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties have had the opportunity to
       comment on the implications of this change, and no parties will have been
       prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would comply with policies that seek to steer new
                development away from areas at the highest risk and avoid increased risks
                from flooding.
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of occupiers of 11
                Quantock Road and occupiers of neighbouring properties to the east and
                west, with regards to overbearing effects, loss of privacy, overshadowing
                and loss of light; and
           •    whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for future
                occupiers, in relation to outlook having regard to the sense of enclosure and
                siting and layout of the proposal.
Reasons
Flooding
4.     A Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) and sequential test (ST) accompanied the
       planning application. The FRA provides some details of on-site topographical
       levels which the appellant has taken and are above predicted AOD flood levels in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007423


       a defended and undefended scenario. It is put to me that therefore the appeal site
       should be considered as flood zone 1.
5.     However, the Environment Agency’s consultation response states that the appeal
       site falls within flood zone 2/3, whilst the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk
       Assessment (SFRA), clearly places the appeal site in Flood Zone 3a.
6.     Whilst photographs have been supplied of measuring equipment, I have no details
       of the methodology of measurements taken or by whom, or if the appellant has
       sought to seek an amendment to the formal flood zone designation. Moreover,
       Policy F5.3 of the Framework states that the strategic flood risk assessment
       covering the area of the proposed development should provide the evidential basis
       for applying the sequential test. As such, and on the substantive evidence before
       me, I must consider that the appeal site is within flood zone 3a as outlined within
       the SFRA.
7.     Annex F of the Framework outlines that Flood zone 3a is land which has a high
       probability of flooding, with the proposed development being classed as ‘more
       vulnerable’. Framework Policy F5 clarifies that a sequential test should be used in
       areas known to be at risk now or in the future from any form of flooding, except in
       certain criteria, none of which are applicable to the proposal. Moreover, the
       proposal is not one of the types of development that the Framework specifies
       should not be subject to the sequential test.
8.     The aim of the sequential test is to steer new development to areas with the lowest
       risk of flooding from any source. Where the test applies, development proposals
       should not be located in areas at risk of flooding where alternative sites,
       appropriate for the development, are reasonably available in areas with a lower
       risk of flooding.
9.     The appellant’s ST considers whether there are any opportunities to locate the
       development at a site with lower risk of flooding and considered to be available,
       deliverable and developable. The ST utilises the Weston-super-Mare settlement
       boundary and flood mapping to identify areas outside of flood zone 2/3 within the
       settlement boundary. This is a proportionate search area given the scale of
       development proposed.
10. Within this search area, the ST has identified three differing sites, 2 of which are
    within a lower risk of flooding although discounted due to being of a differing scale
    of site, and one being outside the current settlement boundary. The ST states
    reasonably available sites may also be ones that have an extant permission and
    that are in a lower flood risk area on the basis of the Council’s Residential Land
    survey and five year housing land supply position. In this respect, it concludes that
    sites are either in flood zone, have a net loss of dwellings, have expired, have
    been completed or are not for sale or have been commenced.
11. However, the Planning Practice Guidance states that sites should be considered
    reasonably available if their location is suitable for the type of development
    proposed, they are able to meet the same development needs and they have a
    reasonable prospect of being developed at the same time as the proposal. In
    respect of some sites discounted in the ST, land ownership, or indeed if a site is
    for sale does not directly indicate that a site does not have a reasonable prospect
    of being developed at the same time as the proposal. Moreover, I see no reason


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007423


       why a larger site could not accommodate the type and quantum of development
       proposed.
12. Therefore, I am unable to conclude, on the substantive evidence before me, that
    other sites are unsuitable for the type of development proposed and that all
    reasonably available sites have formed part of the ST. Therefore, it has not been
    adequately demonstrated there are no suitable sites for the proposal in areas of
    lower risk of flooding.
13. Even if the sequential test were passed, the Framework requires that development
    will only be appropriate where an ‘exception test’ is satisfied. The appellant’s FRA
    indicates that proposed development will be safe and a flood warning and
    evacuation plan has been supplied. Nevertheless, given that the proposal would
    be single storey with no areas of refuge, and no details of safe access or egress
    during a flood event, I cannot be sure that the proposal would be safe for its
    anticipated lifetime. I also have insufficient substantive evidence to conclude that
    the proposal would not increase flood risk elsewhere, or evidence of wider
    sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh the flood risk.
14. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would not comply with policies that
    seek to steer new development away from areas at the highest risk and avoid
    increased risks of flooding, including Policy CS3 of the North Somerset Core
    Strategy 2017 and Policy DM1 of the North Somerset Sites and Policies Plan (Part
    1) 2016 (PP). These policies seek amongst other things, to reduce flood risk
    overall and ensure that the impact of new development on flooding is fully taken
    into account.
Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
15. The proposal would result in layout changes to the existing ground floor flat and
    the replacement of a ground floor window with a larger area of glazing. The
    proposed dwelling would be in reasonably close proximity to this window.
    However, given its spatial relationship off set from the window, combined with a
    small area of fencing which would be lower in height than the proposed dwelling,
    and a path leading to a garden area, outlook from the window would be varied,
    and the proposal would not appear overbearing or oppressive.
16. Moreover, given this spatial relationship and the proposed increase in size of the
    window, there would be no significant overshadowing or loss of light to occupiers
    of the ground floor flat. Furthermore, due to the proposed height of the boundary
    fence, there would be no significant overlooking into the flat from the proposed
    dwelling. Consequently, the proposal would not result in unacceptable harm to the
    living conditions of occupiers of the ground floor flat.
17. In terms of occupiers of the upper floor flat and neighbouring dwellings, the
    proposed dwelling would be noticeable and be seen above boundary treatments.
    Nevertheless, overshadowing of neighbouring properties would be limited due to
    its low height. Moreover, the position of the proposed dwelling, as well as the
    location of its windows at oblique angles to existing dwellings would ensure that
    the proposal would not result in significant overlooking and loss of privacy. This is
    particularly so given the existing residential context of the appeal site and area and
    would be in accordance with the aims of the North Somerset Residential Design
    Guide Supplementary Planning Document 2013.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007423


18. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would result in acceptable living conditions
    for occupiers of 11 Quantock Road and occupiers of neighbouring properties to the
    east and west, with regards to overbearing effects, loss of privacy, overshadowing
    and loss of light. In these respects, it would accord with PP policies DM32 and
    DM38 which seek, amongst other things, to ensure development does not
    prejudice living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
Living conditions of future occupiers
19. The proposed dwelling would not follow the prevailing pattern of development in
    the area and would appear somewhat cramped within the appeal site.
    Nevertheless, even if the proposal would amount to an overdevelopment of the
    site, in terms of living conditions for future occupiers, the proposal provides for
    accommodation which would meet national space standards, incorporates useable
    outdoor garden space and would include off street parking and a cycle store.
20. Due to the cramped character of the proposal, windows serving the two bedrooms
    would be in close proximity to proposed fencing which would result in a reduced
    outlook when within the bedrooms. However, the main living area would likely be
    occupied more by future occupants during the daytime and daylight hours. This
    open plan lounge/dining/kitchen area would provide views out to the garden area
    and would alleviate any sense of enclosure, due to large doors facing into the
    garden area.
21. Therefore, I find that the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for
    future occupiers, in relation to outlook having regard to the sense of enclosure and
    siting and layout of the proposal. In respect of living conditions, the proposal would
    accord with CS Policy CS12 and PP policies DM32 and DM37. Amongst other
    things, these policies seek to ensure development provides appropriate living
    conditions.
Other Matters
22. A differing appeal decision1 has been cited by the appellant where the sequential
    test was failed, although the appeal was allowed. However, this materially differs
    from the proposal before me. That proposal related to differing scale of benefits,
    due to amongst other things, the provision of 190 homes, commercial floor space
    and public open space.
23. A further appeal decision2 that is cited also differs from the proposal before me.
    Whilst the Inspector found that the adverse effects of that proposal did not
    significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, that appeal was considered
    under a previous version of the Framework. Moreover, although limited details are
    before me, it appears that the Inspector concluded that in the specific context and
    circumstances of that site, a flood risk exception test was not required. For these
    reasons the equivalence of the other cases to the current proposal are limited.
24. The proposal would conflict with policies that seek to steer new development away
    from areas at the highest risk and avoid increased risks from flooding. It would
    therefore conflict with the development plan when considered as a whole,
    notwithstanding the fact that I have not found harm to living conditions.


1
    APP/D0121/W/24/3343144
2
    APP/D0121/W/25/3367493


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007423


25. The site is within the settlement of Weston-super-Mare and therefore the
    provisions of Framework Policy S4 are of relevance. This states that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in this Framework.
26. The Council are unable to demonstrate a five-year housing land supply. The
    proposal would provide one dwelling to the areas housing land supply which in
    accordance with Framework Policy HO7 is afforded substantial weight given the
    demonstrated housing need. Further short-term economic benefits would flow from
    the construction of the proposal, with longer term economic and social benefits
    flowing from its occupation. However, given the small scale of the proposal these
    are only modest benefits.
27. Nonetheless, the Framework is clear at Policy F5 that development should be
    steered to areas with the lowest risk of flooding. Given that is has not been
    adequately demonstrated that there are no suitable sites for the proposal in areas
    of lower risk of flooding, or that the development would be safe from flooding,
    Framework Policy F6 indicates that the proposal would not be appropriate and
    should be refused, to which I afford significant weight. Consequently, I find that the
    proposal would not result in sustainable development.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan, read as a whole. No material considerations, individually or
    cumulatively, indicate that a decision should be taken otherwise than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed



S Harrington
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
