Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007445
Roman Road, opposite 19 Shepherds Bush Green, London W12 8PH
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Simon Warner (BT Telecommunications PLC) against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham.
•    The application Ref is 2025/00690/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is ‘the proposed removal of an existing InLink Unit, and the deployment
     of a replacement Street Hub 3 Unit.’

Appeal B Ref: 6007449
Roman Road, opposite 19 Shepherds Bush Green, London W12 8PH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Simon Warner (BT Telecommunications PLC) against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham.
•    The application Ref is 2025/00689/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘The proposed removal of an existing InLink Unit, and the
     deployment of a replacement Street Hub 3 unit.’

Decisions
1.     Appeal A is allowed and express consent is granted for ‘the proposed removal of
       an existing InLink Unit, and the deployment of a replacement Street Hub 3 Unit’ at
       Roman Road, opposite 19 Shepherds Bush Green, London W12 8PH, in
       accordance with the terms of application ref: 2025/00690/ADV. The consent is for
       five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five standard
       conditions set out in the Regulations and the following additional conditions:
                   1) The intensity of the illumination of the advertisement screens permitted
                   by this consent shall be within that recommended by the Institute of
                   Lighting Professionals in its Professional Lighting Guide 05/23 ‘The
                   Brightness of Illuminated Advertisements Including Digital Displays’
                   2) The digital display screens shall not display any moving images
                   (including animation, flashing, scrolling three dimensional, intermittent or
                   video elements).
                   3) The minimum display time for each piece of content on the digital
                   display screens shall be 10 seconds.
                   4) The interval between each piece of content on the digital display
                   screens shall take place over a period no greater than one second; the
                   complete screen shall change with no visual effects (including swiping or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007445 & 6007449


                   other animated transition methods) between displays, and the display will
                   include a mechanism to freeze the image in the event of a malfunction.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and planning permission is granted for ‘the proposed removal
       of an existing InLink Unit, and the deployment of a replacement Street Hub 3 unit’
       at Roman Road, opposite 19 Shepherds Bush Green, London W12 8PH, in
       accordance with the terms of the application ref: 2025/00703/FUL, subject to the
       following conditions:
                   1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three
                   years from the date of this decision.
                   2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance
                   with the following plans and drawings: Site Location Plan, Drawing No.
                   24007246_PLN_LOC_1.1; Elevation Plan, Drawing No.
                   24007246_PLN_EL_3.1; Proposed Site Plan, Drawing No.
                   24007246_PLN_SI_2.1; BT Street Hub Unit Dimensions.
                   3) The development hereby permitted shall at all times be operated in full
                   accordance with guidance in the following documents: Street Hub Anti-
                   Social Behaviour Management Plan Version 3; Street Hub Noise
                   Management Plan Version 2.
                   4) Prior to the installation of the street hub hereby approved, the existing
                   hub at the appeal site shall be removed in its entirety and disposed of
                   responsibly. The street surface should then be made good to match the
                   adjoining footway surface materials.
                   5) Should the street hub hereby permitted no longer be required or
                   become defunct, it shall be removed within 3 months of the date it was
                   last used and thereafter the land reinstated to its former condition.
Preliminary Matters
3.     There are 2 appeals concerning refused applications for express consent to
       display an advertisement and planning permission to erect a replacement
       multimedia hub. Although the appeals are determined under separate legislation,
       they are intrinsically linked. Therefore, for the sake of expediency, and to avoid
       duplication, I have dealt with both appeals in the same decision letter.
4.     In respect of Appeal A, the Town and Country Planning (Control of
       Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) require that
       advertisement appeal decisions are made only in the interests of amenity and
       public safety, taking account of any material factors. The National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) and the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) confirm
       this approach. The development plan policies referred to by the Council in the
       decision notice for Appeal A are therefore not determinative with regards to the
       advertisement, but I have taken them into account as a material consideration
       where they are relevant to the matter at hand.
5.     On 17 August 2026, a revised Framework was published by the Government. This
       is a material consideration in the decision-making process from the day of
       publication. As the changes do not affect the main issues in this decision, it was
       not necessary to offer the main parties an opportunity to comment on the
       implications for this appeal

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decisions 6007445 & 6007449


Main Issues
6.       The main issues are the effects of the proposals on the character and
         appearance/amenity of the area with particular regard to the settings of designated
         heritage assets, and on public safety.
Reasons
Character and Appearance/Amenity
7.       The appeal site is located on the footpath on the south side of Shepherd’s Bush
         Green (A402) which includes a number of commercial units at street level. The
         appeal site currently includes an existing unit which would be removed to make
         way for the proposed hub and advertisement screens. The proposed unit would be
         marginally taller with a larger footprint but most significantly would be
         approximately 34 centimetres (cm) wider and evidently have 77.5% larger display
         screens than the existing model. The footpath at present includes other street
         furniture such as cycle racks, refuse bins and streetlights while the adjacent bus
         stops also include advertisement displays to both sides.
8.       The site is adjacent the boundary of the Shepherd’s Bush Conservation Area (CA).
         While the setting of a conservation area does not have statutory protection, I have
         had due regard to policy HE4 of the Framework which states that development
         proposals should avoid (or if that is not possible, minimise) harm to the
         significance of heritage assets, and instead conserve this significance. This
         includes development in their setting and should have a clear and convincing
         justification.
9.       There is nothing before me to establish the significance of the CA from either party
         as required by the Framework. From my own observations, the character and
         appearance, and thereby significance of the CA, is derived from the orientation
         around Shepherd’s Bush Green, which is an area of open green space within a
         busy and densely developed locale. Furthermore, the quality of built form within
         the CA, particularly to the northern side of the green along Uxbridge Road, is a
         pleasantly uniformed feature formed of long terraces of 3 storeys with commercial
         properties at street level and brick facades above which feature fine detailing.
10. I am mindful of the definition of setting given in the Framework, which advises that
    this includes the surroundings in which a heritage asset is experienced. It goes on
    to state that its extent is not fixed and may change as the asset and its
    surroundings evolve. Moreover, elements may make a positive or negative
    contribution to the significance of a heritage asset.
11. Given the proximity of the appeal site to the CA, I don’t dispute that it would be
    within its setting. However, built form to the south of the green is decidedly more
    modern, formed of glass and metal commercial buildings with high rise flats behind
    when looking south. This part of its setting therefore makes a neutral contribution
    to the significance of the CA.
12. Furthermore, the appeal site is adjacent a war memorial1, which is a grade II listed
    building. With respect to Appeal B, I have had regard to section 66(1) of the
    Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) which
    states that in considering whether to grant planning permission for development
1
    List Entry Number: 1392026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6007445 & 6007449


       which affects a listed building or its setting, the local planning authority or, as the
       case may be, the Secretary of State shall have special regard to the desirability of
       preserving the building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
       historic interest which it possesses.
13. The memorial evidently dates from 1920 and includes a depiction of a saint
    mounted on a plinth as well as plaques commemorating those lost in both world
    wars. The special interest of the listed building is therefore derived from its historic
    and architectural interests. Historic interest is mostly drawn from its association
    with the two world wars, while its architectural interest is derived from the
    craftsmanship and traditional form as seen in many similar monuments around the
    country.
14. The immediate setting of the listed building is largely formed of the curtilage
    surrounding the memorial which is demarked by railings. It includes benches and
    is a space within which to contemplate the significance of the memorial and its
    purpose in commemorating those lost in the wars. The wider setting includes the
    remainder of the green to the west which makes a positive contribution to the
    significance of the listed building due to its community use and verdant character
    within what is otherwise a busy, loud and somewhat hectic urban area. While I
    don’t dispute that the appeal site could be considered within the setting of the
    listed memorial, as with the conservation area the general vicinity of the south side
    of the road makes a neutral contribution to its significance.
15. Built form in the general area of the appeal site is 3 storeys high and, in this
    context, the additional width and height of the hub over that existing would be of
    minimal impact particularly when viewed against the displays of the bus stops
    which feature similar sized ends with displays to that proposed. Compared to the
    silver colour of the existing hub, the black and more solid composition of the
    proposal would be somewhat stark, although it would also resemble the bus stops
    in this regard. There is an existing hub which I must bear in mind and in this
    context, overall, the changes are relatively minor within the context of the area,
    and I do not consider the replacement hub to be harmful in its size or design as a
    result.
16. With regards to the advertisement screens, while they are significantly increased
    over the existing, I observed similar sized displays in the area, including said bus
    stops. While I understand the concerns of the Council regarding proliferation, the
    proposal would not increase the number of advertisement displays as such. The
    larger screens would be well contained within the street scene and when travelling
    along the footpath or driving on the road opposite, it would not appear
    overwhelming or harmful in this location.
17. Taken together, in the context of the location I do not find that the street hub and
    advertisement displays would harm the character and appearance/amenity of the
    area, or the settings of either the CA or listed building. This would accord with
    section 66(1) of the Act and policies DC1, DC9 and DC10 of the Hammersmith
    and Fulham Local Plan (adopted February 2018) (HFLP) or D8 of the London Plan
    (TLP) (adopted March 2021). It would also accord with policy HE4 of the
    Framework. Among other things, these seek to ensure that the significance of the
    borough’s historic environment is preserved by protecting, restoring and enhancing
    its heritage assets. These assets include listed buildings and conservation areas.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6007445 & 6007449


Public Safety
18. The A402 road runs to the west past the appeal site and is a one way route. The
    existing hub at the appeal site is aligned with other street furniture towards the
    front of the footway. The bus stops include advertising screens, while there is
    another hub to the east with the same size screens as that proposed.
19. I have had regard to the concerns of the Council, and I note that the local
    highways consultee has objected to the scheme due to concerns that the display
    of adverts could distract drivers. I observed the road to be heavily trafficked even
    in the mid-afternoon hour of my visit. Moreover, there is a pedestrian crossing
    before reaching the appeal site while buses would be pulling up to the stop to the
    west to allow passengers to on or off. I also understand that the slipway adjacent
    to the site allows buses to join the south side of the road from Uxbridge Road to
    the north.
20. However, Shepherd’s Bush Green is one way and straight with a low speed limit.
    The advertisement screen at present is behind traffic lights but does not interfere
    with the view drivers would have of the lights, while it would not appear materially
    larger than the existing screens on the bus stops in the same frame of reference.
    Buses merging from the north would likely have an oblique view, if any, of the
    screens as they face east and west rather than to the north. The views of bus
    drivers in this scenario would be of the narrow end of the hub would does not have
    large advertisement screens. While the proposal would increase the screen size
    over the existing, from all that I have seen and read it would not appear dominant
    in the location. As such, I do not find they would be a distraction to drivers in this
    context and would therefore not harm public safety.
21. Insofar as they are relevant to this matter, this would accord with policies T1 and
    T3 of the HFLP and T1, T2 and D5 of TLP. These generally seek to ensure
    highway and pedestrian safety in the transport network of London.
Conditions
22. I have had regard to the conditions proposed by the Council and amended or
    changed wording where required to meet the tests for conditions or expediency.
    Moreover, I note some conditions have been suggested for Appeal B which more
    readily relate to Appeal A. I have changed these where necessary.
23. With regards to Appeal A, I will draw the attention of the main parties to the 5
    standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the Regulations which apply to all
    advertisements granted express consent. These include prohibiting the
    interpretation of traffic signs; ensuring the advertisement shall be maintained in a
    condition that does not impair the visual amenity of the site; ensuring any structure
    or hoarding erected or used principally for the purpose of displaying
    advertisements shall be maintained in a condition that does not endanger the
    public; and when removed, that the site shall be left in a condition that does not
    endanger the public or impair visual amenity. As such, additional conditions
    suggested which would cover these matters are unnecessary.
24. Additional conditions to control illumination levels, prohibit moving images, the time
    each advertisement is displayed, and fast changeover of displays are necessary in
    the interests of the amenity of the area and public safety. Express consent is
    automatically granted for 5 years as per the Regulations, although this is at the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6007445 & 6007449


       discretion of the decision maker if specified. A further condition requesting the
       advertisement be displayed for 10 years is requested, although the appellant’s
       appeal statements for both appeals before me appear to relate to another location
       and there is no justification for this. As such, I see no reason to impose this as it
       would not be reasonable. Consent it therefore granted for the standard 5 years.
25. With respect to Appeal B, the standard time limit and approved plans conditions
    are necessary to provide clarity for all parties. A condition relating to materials only
    is not considered necessary given this is secured by adherence to the approved
    plans and documents. Additionally, conditions to control matters including
    maintenance, anti-social behaviour and noise as outlined in the supporting
    documentation is specifically attached to ensure the character and appearance of
    the area is not harmed. Further conditions to specify that the hub shall be removed
    as soon as practicable following cessation of its use and the pavement
    surrounding the hub shall be made good to the same condition as the adjacent
    land is necessary to ensure the character and appearance of the area is
    maintained following its removal
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal A would not harm the amenity of the
    area or public safety, while Appeal B would accord with the development plan as a
    whole. The appeal are therefore allowed, subject to the conditions in my formal
    decisions.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
