Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by R Major BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6007521
Jamia Syeda Fatima Al-Zahra, Bank Lane, Blackburn BB1 2AP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by Jamia Syeda Fatima Al-Zahra against the decision of Blackburn with Darwen
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref 10/24/0884 was approved on 1 October 2025 and planning permission was
     granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is demolition of existing Mosque and erection of replacement Mosque
     (Use Class F1).
•    The condition in dispute is No 4 which states that:

     No development shall occur until a scheme for the following off site highway works has been
     submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be in
     accordance with the approved details and all costs shall be borne by the developer.

     - Zebra crossing facility on Shadsworth Road
     - Widening of the Bank Lane footway adjacent to the site.

•    The reason given for the condition is:

     In the interests of the safe, efficient and convenient movement of pedestrians, in accordance with the
     requirements of Policy DM29 of the Blackburn with Darwen Borough Local Plan 2021-2037.


Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref 10/24/0884 for demolition of
       existing Mosque and erection of replacement Mosque (Use Class F1) at Jamia
       Syeda Fatima Al-Zahra, Bank Lane, Blackburn BB1 2AP granted on 1 October 2025
       by Blackburn with Darwen Borough Council, is varied by deleting condition No.4 and
       substituting it for the following condition:
       4)    No development shall take place until a scheme for the off-site highway works
             to widen the Bank Lane footway adjacent to the site has been submitted to
             and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The widening of the
             footway shall be completed in accordance with the approved details prior to
             the development hereby permitted being first brought into use and retained as
             such thereafter.
Preliminary Matters
2. Subsequent to the Council issuing its decision the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
   were given the opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised
   Framework, and I have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my
   decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007521


Background and Main Issue
3.       Planning permission was granted for the demolition of existing mosque and
         erection of replacement Mosque (Use Class F1) subject to a number of conditions,
         including condition No.4 requiring off-site highway works to take place. This appeal
         is made directly against the imposition of this condition.
4.       The off-site highway works required by the imposed condition relate to the widening
         of the Bank Lane footway adjacent to the site and the provision of a Zebra crossing
         facility on Shadsworth Road. The Council’s reason for the condition states that this
         is in the interests of the safe, efficient and convenient movement of pedestrians.
5.       The appellant’s submission asserts that the requirement to provide a Zebra
         crossing on Shadsworth Road is unreasonable and unnecessary to make the
         development acceptable. However, the appellant clarifies that they do not seek to
         challenge the part of the condition relating to the widening of the Bank Lane
         footway adjacent to the site. The appellant is therefore seeking to vary condition
         No.4 to remove the requirement to provide a Zebra crossing on Shadsworth Road
         and I have dealt with the appeal on this basis.
6.       Consequently, the main issue is whether it is reasonable and necessary for the
         Zebra crossing to be provided in the interests of highway safety, with particular
         regard to the safe, efficient and convenient movement of pedestrians.
Reasons
7.       From the information before me the replacement Mosque would have a
         significantly larger floor area than the existing building that is to be demolished.
         The replacement building would likely increase visitor capacity in comparison to
         the existing building and therefore could result in an intensification of the activity at
         the site, including increasing the number of trips generated.
8.       However, my attention has been drawn to an extant permission1 for “Proposed
         single storey extension to the side & double storey extension to the front, rear and
         side of the property with elevational and internal alterations” (herein referred to as
         “the extant permission”). There is no condition requiring a Zebra crossing to be
         provided on Shadsworth Road as part of this extant permission and I have no
         reason to doubt that there is a greater than a theoretical possibility that the extant
         permission could be implemented. This extant permission therefore represents a
         fallback position to which I attribute substantial weight as a material consideration
         in the determination of this appeal.
9.       In this regard, the appellant comments that the appeal proposal seeks to provide
         better facilities for visitors rather than increasing the overall capacity in comparison
         to the extant permission. Furthermore, the evidence before me details that whilst
         the total floor area of the replacement building subject of this appeal would be
         larger than the extant permission, the floor area of the proposed study and prayer
         rooms would in fact be marginally smaller than those of the extant permission. The
         appellant therefore contends that the trip generating activities within the appeal
         proposal have less floorspace than those within the extant permission.
10. The Council, however, state that there are other new features within the proposed
    replacement Mosque, including the women’s entrance, madrassa classrooms and
1
    Council Ref: 10/23/0273 – Date of Decision: 8 March 2024


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decision 6007521


       basement mortuary, that will generate concentrated pedestrian movements at
       peak periods. I do however note that the floorplans provided of the extant
       permission do show classrooms at first floor level.
11. Nevertheless, neither party has provided any detailed analysis or information in
    respect of the predicted pedestrian or vehicular movements for either the extant
    permission or the appeal proposal. Therefore, and based on the evidence before
    me, I find that as a result of the modest increase in the total floor area and the
    slight reduction in study and prayer room areas, any increase in pedestrian and
    vehicular trips generated by the appeal proposal, in comparison to those that
    would be generated by the extant permission, would likely be limited.
12. I therefore find the provision of a Zebra crossing on Shadsworth Road is not
    required based on the likely number of additional trips generated by the appeal
    proposal alone, when compared to those generated by the extant permission
    which is not required to provide a Zebra crossing.
13. The Council has however also referred to the poor accident record along this section
    of Shadsworth Road as a reason why the Zebra crossing is required. However,
    there is limited information before me to demonstrate how accidents relating to car
    collisions along this section of Shadsworth Road directly correlate with the need for
    the appeal development to provide a Zebra crossing for pedestrians.
14. In this particular regard, I note that of these recorded accidents only a small
    number related to pedestrians and there are limited specific details before me in
    respect of these pedestrian accidents, or any substantive evidence as to how these
    pedestrian accidents would have been prevented with a Zebra crossing in place.
15. Furthermore, whilst on site I observed that there is a refuge island crossing on
    Shadsworth Road, directly adjacent to the appeal site. Additionally, there is a
    second refuge island crossing a short distance away on Shadwsorth Road, beyond
    the junction with Bank Lane to the northeast of the appeal site.
16. During my visit, early to mid-afternoon on a weekday, I observed a number of
    pedestrians crossing Shadsworth Road, including a family with small children, in
    the vicinity of the appeal site. Of these, all but one used the existing refuge islands
    to cross Shadsworth Road. The single pedestrian that did not use either of these
    refuge islands crossed Shadsworth Road closer to its junction with Feccit Brow.
17. As such, whilst acknowledging my visit was only a snapshot in time, I found that
    these refuge islands, and in particular the one directly in front of the appeal site,
    were being well used by pedestrians to cross this part of Shadsworth Road. My
    observations are consistent with the findings of the appellant’s pedestrian survey
    which also recorded that the majority of pedestrians crossing the road in this area
    used the refuge island outside the appeal site.
18. Additionally, there is no substantive evidence before me to suggest that any of the
    recorded pedestrian accidents that have occurred on Shadsworth Road related to
    a pedestrian using the refuge islands, or any detailed explanation as to why these
    existing refuge islands are not a safe and suitable means for pedestrians to cross
    the road in this location.
19. Furthermore, during my visit I observed very little, if any, waiting time for
    pedestrians when using these refuge islands and whilst I appreciate pedestrian


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007521


         movements will be more frequent when events are taking place at the appeal site,
         based on my own observations, I found them to be a safe and sufficient means of
         crossing the highway in this location.
20. I note the Council state that given the shortfall in car parking provision there is an
    emphasis to demonstrate that the safe, efficient and convenient movement of all
    highway users is not prejudiced. Furthermore, the Council also refer to the Manual
    for Streets2 and Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan3 highlighting the need
    to support pedestrians navigating the highway and to mitigate uncertainties and
    constraints in their passage of movement. However, for the reasons given, there is
    no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that the existing refuge
    crossing(s) in the vicinity of the site are not sufficient and safe for pedestrians to use,
    including disabled people, older people and children.
21. In view of all the above, whilst I appreciate that the provision of a Zebra crossing
    may provide some benefits for pedestrians, I conclude that given the likely limited
    number of additional pedestrian trips generated by the appeal proposal, in
    comparison to the extant permission (fallback), as well as the existing provision of
    refuge crossings within the vicinity of the site, it is not reasonable and necessary
    for a Zebra crossing to be provided in order to ensure the safe, efficient and
    convenient movement of pedestrians in relation to the proposed development.
22. Accordingly, I conclude that condition No.4 as imposed by the Council is not
    reasonable or necessary to make the development acceptable with regard to
    highway safety, and the safe, efficient and convenient movement of pedestrians.
    Consequently, the removal of this condition and its substitution with the amended
    condition would not conflict with Policy DM29 of the Blackburn with Darwen
    Borough Local Plan 2021-2037 (2024) where it states, amongst other things, that
    development will be permitted provided that road safety, and the safe, efficient and
    convenient movement of all highway users, is not prejudiced.
23. In addition, given that I have found that the removal of the requirement to provide a
    Zebra crossing would not have an unnacceptable impact on highway and
    pedestrian safety, I find no conflict with Policy TR6 of the Framework. I also find no
    conflict with Policies DP3 and TR4 of the Framework, where they together seek to
    ensure that proposals give priority first to walking; meet the needs of disabled
    people, older people and children; and minimise the scope for conflict between
    pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles.
Conditions
24. I have amended the wording of the disputed condition to remove the requirement
    to provide a Zebra crossing on Shadsworth Road. I have also amended the
    wording to provide clarity as to when the widening of the footway on Bank Lane is
    to be completed and removed the requirement for the cost to be specifically borne
    by the developer. In the interest of clarity, this does not mean that the cost must be
    borne by someone else, it simply means that, if necessary, the cost could be borne
    by someone other than the developer. The remaining conditions were not in
    contention and remain unaltered.



2
    Manual for Streets (2007) and Manual for Streets 2 – Wider Application of the Principles (2010)
3
    Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan -Technical Guidance for Local Authorities (2017)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    4
Appeal Decision 6007521


Conclusion
25. For the reasons given, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed. I therefore
    vary the planning permission by deleting condition No.4 and substituting it with a
    new condition No.4, as set out in the decision above.



R Major
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
