Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by K Crutchfield BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10th September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6007583
35 Sheeplands Avenue, Guildford, Surrey GU1 2SG
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr Joseph Noble against the decision of Guildford Borough Council.
    The application Ref is 25/P/01412.
    The development is a bin and bike store to front of dwelling.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The bin and bike store had been completed by the time of my visit and appears to be
      in accordance with the plans before me. I have therefore considered the appeal on
      the basis that the development has already taken place.
3.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
      August 2026. I am satisfied that any changes to the Framework have not prejudiced
      any party in this case.
Main Issue
4.    The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance of
      the site and surrounding area.
Reasons
5.    Sheeplands Avenue predominantly comprises two-storey semi-detached red brick
      dwellings. Some of the distinguishing features of Sheeplands Avenue are that the
      dwellings are similar in design and materials, are set back a similar distance from the
      street, and for the most part have open frontages.
6.    Guildford Borough Council’s Residential Extensions and Alterations Supplementary
      Planning Document explains that front extensions often upset building lines and can
      appear unduly prominent in the streetscape, especially where a row of properties is
      uniform in character.
7.    I acknowledge the appellant’s desire to rationalise, tidy and make effective use of the
      land to the front of the dwelling, and that bin and bike stores are typical within
      residential environments. However, in this case the development is located much
      closer to the street than the front elevation of the host dwelling and surrounding
      dwellings. It includes a tall side boundary wall in an area with predominantly open
      frontages. Furthermore, it is finished in white and black render in contrast to the
      prevailing red brick used in the area. Together, this results in a visually discordant

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007583


       addition, which does not integrate well with the existing dwelling, and is out of
       keeping with the prevailing design, materials and open frontages of dwellings in the
       area.
8.    I note ground levels are higher at the site than the adjoining dwelling which is
      retained by a wall. However, this wall is modest in height. Even with the stepped
      design, the overall increase in the height of this wall is significant and is out of
      keeping with the prevailing open character and appearance of frontages in the area.
9.    The green roof over the bin store softens the appearance of this part of the
      development. However, this matter does not outweigh my concerns regarding the
      effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area.
10. I conclude that the development is unacceptably harmful to the character and
    appearance of the site and surrounding area. As such, it conflicts with policy D1 of
    the Guildford Borough Local Plan: Strategy and Sites (2019) and policies H4, D4 and
    D6 of the Guildford Borough Local Plan: Development Management Policies (2023).
    These policies, amongst other provisions, seek to ensure that new development
    responds to distinctive local character, and bin storage and cycle parking is
    integrated into the built form and does not detract from the surrounding area.
11. The decision notice asserts that the development conflicts with policy D5 of the
    Guildford Borough Local Plan: Development Management Policies (2023). However,
    this policy relates to matters of living conditions and provision of amenity space
    which are not referred to in the reason for refusal. I do not have substantive
    evidence before me to suggest that there is a conflict with this policy and, as such, it
    is not determinative.
Other Matters
12. I acknowledge that the development promotes the sustainable management of
    waste and sustainable modes of transports, the biodiversity and sustainability merits
    of the green roof, the hygiene benefits of internal bin storage, and the practicality of
    bike storage to the front of the dwelling as it has no side access. However, these
    benefits are substantially outweighed by the identified harm to the character and
    appearance of the area.
13. The appellant refers to the Council’s assessment of no harm to neighbour amenity
    and no adverse impact on highway safety. However, the absence of harm is a
    neutral factor in the planning balance.
14. The appellant refers to other development within the area, including bin stores and
    boundary walls. However, full details of these have not been provided, and therefore
    I cannot be certain they are comparable to the appeal before me.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal development conflicts with
    the development plan as a whole, and the material considerations do not indicate
    that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the
    appeal is dismissed.

K Crutchfield
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
