Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 June 2026
by D Ellis MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007130
Land at south of Old Elstead Road, Milford GU8 5EB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr J Moore against the decision of Waverley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is WA/2025/02158.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a custom self-build dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters and Main Issue
2.     The application was submitted in outline with all matters reserved for subsequent
       approval. Consequently, I have assessed the appeal proposal on that basis and
       have considered the submitted plans as indicative.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
       2024. This latest version of the Framework has introduced plan-making and
       national decision-making policies and is effect from the day of publication. The
       appellant and the Council have had the opportunity to comment on the new
       Framework.
4.     Following the publication of the new Framework, the Council now considers the
       site to constitute grey belt land and thus would not be inappropriate development
       in the Green Belt in accordance with Policy GB7(g) of the Framework. Given that
       the proposal would not fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of
       the remaining Green Belt, the Council’s very low housing land supply, and as the
       proposal would be in a sustainable location, I have no reason to conclude that the
       site would not accord with Policy GB7(g) of the Framework. As such, the first
       reason for refusal falls away.
5.     Therefore, the main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and
       appearance of the area, including its effect on the Surrey Hills National
       Landscape.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site is an area of land to the south-west of Old Elstead Road with a
       small cluster of buildings to the south-west along Amberley Lane. To the north-
       east of Old Elstead Road is a residential development. The site lies within an Area
       of Great Landscape Value (AGLV). The site is visible from the adjoining roads and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007130


       has boundary trees and vegetation which visually merges with other established
       vegetation, especially that which continues south-west along the same side of Old
       Elstead Road.
7.     The site also lies within the Surrey Hills National Landscape (NL). The statutory
       purpose of National Landscapes is to conserve and enhance the natural beauty of
       the area. Section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (as amended)
       includes the duty on relevant authorities that they must seek to further this purpose
       when exercising or performing any functions in relation to, or so as to affect, land
       in an area of outstanding natural beauty (now National Landscapes).
8.     Furthermore, paragraph 1 of Policy N4 of the Framework development proposals
       within Protected Landscapes, including National Landscapes, should be limited in
       scale and extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to the
       statutory purposes and special qualities of the Protected Landscape. Paragraph 1
       further states that substantial weight should be placed on the importance of
       conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas.
9.     The Surrey Hills Management Plan 2020-2025 explains that the NL is a diverse
       landscape characterised by areas of woodland, hills and valleys, traditional mixed
       farming, a patchwork of chalk grassland and heathland, sunken lanes, picturesque
       villages, and market towns.
10. The housing on the north-east side of Old Elstead Road is set back behind a wide
    grass verge and appears as an established part of a residential area. There is a
    clear difference in character and appearance between this built-up residential
    development and the sporadic clusters of buildings surrounded by fields and
    countryside broadly to the west of the appeal site and Old Elstead Road. When
    viewed on the ground, the appeal site appears much more associated with the
    wider rural character of the surrounding land. Its undeveloped and open form
    makes a contribution with the other open land on this side of the road in providing
    a visual separation between the cluster of buildings to the south-west and the
    residential development to the north and north-east. As such, the site in this
    location at the junction of the two roads makes a valuable contribution to the semi-
    rural character and appearance of the area and thereby to the natural beauty of
    the NL.
11. Appearance, scale and layout are matters which would be reserved for future
    approval. Nevertheless, the provision of a dwelling, even if well designed and
    modest in size, with the associated works and, in due course, likely residential
    paraphernalia would, where no development currently exists, have a noticeable
    effect and change in character. It would erode the rural contribution the site makes
    to the area and would adversely reduce the visual separation from the residential
    development to the north-east from the cluster of buildings to the south-west. The
    effect would be to harmfully detract from the character and appearance of the
    area, within this part of the AGLV. The proposal would also result in a modest yet
    incongruous domestic encroachment into the NL, detracting from the rural
    character and natural beauty of the NL.
12. I have carefully considered the appellant’s Landscape Statement which describes
    the existing boundary hedge as a ‘dominant and incongruous feature which
    creates more of a sense of enclosure than openness’. While the tall evergreen
    screen around parts of the site could be considered somewhat incongruous it


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007130


       nevertheless does not have a residential character to the site and even with this
       boundary planting there is a feeling of open undeveloped character to the land.
       The site merges visually with the land broadly to the south-west and whether or
       not the hedge is retained or replaced with other planting, the effect of the scheme
       would be to severely undermine the undeveloped character of the site and its
       positive contribution to the area.
13. I consider that the Landscape Statement places too much emphasis on the
    adverse effect of the present boundary planting and underplays the importance
    that comes from the undeveloped nature of the site in this location. I therefore
    place greater weight on the conclusions of the Council in this respect.
14. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would cause harm to the character
    and appearance of the area and to the AGLV and would fail to conserve or
    enhance the natural beauty of the NL. The proposal would therefore conflict with
    Policies RE3 and TD1 of the Waverley Borough Local Plan Part 1: Strategic
    Policies and Sites February 2018, insofar as they require development to respond
    to the distinctive local character, to respect and where possible enhance the
    distinctive character of the landscape in which it is situated, and to protect and
    enhance the character and qualities of the NL and AGLV.
15. Paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the Framework requires development proposals to
    respond to their context, including the character and features of their site and its
    setting, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. The paragraph
    further states that this should not preclude change where appropriate, especially
    where an increased density is justified in accordance with Policies L2 (Making
    effective use of land) and L3 (Achieving appropriate densities).
16. For the reasons given above the proposal would fail to respond to its context,
    character and features of the site and its setting. As such, the proposal would not
    integrate with or enhance its surroundings. I am therefore not satisfied that the
    proposed dwelling would constitute an effective use of land or that the increase in
    density would be justified. The proposal would therefore fail to comply with
    paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the Framework
17. As the proposal would harm the statutory purposes and special qualities of the NL
    and would fail to conserve or enhance the natural beauty of the NL, the proposal
    would also conflict with Policy N4 of the Framework.
Other Matters
18. There are four Grade II listed buildings within the cluster of buildings along
    Amberley Lane. The historic nature and traditional appearance of these buildings
    contribute strongly to their significance. However, the distance of the appeal site
    from these buildings would ensure that the proposal would not harm the setting or
    significance of the listed buildings.
Other Considerations
19. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S5 of the
    Framework has regard to development outside settlements. However, paragraph 5
    of Policy S5 states that this policy does not apply to development proposals in the
    Green Belt, which should be determined in accordance with Policies GB6, GB7


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007130


       and/or GB8 as appropriate. Paragraph 5 further states that where development
       would not be inappropriate in these locations through the application of Policy
       GB7, proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
       substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
       national decision-making policies in the Framework and applying paragraph 2 of
       Policy S5.
20. Paragraph 2 of Policy S5 of the Framework states that the circumstances in which
    the benefits of approving development proposals are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not limited to, situations where the
    development proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-
    making policies which state that development proposals should be refused in
    specific circumstances.
21. The Council states that they can current only demonstrate a 1.28-year supply of
    housing sites. There is, therefore, a significant shortfall in housing land. Policy
    HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community.
22. The provision of one additional unit would make a modest but meaningful
    contribution to the existing supply. Economic and social advantages would also
    arise from the construction and occupation of a new house, although these would
    be limited by the scale of the scheme. The proposed dwelling would be located in
    a fairly sustainable location where future occupants would have access to services
    and facilities without the need to rely on the private vehicle.
23. The proposal is advanced on the basis of a self-build dwelling. However,
    notwithstanding the CIL self-build exemption proforma I have no mechanism, such
    as a planning obligation under Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act
    1990 (as amended), before me to secure the new dwelling as a self-build property.
    The Council has suggested a condition to meet this requirement however I am not
    persuaded that such a condition would meet the test for enforceability.
24. Nevertheless, when taken together and having regard to the lack of a five-year
    housing land supply, the benefits of the scheme, because an additional self-build
    dwelling would result, should be attributed substantial weight.
25. However, the proposal would fail to comply with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the
    Framework. Paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 states that development proposals should
    be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy
    DP3. The proposal would also conflict with Policy N4 of the Framework. These
    adverse effects are matters of considerable importance.
26. In the circumstances of this case, I conclude that the benefits of the scheme would
    not outweigh the harm that would be caused to the character and appearance of
    the area, the AGLV and the NL. Consequently, I am satisfied when having regard
    to paragraph 2 of Policy S5 of the Framework that the benefits of the scheme
    would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007130


27. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan
    and that material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided
    other than in accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

D Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
