Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 and 23 July 2026
by H Miles BA (hons), MA, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007869
Wild Flowers, Wrens Hill, Oxshott, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 0HN
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by BlackOnyx Projects Ltd against the decision of Elmbridge Borough Council.
    The application Ref is 2025/3383.
    The development proposed is construction of a detached single-storey dwelling with accommodation
     in the roof space and integral garage, and a pair of semi-detached houses, with integral garages and
     rooms in the roof space, associated parking, extension of existing driveway to provide access,
     erection of boundary treatment and associated landscaping.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for construction of a
      detached single-storey dwelling with accommodation in the roof space and integral
      garage, and a pair of semi-detached houses, with integral garages and rooms in
      the roof space, associated parking, extension of existing driveway to provide
      access, erection of boundary treatment and associated landscaping at Wild
      Flowers, Wrens Hill, Oxshott, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 0HN in accordance with
      the terms of the application, Ref 2025/3383, subject to the conditions in the
      attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by BlackOnyx Projects Ltd against Elmbridge
      Borough Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.    During the course of this appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (2026) (Framework) has been published. The policy emphasis has not changed
      with regard to the substantive matters in this case, in particular to the main issue of
      living conditions. I have therefore proceeded to determine the appeal on the basis
      of the 2026 Framework.
Main Issue
4.    The main issue is the effect on the living conditions of future occupiers with
      particular regard to daylight and sunlight.
Reasons
5.    The proposed plot 1 would be located to the south-eastern corner of the existing
      garden to Wild Flowers. There is a row of dense evergreen Leyland Cypress to the
      south which the Arboricultural Report states are 5.5m high (G1), and a lower 3.5m

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007869


       high row to the east (G2). There is also a deciduous Sycamore (14m high) (T1)
       and English Oak (16.5m high) (T2) which are on a separate plot.
6.    Plot 1 would be a three bedroom semi-detached house. It has an open plan
      living/dining/kitchen at ground floor served by two windows facing to the rear and
      one to the side. Its back garden would be bounded by the trees mentioned above
      on two sides.
7.    The appellant has submitted detailed daylight and sunlight reports which have
      undertaken assessments in line with the Building Research Establishment (BRE)
      guidelines – Site Layout Planning for Daylight and Sunlight: A guide to good
      practice (2022) (BRE Guide). The BRE guide seeks that a specific light level (150
      lux for living rooms) is exceeded over at least 50% of the room. Also, that at least
      half of a garden receive at least 2 hours of sunlight on 21 March. The reports
      include the evergreen trees at G1 and G2 and updated information has also
      modelled T1, T2 and other trees. The Elmbridge Design Code (2024) provides a
      45 degree angle test relating to two storey extensions closer than 15m to assess
      daylight and sunlight. However, taking into account the type of development
      proposed, the technical site specific results are more relevant to this case.
8.    These results show that the living/kitchen/dining rooms to plot 1 would meet the
      required light level across 66% of its area if deciduous trees are not included and
      44% of its area if trees T1 and T2 are modelled as a solid mass. However, there
      would be dappled light through the leaves of the trees. As such the appellant has
      applied a transparency ratio to the results with the trees in place. At a 30%
      transparency ratio, the weighted summer value for this room would be 50.6%,
      which exceeds the standard in the BRE guidelines, albeit marginally. Taking all the
      above into account, due to the number, size, orientation and separation between
      the windows to the living/kitchen/dining room and the surrounding trees the
      property would have acceptable levels of light, even during the summer months
      when the nearby deciduous trees are in leaf.
9.    The results for the other plots have been carried out using the same methodology
      by a specialist professional. Based on the evidence before me, I have no detail to
      find that these would be inaccurate.
10. 70% of the garden to plot one would receive at least 2 hours of sunlight on 21
    March. Updated models including deciduous trees have not been produced as
    trees would generally not be in leaf on this date. During the summer months when
    trees would be in leaf the sun would be higher in the sky and would clear more of
    the evergreen boundary planting. As such the gardens would receive adequate
    light levels.
11. A previous appeal at this site (Ref: 6002519) considered a different scheme where
    harm was identified on the other side of the appeal site. Additionally, the evidence
    from the appellant in this case clearly considers the effects of the deciduous trees
    and therefore I have sufficient information to reach a conclusion. As such, my
    findings differ from this appeal.
12. Consequently, the proposed development would result in acceptable living
    conditions for future occupiers with particular regard to daylight and sunlight. As
    such, it would be in accordance with Policies DM2 and DM10 of the Development
    Management Plan (2015). Together these require that development should
    provide adequate daylight and sunlight to potential occupiers and appropriate

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007869


       gardens or outdoor space. These are in accordance with the Framework’s
       requirements for acceptable living standards for residents in terms of access to
       daylight, sunlight, and external amenity space.
Other Matters
13. There would be around 14m between the front elevations of the proposed houses
    and the boundary of the garden of Wild Flowers. The host dwelling would then be
    a further 15m away. There would also be around a 22m separation distance
    between the rear elevation of Swallows View and the proposed houses, which are
    set at a lower ground level than Swallows View. Views from the proposed ground
    floor windows towards these closest properties would be screened by boundary
    treatment. The first floor windows closest to Swallows View serve a bathroom and
    utility room and these could be conditioned to be obscure glazed. Views from other
    first floor windows would be angled away and at a greater distance and therefore
    there would not be direct overlooking between the dwellings. There would be some
    more distant or angled views towards gardens, however the relationship would be
    similar to the existing arrangement with views towards gardens from adjoining
    dwellings. As such there would not be an unacceptable effect on privacy.
    Additionally, due to these separation distances and site levels, there would not be
    an overbearing effect to the host property or Swallows View.
14. Plot 1 is closest to Wrens Gardens. It would be a single storey bungalow with a
    roof that pitches away from the boundary and is set back a minimum of 3.5m.
    There is accommodation within the roof. The window to the front elevation is set
    back, which would limit any peripheral views towards Wrens Gardens, whilst the
    windows to the rear face away from the existing house. Rooflights would be high
    level and would not create views. Whilst there is a level change, the single storey
    height combined with the separation distance would not be overbearing and the
    detailed daylight and sunlight evidence demonstrates that there would not be harm
    in this regard.
15. There is a large dense hedge between the appeal site and Halcyon Close. In its
    current form it provides significant screening. However, even without it, the
    proposed rear elevations would be at an angle to the closest property at 23
    Halcyon Close and therefore would not create direct views towards the main
    rooms at this property. Although there would be views towards the garden, these
    would be at a greater distance than the existing views from the neighbouring first
    floor windows.
16. There would be one first floor side window to plot 1 which serves the hallway and
    could be obscure glazed. From the rear first floor windows any visibility towards
    Kingfishers would be at an angle and away from the dwelling and the relationship
    to the rear part of the garden would be similar to that with the properties at
    Halcyon Close.
17. Planning is concerned with the public interest and the effect on private views from
    a property is not a consideration to which I attribute any degree of weight in this
    case. The proposed houses are in a residential area, where domestic lighting is
    common. A condition requiring a sensitive lighting strategy would also minimise
    any effects. As such, the light levels would not be harmful. For the reasons above
    there would not be harm to privacy, light or an overbearing effect on the closest



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007869


       properties. Given these findings it follows that the houses further away would also
       not be adversely affected.
18. The appeal site is within an area of Oxshott which is characterised by generally
    detached properties set in their own grounds, with a number of driveways serving
    multiple properties leading from Wren’s Hill as well as the more closely spaced
    semi-detached and detached houses directly to the rear of the site. The proposed
    development would introduce one detached dwelling and two semi-detached
    houses to the site. Their spacing would be broadly similar to the surroundings and
    would create an appropriately spacious form of development on the plot. As such
    the effect on character and appearance would be acceptable and this is not
    determinative in this case.
19. Wren’s Hill is a narrow, private road with a 15mph speed limit and is also a
    bridleway. The Transport Assessment uses a clear methodology to estimate that
    the proposal would generate a total of 15 daytime vehicle movements, this limited
    increase would not have a severe effect on the operation of Wren’s Hill or the
    surrounding road network. The development proposes a widened mouth to the
    driveway where suitable visibility splays would be provided. The Council’s parking
    SPD requires the provision of a maximum of 2 car parking spaces for 3 bedroom
    houses. Although the garages would be undersized for car parking, there would be
    sufficient space to the front of the dwellings to accommodate 2 spaces for each
    dwelling. As such there is unlikely to be overspill parking onto Wren’s Hill from
    these houses. There would also be space for a fire tender to enter, turn and exit.
    As well as space for bikes and bins and an area would be provided at the roadside
    for the bins on collection day. Details could be secured by condition and the
    detailed placement should take into account the effects on the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers. There is likely to be an increase in traffic during
    construction, however it would be for a limited time and a construction transport
    management plan could be secured by condition which would mitigate the effects.
20. The appeal scheme would result in development on garden land with a notable
    slope, and concerns have been raised regarding flooding. The applicant commits
    to the pre development greenfield run off rate and the appeal scheme sets out that
    there are a number of measures that could be put in place for surface water run
    off. The details of a suitable drainage scheme, including full details of any
    discharge to a watercourse, should be secured by condition.
21. The development would result in the loss of on-site biodiversity. However, it would
    be subject to the standard biodiversity net gain condition which requires a statutory
    10% biodiversity net gain. The appellant has indicated this would be delivered off
    site. This would be established and assessed via the statutory condition, albeit the
    detail does not persuade me that off site gains would not be appropriate for these
    three dwellings.
22. Elmbridge cannot demonstrate a 5 year supply of deliverable housing sites, with
    the appellant stating that they have a 0.9 year supply. The greatest need for
    housing is smaller 1-3 bedroom dwellings and the development would provide this.
    It is possible that the home offices could be occupied as bedrooms which would
    create two 4-bedroom dwellings, nevertheless there is clearly a pressing need for
    housing of all sizes and the appeal scheme would be beneficial in this respect.
    Overall, subject to the conditions set out, the appeal scheme would not be harmful
    with regard to the other matters and there would be no adverse effects.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007869


Conditions
23. I have considered the suggested conditions against the tests in the Framework
    and the advice in the Planning Practice Guidance. I have made amendments in
    order to comply with these documents and to ensure that conditions would not
    unnecessarily delay the delivery of development.
24. The standard implementation condition is attached and in the interests of certainty
    a condition to define the plans with which the scheme should accord. Details of
    landscaping are not included in the approved drawings and, along with a timetable
    for implementation, are required in the interests of the character and appearance
    of the area. For the same reasons, the development should be carried out in
    accordance with the submitted arboricultural details including the retention and
    protection of trees. Tree protection implementation details are pre-commencement
    as they are required before any works start. However, in light of this, the
    submission of landscaping details including a timetable for implementation, can
    occur prior to the above ground development so as not to delay delivery. The
    requirement for development to be carried out in accordance with the specified site
    supervision and monitoring is a proportionate and appropriate way that the Local
    Planning Authority can ensure that these measures are carried out. Materials and
    details of bin stores are required for character and appearance reasons, as well
    as, for the latter, to protect living conditions. Obscure glazing is also required for
    the detailed reasons above relating to living conditions.
25. Details including a precautionary working method statement (PWMS) for the felling
    of the trees, a construction environmental and management plan (CEMP), a stag
    beetle mitigation and enhancement strategy, site walkover for badgers, an
    amphibian and reptile mitigation strategy, a tree survey if additional works are
    required to be carried out to specific trees, a sensitive lighting strategy and that
    development must be in accordance with the submitted ecological details and
    biodiversity enhancements, are required in the interests of biodiversity. The
    lighting details are also needed to protect living conditions, and it would be
    reasonable and proportionate for these to be agreed prior to any implementation of
    lighting. The PWMS, CEMP, stag beetle, badger, amphibian and reptile conditions
    are pre commencement as these details are required before any development
    takes place. There are private gardens in the vicinity, however the condition for a
    site walkover for badgers is clear that this is only required outside the site
    boundary where accessible. The PEA sets out that the site is of limited suitability
    for reptiles and recommends a watching brief. However, the related condition is
    not prescriptive about the form of any mitigation strategy and such details would
    be agreed with the LPA for the discharge of this condition.
26. Car parking layouts are not included in the application and details of these, turning
    space and a construction transport management plan (CTMP) are required in the
    interests of highway safety. The CTMP is pre commencement as these details are
    required for the full construction period. Details of cycle parking are required in
    order to promote sustainable modes of transport. Electric vehicle charging points
    are covered by building regulations and therefore a condition has not been
    included. Full details of a surface water drainage scheme shall also be submitted
    so that the development does not increase flood risk and these details are pre-
    commencement as they are required before any above ground development takes
    place.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007869


Conclusion
27. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

H Miles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007869


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of
              three years from the date of this permission.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in strict accordance
              with the following list of approved plans: Existing Site Location Plan 682-EX-
              01, Existing Site Block Plan 682-EX-02, Proposed Plot 1, 2 & 3 Ground Floor
              Plan 682-SK-02 Rev G, Proposed Plot 1, 2 & 3 First Floor Plan 682-SK-03
              Rev H, Proposed Second Floor Plan 682-SK-04 Rev H, Proposed Roof Plan
              682-SK-05 Rev G, Proposed Front and Side Elevations 682-SK-10 Rev H,
              Proposed Rear and Side Elevation 682-SK-11 Rev H, Proposed Sections
              682-SK-16 Rev H, Proposed Rear Elevation (Context) 682-SK-17 Rev G,
              Proposed Site Section (Context) 682-SK-18, and Proposed Site Block Plan
              682-SK-20 Rev G.
     3)       No development shall take place until a precautionary working method
              statement (PWMS) for the felling of the trees classified as PRF-I in the
              Preliminary Ecological Appraisal and Preliminary Roost Assessment
              prepared by MKA Ecology, dated 28/07/2024 as well as the Ground Level
              Tree Assessment: Technical Note prepared by MKA Ecology dated
              11/12/2025, has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The PWNS shall include a soft-felling methodology and
              details of the pruning to trees T2 and T7. The development shall be carried
              out in accordance with these approved details.
     4)       No development, including groundworks and demolition, shall take place and
              no equipment, machinery or materials shall be brought onto the site for the
              purposes of the development until all tree protection measures have been
              installed in the positions identified on the approved tree protection plan and
              are suitably fit for purpose (BS5837 2012 Figure 2 and / or Figure 3 including
              any ground protection described within section BS5837 2012 6.2.3.3). All tree
              protection measures must be maintained throughout the course of the
              development. The development thereafter shall be implemented in strict
              accordance with the approved details and method statements contained in
              the Arboricultural Implications Report by SJA dated Dec 2025 Ref: SJA air
              24340-01d
     5)       No development, including groundworks and demolition, shall take place and
              no equipment, machinery or materials shall be brought onto the site for the
              purposes of the development until a Construction Transport Management
              Plan (CTMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The CTMP shall include details of:
              i)    parking for vehicles of site personnel, operatives and visitors
              ii) loading and unloading of plant and materials
              iii) storage of plant and materials
              iv) programme of works (including measures for traffic management)
              v) provision of boundary hoarding behind any visibility zones
              vi) HGV deliveries and hours of operation
              vii) vehicle routing
              viii) measures to prevent the deposit of materials on the highway
              ix) on-site turning for construction vehicles


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007869


              The approved CTMP shall be adhered to throughout the construction period
              for the development.
     6)       No development, including groundworks and demolition, shall take place and
              no equipment, machinery or materials shall be brought onto the site for the
              purposes of the development until full details of a Construction Environmental
              and Management Plan (CEMP) are submitted to and approved in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority. The CEMP should be prepared by a suitably
              qualified ecologist. The CEMP should be based on impact avoidance,
              mitigation and enhancement measures specified within the submitted
              Preliminary Ecological Appraisal and Preliminary Roost Assessment
              prepared by MKA Ecology, dated 28/07/2024 as well as the Ground Level
              Tree Assessment: Technical Note prepared by MKA Ecology dated
              11/12/2025, and should include, but not be limited to the following:
              i)   Map showing the location of all ecological features
              ii) Risk assessment of the potentially damaging construction activities
              iii) Practical measures to avoid and reduce impacts during construction
              iv) Location and timing of works to avoid harm to biodiversity features
              v) Responsible persons and lines of communication
              vi) Use of protective fencing, exclusion barriers and warning signs.
              The development thereafter shall be implemented in strict accordance with
              the approved details.
     7)       No development including groundworks and demolition shall take place and
              no equipment, machinery or materials shall be brought onto the site for the
              purposes of the development until an Amphibian and Reptile Mitigation
              Strategy has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The Amphibian and Reptile Mitigation Strategy shall be
              prepared by a suitably qualified ecologist. The development thereafter shall
              be implemented in strict accordance with the approved details.
     8)       No development including groundworks and demolition shall take place and
              no equipment, machinery or materials shall be brought onto the site for the
              purposes of the development until a stag beetle mitigation and enhancement
              strategy has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local
              Planning Authority. The Stag Beetle strategy shall be prepared by a suitably
              qualified ecologist and be appropriate to the local ecological context. The
              development thereafter shall be implemented in strict accordance with the
              approved details.
     9)       No development including groundworks and demolition shall take place and
              no equipment, machinery or materials shall be brought onto the site for the
              purposes of the development until a site walkover has been undertaken by a
              suitably experienced ecologist to check for badger setts within the application
              site boundary, and a 30m buffer, where accessible. If any badger activity is
              detected an appropriate method of working, including details of any licences
              that are required, shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority prior to the commencement of development. The
              development thereafter shall be implemented in strict accordance with the
              approved details.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007869


     10)      No development shall take place until a detailed surface water drainage
              scheme for the site, based on sustainable drainage principles and an
              assessment of the hydrological and hydrogeological context of the
              development, has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority.
              The submitted details shall:
              i)   provide information about the design storm period and intensity, the
                   method employed to delay and control the surface water discharged
                   from the site and the measures taken to prevent pollution of the
                   receiving groundwater and/or surface waters;
              ii) include a timetable for its implementation; and,
              iii) provide, a management and maintenance plan for the lifetime of the
                   development which shall include the arrangements for adoption by any
                   public authority or statutory undertaker and any other arrangements to
                   secure the operation of the scheme throughout its lifetime.
              The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              details. The sustainable drainage system shall be managed and maintained
              thereafter in accordance with the approved management and maintenance
              plan.
     11)      No above ground development shall take place until a scheme of hard and
              soft landscaping has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The scheme shall include a timetable for the
              implementation of arboricultural work to existing trees and all remaining
              landscaping work and new planting. Any new or retained trees or plants,
              which within a period of five years of the commencement of above ground
              development die, are removed, or become seriously damaged or diseased,
              shall be replaced as soon as practicable with others of similar size and
              species. The development thereafter shall be implemented in strict
              accordance with the approved details including the timetable for
              implementation.
     12)      No above ground development shall take place until samples of the materials
              to be used on the external faces and roof of the building have been submitted
              to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development
              shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
     13)      No above ground development shall take place until full details of car and
              cycle parking have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The details shall include:
              i)   space for vehicles to be parked and for vehicles to turn around within
                   the site
              ii) High quality, secure, lit and covered cycle parking for each dwelling for a
                   minimum of 2 bikes. Storage spaces should cater for disabled/adaptive
                   cycles.
              iii) Charging points with timers for e-bikes within said facilities; and
              iv) Clear hardstanding routes between the cycle stores and the site access.
              The facilities, parking and turning areas shall be provided prior to the first
              occupation of the development and thereafter retained for their designated
              purposes.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007869


     14)      Prior to the first occupation of the development, details of the waste
              arrangements shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The details shall contain the design, location and
              positioning of the proposed bin stores for refuse and recycling. The agreed
              details shall be provided prior to the first occupation of the development and
              thereafter retained for their designated purposes.
     15)      Prior to the first occupation of the development the upper floor side windows,
              rooflights on the flank elevations, and first floor windows to the family
              bathroom and linen cupboard to Plot 1 shall be glazed with obscure glass
              that accords with level three obscurity as shown on the Pilkington textured
              glass privacy levels (other glass suppliers are available) and only openable
              above a height of 1.7m above the internal floor level of the room to which it
              serves. The windows shall be permanently retained in that condition
              thereafter.
     16)      No external lighting shall be implemented until a sensitive lighting
              management plan has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
              Local Planning Authority. This document should demonstrate compliance
              with the National Planning Policy Framework and best practice guidance by
              Bat Conservation Trust (BCT) & Institution of Lighting Professionals (ILP)
              (2023) on bats and artificial lighting in the UK and include detail that species
              sensitive to lighting shall not be adversely impacted by an increase in artificial
              lighting at the site. The Sensitive Lighting Management Plan shall be
              prepared by a qualified ecologist. The development thereafter shall be
              implemented in strict accordance with the approved details.
     17)      The development shall be carried out in accordance with the conclusions and
              recommendations, including any biodiversity enhancements, in the
              Preliminary Ecological Appraisal and Preliminary Roost Assessment
              prepared by MKA Ecology, dated 28/07/2024 as well as the Ground Level
              Tree Assessment: Technical Note prepared by MKA Ecology dated
              11/12/2025. The biodiversity mitigation and enhancement measures,
              including provisions for roosting bats including a minimum of two integrated
              or wall -mounted bat bricks/box, shall be implemented prior to the first
              occupation of the development and thereafter retained.
     18)      Prior to any pruning works to trees T2 and T7 which are greater than
              proposed in the Arboricultural Implications Report by SJA dated Dec 2025
              Ref: SJA air 24340-01d, a survey to investigate the presence/likely absence
              of bats shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with these
              approved details.
     19)      The development, including the retention of existing trees, hedges and
              hedgerows and arboricultural site supervision and monitoring, shall be
              carried out in accordance with the Arboricultural Implications Report by SJA
              dated Dec 2025 Ref: SJA air 24340-01d.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
