Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by J Hobbs MRTPI MCD BSc (hons)
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007657
Little Land, Lower Smaws, Wetherby Road, Tadcaster, North Yorkshire LS24 9GG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Simon Perkins against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•    The application Ref is ZG2026/0034/ATD.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of a building to 1 no dwelling (Use Class C3) and
     associated operational development.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
      3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q, paragraph Q.2 of the Town and Country
      Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
      for the change of use of a building to 1 no dwelling (Use Class C3) and associated
      operational development at Little Land, Lower Smaws, Wetherby Road, Tadcaster,
      North Yorkshire LS24 9GG in accordance with the application ZG2026/0034/ATD
      made on 14 January 2026, and the details submitted with it, including plan nos
      TQRQM26010181941630, and TQRQM26047173103465, and plans entitled
      “Front Elevation Proposed”, “Rear Elevation Current & Proposed”, and “Side
      Elevations”.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The description of development in the banner above is taken from the Decision
      Notice. I have removed reference to the existing building being an agricultural
      building as this is not claimed by the Appellant. The description of development in
      the Application Form did not explicitly state that the proposed development was for
      the change of use of a building to a dwellinghouse. As such, I consider the
      description of development from the Decision Notice to be more accurate, subject
      to the minor amendment I have made.
3.    Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q [Class Q] of the Town and
      Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, as
      amended [the GPDO], planning permission is granted for the change of use of
      buildings on agricultural units to dwellinghouses subject to limitations and
      conditions. Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior
      approval is required, Paragraph W(3) of Schedule 2, Part 3 [Paragraph W] of the
      GPDO provides that the local planning authority may refuse the application where
      it considers that the proposed development does not comply, or that the developer
      has provided insufficient information to enable the authority to establish whether



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007657


      the proposed development complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions
      that are applicable to such permitted development.
Background and Main Issue
4.    The Council contend that the proposed development would not comply with Class
      Q of the GPDO as it does not entail the change of use of a building that is part of
      an established agricultural unit, nor is it a former agricultural building that was, but
      is no longer, part of an established agricultural unit.
5.    Therefore, the main issue of the appeal is whether the appeal building (i) is part of
      an established agricultural unit and is in continuing use, or (ii) is a former
      agricultural building that was part of an established agricultural unit.
Reasons
6.    Schedule 2, Part 3, Paragraph X [Paragraph X] of the GPDO defines ‘established
      agricultural unit’ as agricultural land occupied as a unit for the purposes of
      agriculture. It goes on to explain for the purposes of Class Q this use shall be on or
      before 20 March 2013, or for 10 years before the date the development begins.
7.    Paragraph X does not include a definition of ‘agriculture’. I therefore refer to the
      definition within Section 336(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990. It
      specifies that the definition of agriculture includes horticulture, fruit growing, seed
      growing, meadow land, and the use of land for woodlands where that use is
      ancillary to other agricultural purposes.
8.    Prior approval was previously granted for the erection of a lean to extension to the
      appeal building. The Application Form for that application specified that more
      internal space was needed to season logs and to store associated tools and
      vehicles. The Appellant confirms that this building has been continuously used for
      forestry purposes since before they purchased the land in 2012. Moreover, during
      my site visit I observed that it is currently in use for storing logs and tools.
9.    The Appellant’s landholding comprises of 10.5 acres of land. This includes
      woodland, land used for seed growing, nursing grounds for young trees and
      hedging plants in plots, and meadow land for natural wildlife corridors. The
      Appellant asserts that the primary use of the land is for horticulture and they run a
      business selling plants and trees to local landscape garden contractors. They also
      sell small quantities of logs to a “few select locals.”
10. My observations on site corroborate the Appellant’s assertion. A large amount of
    land was being used for horticultural purposes, largely related to the growing of
    young trees and hedges, or as meadow land. Although a moderate amount of the
    Appellant’s landholding is woodland, there is only a modest amount of space for
    the storage of logs and associated tools. Furthermore, I only observed a small
    number of logs being stored. As such, the primary use of the landholding is for
    agricultural purposes, and the forestry use, including the appeal building, is
    ancillary to this. I consider that the landholding, as a whole, is being use as a
    single unit to support the ongoing horticultural business and has been since before
    20 March 2013. It therefore meets the definition of an established agricultural unit
    as set out within Paragraph X of the GPDO.
11. As I have found that the appeal building is part of an established agricultural unit
    and is in continuing use, there is no need to consider whether it is a former

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007657


      agricultural building when assessing the proposal’s compliance with the conditions
      and limitations of Class Q.
12. On balance, I conclude that the appeal building is part of an established
    agricultural unit and is in continuing use. Subject to the conditions and limitations
    specified within Class Q of the GPDO, the proposed development should be
    permitted.
Other Matters
13. Within the Delegated Planning Report, the Council indicate that the land could be
    contaminated due to the previous railway use. On the Application Form, the
    Appellant set out this historic use of the land and how the railway was formed.
    There is no substantive evidence which indicates that the land is contaminated. I
    am satisfied that the potential presence of contaminated land would not be a
    reason to withhold prior approval in this instance.
Conditions
14. Paragraph Q.2(4) of Class Q of the GPDO, specifies that the development
    permitted by Class Q must be completed within 3 years starting with the prior
    approval date.
15. Paragraph W.(13) specifies that a local planning authority may grant prior approval
    subject to conditions reasonably related to the subject matter of the prior approval.
    The Local Highway Authority has indicated that if prior approval is granted two
    conditions should be attached to the prior approval.
16. The first suggested condition would require the access to be upgraded prior to the
    residential use of the building commencing. The proposed development would
    lead to a very modest increase in vehicle movements. The existing access is
    appropriate for the proposed use. As such, the suggested condition is not
    necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms.
17. The second suggested condition would require parking facilities to be constructed
    in accordance with details approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. This
    suggested condition is also not necessary to make the development acceptable in
    planning terms, as there is already space for the parking of two vehicles next to
    the building.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed and prior approval
    should be granted.

J Hobbs
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
