Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by John Felgate BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007451
Land to the rear of The White House, Munden Road, Dane End, Herts SG12 0LP
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Pool against the decision of East Hertfordshire District Council.
   The application reference is 3/25/1936/FUL.
   The development proposed is the erection of a self-build/custom-build dwelling, with outbuilding and
    associated works.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted, for the erection of a
   dwelling with outbuilding and associated works, on land to the rear of The White
   House, Dane End, Herts SG12 0LP, in accordance with the application
   3/25/1936/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.

Application for costs
2. An application for costs has been made by the appellants against the Council. That
   application is the subject of a separate decision.

Preliminary matters
3. A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) was published
   on 17 August 2026, and is a material consideration in all appeal decisions taken
   after that date. In this appeal, the appellants and the Council have been given an
   opportunity to comment on the relevance of the new NPPF policies, and I have
   taken their replies into account.

Main issues
4. In the light of all the matters raised, I find the main issues in the appeal to be as
   follows:
        whether the proposed development would accord with the relevant local and
         national policies relating to development in rural areas;
        the effects of the development on the character and appearance of the area;
        the effects on the setting of The White House, as a listed building;
        and the effects on trees and hedges within and adjoining the site.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007451


Reasons for the decision
Policy on development in rural areas
5.    The appeal site comprises, in the main, a hard-surfaced tennis court, located in
      one corner of a rectangular, field to the rear of The White House. Access would
      be gained via an extension of The White House’s existing driveway, running
      initially through the existing garden, and then across part of the rear field. On the
      Policies Map for the district, The White House itself lies within the Dane End
      village boundary, while its rear garden and the land beyond, including the appeal
      site, fall outside.
6. The local plan for the area is the East Hertfordshire District Plan (the EHDP),
   adopted in October 2018. In that plan, Policy DPS2 sets out the overall
   development strategy, which is to deliver sustainable development in accordance
   with a hierarchy, with the first priority being brownfield sites, then urban areas, then
   urban extensions, and then limited development in villages. In the rural area
   beyond the green belt, Policy GBR2 limits development to various specified
   categories, one of which is (e), the redevelopment of previously developed land
   (PDL) in sustainable locations, where appropriate to the character, appearance and
   setting of the site and surrounding area. Under Policy VILL2, Dane End is
   classified as a Group 2 village, where limited infill development is permissible,
   subject to meeting a list of criteria.
7. In the case of the present appeal site, the tennis court comprises an asphalt
   surface, laid on an engineered base, enclosed by chain-link fencing on substantial
   metal posts. The Council accepts that this part of the site is PDL, and I see no
   reason to disagree. The proposed new dwelling, and its domestic garden, would
   be wholly on this part of the site. The land over which the new driveway would run
   is also partly PDL, by virtue of being garden land outside the defined built-up area.
   The great majority of the site is therefore PDL, where the principle of development
   is permitted by EHDP Policy GBR2(e), subject only to the two other considerations
   referred to above. With regard to the latter, Dane End has a convenience
   shop/post office, and a reasonable bus service, and it is not disputed that the
   village amounts to a sustainable location. Matters relating to character and
   appearance will be considered elsewhere in this decision.
8. In so far as the remainder of the site is concerned, the southernmost part of the
   proposed driveway route would not be PDL, according to the NPPF definition, due
   to falling within the village boundary. But this part of the scheme would not appear
   to involve any in-principle conflict with any of the above policies relating to
   development in the rural area. The northernmost part of the driveway, and the
   slight widening to accommodate a turning area, would involve an incursion into the
   rear field, which is neither PDL nor within the village boundary. As such, this part of
   the development would not accord with any of the identified policies. But the extent
   of this incursion would be small; indeed, so small in my view, as to be of no real
   significance in policy terms. And in any event, having regard to the site’s other
   constraints, it is clear that this element of the scheme is necessary, to enable the
   main PDL area to be developed.
9. Looking at the appeal proposal as a whole therefore, notwithstanding Policy
   GBR2’s important aim of limiting development in the rural area, it seems to me that,
   in principle, the scheme now proposed is acceptable within the provisions of that
   policy, in GBR2(e), for the redevelopment of PDL.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007451


10. In the new NPPF, Policy S5 states that outside settlements, only certain forms of
    development should be approved. These include, at S5-1d, the redevelopment of
    PDL. In the present case, the proposal falls within the scope of this national
    policy, for the same reasons as those above. In addition, at S5-1j, the same policy
    also permits development outside settlements where the proposal would meet an
    unmet need, provided that the site is well related to a settlement, and is of a scale
    that can be accommodated. In the present case, it is accepted that the district
    lacks a 5-year supply of housing land; and it seems not to be disputed that the site
    directly adjoins the existing settlement, nor that a single dwelling is acceptable in
    terms of scale. As far as the principle of the development is concerned therefore,
    the requirements of NPPF Policy S5, under both 1d and 1j, are clearly met. .
11. Having regard to all of the above matters, I find that the proposed development
    would comply in principle with the most relevant local and national planning policies
    relating to development in the rural area of the district, these being EHDP Policy
    GBR2 and NPPF Policy S5.
Effects on the character and appearance of the area
12. I saw on my visit that the field to the rear of The White House slopes upwards to
    both the north and the west. The field itself has no particular landscape quality or
    visual interest. The appeal site sits in the south-eastern corner of the field, at the
    lowest point. To the south, the site adjoins the White House’s garden. The garden
    is large, but is landscaped and cultivated, and clearly residential in character.
    Alongside The White House are other properties fronting Munden Road. To the
    east of the appeal site are Forge Cottages, with their long driveway and associated
    land. Just beyond these is Easington Road, a cul-de-sac of terraced housing. The
    appeal site is therefore largely enclosed, on two sides, by existing residential
    development. On its other two sides, the site is surrounded by the remainder of the
    field of which it forms part. Beyond this, to the west is the village recreation ground,
    and to the north is a group of large agricultural buildings forming part of High View
    Farm. In terms of land use therefore, the site relates reasonably well to the
    existing development pattern.
13. Inward views of the site are visible, between the existing trees, from various points
    along the footpath that runs along the northern boundary of the field. From this
    direction, the existing view is of an enclosed field, surrounded by trees, with no
    visual connection to any wider landscape. The proposed new dwelling would be
    seen at a distance of about 60m or so, on lower ground, against a background of
    trees and dense vegetation. It would also be seen in the context of Forge
    Cottages, and the High View farmyard buildings, all of which are closer to the view
    point, and on higher ground. From Munden Road, the only part of the site that is
    visible is the access and the first part of the driveway. No public views have been
    identified from any other direction or viewpoint, and from my observations, I am
    satisfied that none of any significance exist. Seen in this context, it seems to me
    that any development on the appeal site would not be likely to be unduly prominent
    in the landscape, and that any impact on the setting of the village would be, at
    most, limited and localised.
14. The new dwelling now proposed would be one and a half storeys in height, with a
    T-shaped floorplan, pitched roofs, a gabled entrance feature, and some modest-
    sized dormers. The proposed outbuilding would take the form of a double garage
    with a small store-room alongside, and a studio space in the roof. Architecturally,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007451


        the design is unexceptional but inoffensive. The driveway, turning area and parking
        spaces would be partly screened by the new main building, and this could be
        supplemented by appropriate fencing and additional planting if necessary. These
        latter features can be secured or controlled by condition, as necessary. The minor
        surfacing improvements proposed to the driveway and access would not be likely to
        be unduly noticeable, nor indeed harmful in any event; any effects of these works
        on the trees or hedges in that area are considered elsewhere in this decision.
        Subject to this latter point, these design considerations reinforce my view that the
        proposed development would have no significant adverse visual impact.
15. For these reasons therefore, I find that the appeal proposal would cause no
    material harm to the area’s character or appearance. In this respect, the scheme
    would involve no conflict with the relevant provisions of EHDP Policies DES2 or
    DES3, which seek amongst other things to conserve the character and distinctive
    features of the district’s landscape, and to protect existing landscape features. For
    the same reasons, the development would also satisfy those elements of Policy
    GBR2 that relate to the character and appearance of the site and its setting.
Effects on the setting of The White House
16. The White House is listed, Grade II. The house is an attractive, 2-storey detached
    property, said to date from around 1830-40, set well back from Munden Road, and
    surrounded by extensive gardens on three sides. From the information available,
    the building’s significance as a heritage asset appears to lie mainly in its evidential
    value, as an example of the local architectural style and construction techniques
    typical of a moderately affluent family house of that period.
17. In the EHDP, Policy HA1 seeks to preserve and enhance the district’s historic
    environment, and Policy HA7 to sustain and enhance the significance of listed
    buildings and their settings. In the NPPF, Policy HE6 requires that the
    conservation of designated heritage assets be given substantial weight.
18. The evidence produced in the appellants’ heritage statement includes historic
    Ordnance Survey mapping from 1878 and 19221. On the 1878 map, the field which
    now includes the appeal site is depicted as an open enclosure, bounded by trees
    on three sides. On its fourth, southern side, a boundary of some form is indicated
    between the field and The White House, albeit in this case shown only as a single
    line, with no vegetation. The map also shows that the position of this southern
    boundary at that date was some 30m or so closer to the house than that which
    exists now. By the time of the 1922 map, the boundary between the house and
    field had been removed altogether, and the field itself had been developed as a
    commercial nursery, with extensive glasshouse buildings.
19. Based on the evidence available, it seems likely that the rear field has been in the
    same ownership as The White House, since at least the early 1920s. Before that
    date however, the evidence is inconclusive. It is also reasonable to assume that,
    during the life of the nursery, there was a close functional link between the
    occupants of the house and the plant growing activities carried out on the rear land.
    But there is no evidence of such a link either before or after that period. The date
    when the nursery closed is not stated, but it is evident from the condition of the
    land, and the growth of the vegetation which has been planted since, that this must
    now be several decades ago. None of the evidence establishes any link, in terms
1
    Similar maps are produced by the Council, in which the dates are referred to as ‘1874-94’ and ‘1920-24’ respectively


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    4
Appeal Decision 6007451


     of either ownership or function, during the 1830s or mid-19th century, which is the
     period to which the building’s significance primarily relates. The extent of the
     evidenced relationship, dating only from relatively recent times, does not seem to
     me to demonstrate that either the appeal site or the larger field contributes anything
     of historic significance to the listed building’s setting.
20. The mapping evidence also suggests that in 1878 there may have been
    unobstructed intervisibility between the listed building and the rear field. But by
    1922 those views had evidently been completely changed, and indeed almost
    entirely blocked out, by the nursery structures which covered the whole of the
    central portion of the site. Subsequently, although the latter have now gone, they
    have been replaced by maturing trees and dense vegetation within what is now the
    extended garden. Consequently, at the time of my visit, I saw that there is now no
    meaningful intervisibility in either direction. In winter, it is probable that conditions
    will change somewhat, but even so, given the density of the vegetation, it seems
    likely that any gaps that appear would be so limited as to offer no more than
    glimpses of what lies beyond. The Council suggests that views of the field might be
    obtainable from the listed building’s upper floors, but given that the house is on
    lower ground than the trees, this seems unlikely. In the circumstances, I am not
    persuaded that the appeal field plays any significant visual role in the setting of the
    listed building.
21. By way of contrast, the extensive domestic gardens to the front, rear and east side
    of The White House have largely unobstructed views, to and from the listed
    building. From the 1878 map, it is evident that most of this area must have been
    gardens since at least that time. The eastern side area is shown with a formalised
    ‘kitchen garden’ layout, and the front area had a collection of small buildings that
    were likely to have been potting sheds. Although the northern extension to the rear
    garden is a more recent addition, it is fairly clear that the great majority of the
    present garden area has been closely associated with the house, as either
    domestic or ornamental gardens, since the 19th century. Consequently, to my
    mind, it is these garden areas that now form the limits of the listed building’s current
    setting. This reinforces my view that the field which includes the appeal site no
    longer forms part of that setting, and contributes little or nothing to the heritage
    asset’s significance.
22. The development now proposed would introduce buildings, fences and hard
    surfaces onto one corner of the field, changing the character of that part. However,
    for the reasons explained above, that change would have no material effect on the
    listed building’s setting or significance.
23. The scheme would also require some works to the existing access drive. The
    existing drive, from Munden Road as far as the end of the rear garden, forms part
    of the original domestic plot, and therefore lies within the listed building’s setting.
    But the works to the driveway would be small scale, with the only visible changes
    comprising surfacing and edging, along the existing alignment, and mainly within
    the existing width. Minimal, ground-level works of this kind would have a negligible
    effect on the listed building or its setting.
24. I appreciate that the historical evidence contained in the heritage statement is quite
    limited. But the accuracy of that information has not been disputed, and there is no
    apparent suggestion that anything of importance has been omitted. To my mind,
    the statement is proportionate to the nature of the subject matter, and is sufficient

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007451


     to enable the impact of the development to be understood. I am therefore satisfied
     that the evidence provides an adequate basis on which to reach my conclusion on
     this issue.
25. For these reasons, I find that the proposed development would have a neutral
    impact on the setting of The White House. As such, the scheme would preserve
    the character and appearance of the listed building and its setting, and would leave
    its significance unharmed. In this regard, the proposal would accord with the aims
    of the relevant EHDP and NPPF policies identified above.
Effects on trees and hedges
26. The updated Arboricultural Report, submitted in February 2026, confirms that the
    proposed development would require the removal of four trees, two groups and one
    other small tree described as a shrub. The great majority of these, comprising
    trees T1,T2,T6, G1, G2 and S13, are of small size, poor quality, and have limited
    visibility. None are protected by any TPO. The loss of these trees would therefore
    cause no significant harm.
27. One of the trees to be removed, the liquidambar T12, is classified as ‘B’ category,
    indicating a tree of moderate quality. But this particular tree makes little
    contribution to any public views, or to the setting of The White House, and is
    overshadowed by the much larger ash, T11, growing close by. Although it would
    be possible to retain T12, by realigning part of the proposed driveway, this would
    mean taking a larger part of the field area, and would also run closer to the
    boundary trees T17 and T18, which are of more value due to their greater visibility
    and screening function, in relation to views from the playing field to the west. T12
    is not protected. Given its relatively small contribution to the surroundings, its loss
    would result in very limited harm. On balance, this loss seems to me acceptable, in
    order to facilitate what would clearly be, in the light of my earlier findings, an
    otherwise acceptable development.
28. The upgrading of the existing gravel driveway to, take more frequent traffic
    movements, would require the installation of a cellular confinement system, with
    suitable edging and a new surface dressing in a suitable material. For the majority
    of its length, the existing width appears adequate, with no more than minor
    widening needed in a small number of areas. In the vicinity of the site access, the
    cellular system could be laid on top of the existing asphalt, to avoid interference
    with the roots of the protected T30 and T31. Elsewhere along the route, it seems
    likely that the existing gravel could be lifted reasonably easily and safely, to
    minimise the difference in finished levels. The installation of the necessary edging
    would require care to avoid root damage, but there seems no reason to doubt that
    this could be done successfully, provided the method is approved in advance.
29. The arboricultural report confirms that although the existing hedges alongside the
    drive would need to be trimmed back, the extent of this would not need to be any
    more severe than routine maintenance. In the light of the above, I see no reason to
    doubt that pruning on the necessary scale could be achieved without harm to the
    hedges’ future health or viability.
30. Overall therefore, subject to the imposition of the necessary conditions, I find that
    the development would avoid undue harm to the site’s existing trees and hedges.
    In this regard, I again see no conflict with the relevant provisions of EHDP Policies


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007451


     DES2 or DES3, nor with Policy DES4, which seeks a high standard of design and
     layout.
Other matters
31. The proposal is described in the application as a self-build or custom-build dwelling,
    and it is stated that the appellants have planned the new property with the intention
    of downsizing into it for their continued retirement years. The provision of self- and
    custom-built housing is encouraged by NPPF Policy H1-2i, and the Council does
    not appear to dispute that there is a need for housing sites of this type in the
    district. The opportunity for the provision of the appeal site as a site suitable for a
    self- or custom build property is therefore a potential benefit.
32. In this case the development is not secured as self- or custom build by way of any
    legal undertaking or agreement. The potential benefit therefore carries only modest
    weight. But nevertheless, since I have found the scheme to accord with the
    development plan, and found no significant harm in respect of any of the issues
    raised, such an undertaking is not necessary to make the development acceptable
    in planning terms. Nor could a condition be justified in these circumstances.
Conditions
33. I have considered the matter of conditions in the light of NPPF Policy DM6. Those
    that I intend to impose are set out in the attached schedule. With only a few
    exceptions, I agree that the conditions suggested by the Council meet the relevant
    tests in substance, but I have edited a number in the interests of precision and
    clarity.
34. In addition to the standard conditions relating to the timescale and approved plans,
    I agree that conditions regarding levels, tree protection, materials, landscaping,
    boundary treatments and the improvements to the existing driveway are all
    necessary, to ensure that the development respects the character and appearance
    of the area, and preserves the setting of the listed building. In addition, the
    condition relating to the driveway, and another to secure the provision of the on-site
    parking and turning, are also needed for reasons of highway safety. A condition
    regarding water efficiency is justified in this case, exceptionally, in order to comply
    with EHDP Policy WAT4.
35. The suggested conditions relating to energy efficiency and provision for electric
    vehicle charging are noted, but as these matters are now covered by the Building
    Regulations, there is no need for planning conditions to secure these elements. A
    condition removing permitted development rights for extensions, alterations and
    outbuildings, does not seem to me justified, in view of my findings elsewhere in this
    decision.
Conclusion
36. For the reasons explained in this decision, I have found the appeal proposal to fall
    within the types of development which are acceptable in the countryside, in
    accordance with EHDP Policy GBR2. I have also found that, subject to appropriate
    conditions, the scheme would cause no significant harm to the area’s character and
    appearance, or to the setting of the adjacent listed building, or to the trees and
    hedges on the site, thus avoiding conflict with any other relevant EHDP policies.
    The development would therefore accord with the development plan.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007451


37. The development would utilise PDL, and as such is supported by Policy S5 of the
    NPPF. The acknowledged shortfall in the district’s housing supply adds further
    weight in favour of the scheme. None of the alleged adverse impacts have been
    substantiated, nor do I find any other material considerations weighing against the
    appeal.
38. I have taken account of all the other matters raised, but none changes my
    conclusion, which is that planning permission should be granted. The appeal is
    therefore allowed.

J Felgate
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007451


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
The planning permission to which this decision relates is granted subject to the
following conditions:
1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
   date of this decision.
2) The development shall be carried out in accordance with the following approved
   plans: 224612-PL-010, 224612-PL-100-E, 224612-PL-101-B, 224612-PL-103-A,
   and 224612-PL-300-B.
3) No part of the development shall be commenced until details of the existing and
   proposed finished levels of the land and buildings, throughout the site, have been
   submitted to the local planning authority and approved in writing. Thereafter, the
   development shall be carried out in accordance with the details thus approved.
4) No existing tree or hedge, within any part of the land edged either red or blue on
   Plan No 224612-PL-010, shall be felled, uprooted, lopped, topped, or otherwise
   removed or destroyed, other than in accordance with the details shown in the
   Arboricultural Impacts Assessment by OMC Associates (updated version,
   submitted in February 2026). If, notwithstanding this condition, any retained tree is
   removed, uprooted or destroyed or dies within 5 years from the commencement of
   the development, replacement planting shall be carried out in accordance with
   details to be approved by the local planning authority.
5) No part of the development shall be commenced, nor shall any construction
   materials, machinery, vehicles or equipment be brought onto the site, until
   measures for the protection of the trees and hedges to be retained, in accordance
   with Condition 4 above, have been installed in accordance with a scheme that shall
   have been submitted to the local planning authority and approved in writing. The
   scheme shall include full details of all necessary protective fencing and ground
   protection, in general accordance with the indicative details contained in the
   Arboricultural Impacts Assessment by OMC Associates. Thereafter, these
   measures shall be retained until all such machinery, equipment and vehicles, and
   any surplus materials and construction waste have been removed from the site
   following the completion of the development. During construction, nothing shall be
   stored or placed in any area fenced in accordance with this condition and the
   ground levels within those areas shall not be altered, nor shall any excavation be
   made, without the written approval of the local planning authority.
6) No construction work on the new dwelling or outbuilding, above ground floor slab
   level, shall take place until full details of the materials to be used on the external
   surfaces of those buildings have been submitted to the local planning authority and
   approved in writing. Thereafter, the development shall be carried out using only
   these approved materials.
7) No construction work on the new dwelling or outbuilding, above ground floor slab
   level, shall take place until details of water efficiency measures have been
   submitted to the local planning authority and approved in writing. The details shall
   show how the dwelling will achieve a notional water consumption standard of 110
   litres per person per day. Thereafter, the development shall be carried out so as to
   incorporate these approved measures, and these shall be retained throughout the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007451


     life of the development, unless otherwise approved in writing by the local planning
     authority.
8) The new dwelling shall not be occupied until a scheme of hard and soft landscaping
   has been implemented, in accordance with details that shall have been submitted
   to the local planning authority and approved in writing. The scheme shall include
   full details of planting and seeding to the garden areas and other soft areas around
   the new dwelling and driveway, and details of the surfacing of the parking and
   turning areas. If, within a period of five years from the date of completion, any new
   tree or plant forming part of the landscaping scheme shall die, or become
   destroyed, damaged or diseased, that tree or plant shall be replaced, with another
   of the same type and in the same position, within the next available planting
   season.
9) The new dwelling shall not be occupied until the boundaries of the site have been
   enclosed by fencing, hedging, or other boundary treatments, in accordance with
   further details that shall have been submitted to the local planning authority and
   approved in writing. Thereafter, the boundary treatments thus approved shall be
   retained, and no others of any kind shall be erected, including any that would
   otherwise be permitted by virtue of any part of of the Town and Country Planning
   (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, unless approved in
   writing by the local planning authority.
10) The new dwelling shall not be occupied until the existing driveway to the site has
    been improved, in accordance with further details that shall have been submitted to
    the local planning authority and approved in writing. The details to be submitted
    and approved shall include:
      i) details of the cellular confinement system to be used, its extent, and the
         method of its installation;
      ii) the type of edging to be used for the cellular confinement system, its
          positioning, and method of installation;
     iii) a bituminous bound surface over the first 6m from the junction with Munden
          Road;
     iv) a minimum width of 4.2m over the first 10m from the junction with Munden
         Road;
      v) details of the proposed surface treatment and width of the remainder of the
         driveway, to admit the passage of delivery vehicles and emergency vehicles,
         and details of any pruning of the adjacent trees or hedges necessary to achieve
         that width.
11) The new dwelling shall not be occupied until the proposed parking and turning
    areas shown on Plan No 224612-PL-100-E have been provided, in accordance
    with that plan, and surfaced in accordance with the landscaping details to be
    approved under Condition 8 above. Thereafter, the parking and turning areas
    shall be retained and kept available for these purposes, throughout the life of the
    development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
