Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 July 2026
by R J Redford MTCP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007582
Former Revolution Bar, Maxwell Road, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire HP9 1QX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by The Edward Gostling Foundation against the decision of Buckinghamshire
     Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/1579/FA.
•    The development proposed is described as the demolition and construction of a part 3 – part 5
     storey residential development (Use Class C3) with flexible Use Class E(a) (Retail), E(b) (Café),
     E(c) (Professional Services), E(e) (Health Services), E(f) (Creche/nursery) and E(g)(i) (Office) at
     ground floor level, with ancillary car parking, cycle parking, refuse and landscaping.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2. Applications for costs were made by The Edward Gostling Foundation against
   Buckinghamshire Council as the Local Planning Authority and as the Local Lead
   Flood Authority. These applications are the subject to separate decisions.
Preliminary Matters
3. For clarity, the description of development has been taken from the planning
   application. During the application process the scheme was amended. This
   reduced the number of proposed dwellings from 29 to 28, and indicatively showed
   roof mounted photovoltaic arrays.
4. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was updated in August
   2026. The main parties have been given an opportunity to comment on this, so the
   revised version has been referred to in this decision. The emerging
   Buckinghamshire Council Local Plan (eLP) regulation 19 draft was also issued in
   July 2026. However, the examining inspector has not provided any comment as to
   the suitability of the eLP and its policies. Therefore, in accordance with Framework
   Policy DM4, it is not found that the examination is at such an advanced stage to
   attract anything more than limited weight.
Background and Main Issues
5. The Council has not raised an objection to the proposed mixed use of the site. It
   considers that it would not prejudice the aims and objectives of South
   Buckinghamshire District Local Plan (LP) Policies TC1 and S1, South
   Buckinghamshire Core Strategy Development Plan Document (CS) Policy CP11,
   and the eLP Policy SMA001, all of which deal with, amongst other things, the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007582


     appropriate uses and sites to strengthen centres such as Beaconsfield New Town.
     There is nothing before me to conclude otherwise.
6. During the appeal process an engrossed section 106 agreement (s106) has been
   submitted to secure obligations related to the Burnham Beeches Special Area of
   Conservation, affordable housing, and primary health care facilities. However,
   these obligations must be assessed to ensure they are necessary, relevant, and
   reasonable.
7. Therefore, the main issues are the effect of the proposed development on surface
   water flooding, and the living conditions of the occupants of Elmers Court, with
   specific regard to outlook, light and privacy, and the occupants of The Hollies, with
   specific regard to outlook and privacy, and whether the proposal could secure
   appropriate obligations.
Reasons
Surface water flooding
8. The appellant has submitted a Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Strategy
   (FRAaDS)1 which seeks amongst other things, to provide a surface water drainage
   system to reduce the risk of surface water flooding. This would include a deep
   borehole soakaway with various Sustainable Drainage systems (SuDs) attenuation
   measures to assist with storage, and in the event the capacity of this system is
   exceeded or failure, excess water would flow overland into the proposed soft
   landscaping and the private drainage system of the adjacent residential
   development known as The Hollies.
9. The British Geological Survey identifying the appeal site location as ‘high risk’ with
   respect to potential solution features2. In this instance this relates to the underlying
   chalk formation. As a soluble rock water soaking into the chalk could weaken it
   structurally thus leading to its dissolution and the potential creation of cavities and
   cave systems. These would reduce support to the ground above and could cause
   localised collapse of the overlying rocks and deposits, thereby potentially affecting
   the stability of any structure above it, including the proposed building. The
   installation of structures that could affect the local groundwater flow or levels, such
   as soakaways, could also affect these solution features3. As such the use of a deep
   borehole is proposed
10. CIRIA C574 guidance document sets out recommended buffer zones for deep
    boreholes where foundation construction should not occur. As identified in the
    supporting technical advice for the FRAaDS, there is a moderate hazard risk for the
    appeal site4 from dissolution. Therefore, the recommended buffer zones are: 15m –
    20m for areas with known dissolution features, 10m for areas where the chalk is
    low density or the density is unknown; and 5m is permissible for where the chalk
    density is medium or higher. The technical advice goes on to note that a 10m buffer
    zone should be adopted as a risk management strategy due to the lack of chalk
    density data5. From the information provided during the appeal process this would
    appear an acceptable buffer zone and any larger would likely be overly
1
  By Mayer Brown and dated February 2026
2
  Paragraph 1.1 of the Dissolution Risk Assessment Feb 2026 by Subadra Consulting (FRAaDS Appendix E) (the DRA)
3
  Paragraph 2 of the DRA
4
  Paragraph 4 of the DRA
5
  Paragraph 3.4 of the Updated Borehole Infiltration Test Report Aug 2025 by Subadra Consulting (FRAaDS Appendix E and H)
and Paragraph 5.5 of the DRA


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6007582


     conservative as the technical data provided shows a lack of nearby known
     dissolution features.
11. It is, therefore, considered that a deep borehole with 10m buffer zone and SuDs
    attenuation features, in all probability would be a viable method of surface water
    drainage. Nevertheless, the proposal cannot achieve this as one corner of the new
    building would have to be constructed within the 10m buffer zone, approximately
    8.5m from the borehole6.
12. The appellant proposes that this incursion into the buffer zone could be overcome
    with the effected foundations being constructed using piles and / or foundation
    bridging. This aligns with the technical recommendations from Subadra who also
    proposed additional geotechnical investigation to ensure the foundations are
    constructed in such a way to not be affected by the borehole and that the additional
    investigations could be conditioned.
13. It is also recognised within the technical data that the geotechnical investigations
    may lead to the discovery of dissolution features and so require a larger buffer zone
    to the borehole which may need a significant overhaul of the foundation design.
    Nevertheless, the specifics and structural requirements of the foundations would be
    controlled by separate regulatory regimes relating to safe construction practices,
    and as set out in Framework Policy DM7, unless there is clear evidence to the
    contrary, it should be assumed that those separate regimes will operate effectively.
14. However, notwithstanding this, exceedance events must also be dealt with, and the
    proposal method for this would be to use the drainage system which serves The
    Hollies. There is nothing before me to show that there would be capacity within that
    system, nor that the flow of water to it would not put the occupants of The Hollies at
    risk. Therefore, taking account of the probability of extreme weather events
    including heavy rain, increasing during the life of the proposed building it would be
    necessary to demonstrate that in the event of a system exceedance or failure,
    excess surface water can be appropriately managed on site without increasing
    flood risk to occupants, or to adjacent or downstream sites. And there is nothing
    before me to substantiate this would be the case.
15. The Council has sought to deal with this via a condition clause requiring “Details of
    proposed overland flood flow routes in the event of system exceedance or failure,
    with demonstration that such flows can be appropriately managed on site without
    increasing flood risk to occupants, or to adjacent or downstream sites”. However,
    this would not be reasonable as the appellant has stated that the flows would not
    be managed onsite but via The Hollies drainage system and this would require
    potential third-party input and agreement.
16. It is recognised via the decision notice that gave outline permission for The Hollies
    (PL/20/4432/OA) specifics of the use of its exceedance flow disposal was
    conditioned. However, in this instance there is simply not enough information
    before me to ensure that the proposed method of dealing with excess water would
    be appropriate or viable, therefore such a condition would not be precise or
    reasonable.



6
 Paragraph 5.19 of the FRAaDS and the Proposed Drainage Strategy Plan – reference BPBEACONSFIELD.23.01 (FRAaDS
Appendix J)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6007582


17. Therefore, it is found that in relation to exceedance events, it has not been shown
    that the proposal would not increase the risk of surface water flooding with
    particular regard to adjacent residential properties. As such it would fail to comply
    with CS Policy CP13 as far as it seeks to ensure the risk of flooding is minimised.
Living conditions of the occupants of Elmers Court
18. Elmers Court is to the rear of the appeal site. It is a 5-storey residential block,
    including under croft parking, comprising 48 units and is set back from the appeal
    site boundary by a minimum of 2.5m7. The rear elevation of the proposed new
    building would be positioned approximately 18.7m from the shared boundary and
    would not be as wide as Elmers Court. The fenestration in the rear elevation would
    relate to the main residential stairwell and 8 residential units across all 5 floors, as
    well as part of the balcony related to a unit on the 5th floor.
19. The appellant’s Daylight and Sunlight Amenity Study (DSAS)8 confirms that of the
    windows in the Elmers Court which face the appeal site, 3 would have a reduction
    in daylight of more than 20% but less than 30%. BRE guidelines confirm that a 20%
    decrease would be acceptable when considering VSC9 calculations. Further in
    relation to daylight distribution10 results, 14 rooms (some would have multiple
    window) would fall short, with 7 in the minor category, 5 in the moderate loss
    category, and 2 in the substantial loss category. The DSAS shows the windows and
    rooms most effected are on the ground floor and would likely mean multiple rooms
    in anyone unit would be impacted, thus compounding the effect of a reduced
    access to light for the occupants of those units.
20. Where multiple rooms are affected in a single unit, on the balance of probability the
    occupants of those units would have their living conditions significantly and
    detrimentally impacted by the reduction in access to natural light creating a dark
    and gloomy interior requiring an over reliance on artificial lighting.
21. It is recognised it would not be all the units in Elmers Court that would be affected,
    nevertheless this does not negate the harm caused to those which would be
    impacted.
22. By using ‘mirror image’ modelling analysis the DSAS has sought to alter what
    should be considered the baseline, and this would reduce the number of effected
    rooms to 4. However, although it is recognised that BRE standards allow for mirror
    image analysis in certain circumstances, it is not what is existing on site and
    therefore the physical impact on the living conditions of the occupants of Elmers
    Court with regard to access to light would be as previously identified.
23. Due to the articulated nature of the elevation of Elmer Court which would face the
    appeal site, the proposed separation between it and the proposed new building
    would vary between approximately 18m and 28m. The Council’s Residential Design
    Guide Supplementary Planning Document does not provide any minimum
    separation distances for multi-storey buildings but does state it should be 21m for 2
    storey buildings. It also confirms at paragraph 5.3.9 that this may be reduced in line
    with the character of the area and where privacy of any existing properties is
    already reduced. For example, where some overlooking already occurs.

7
  Paragraph 6.25 of the appellant’s Statement of Case.
8
  Daylight & Sunlight Amenity Study (Neighbouring) Report by Rapleys dated 9 December 2025, reference NBB/24-01504
9
  Virtual Sky Component
10
   Relating to how deep the light from a window can penetrate the room.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
Appeal Decision 6007582


24. The appeal site and adjacent properties are within built up town centre
    environment, where a level of intervisibility between buildings in not uncommon and
    existing view have a very urban context. It was also observed on site that the
    proximity between Elmers Court and other existing residential buildings is not
    significantly different to that proposed. Further, due to the positioning of the
    proposed new building, the windows in the section of the Elmers Court closest to
    the appeal site would retain the existing oblique views out towards The Hollies, and
    those windows that would directly face the proposed new building would be set the
    furthest back. Finally, it was also observed that from Elmers Court the existing
    views have very urban context. Therefore, although it is clear the outlook would
    change from the effected windows, and that some of the views would be curtailed,
    it is not considered that the quality of urban outlook would be so different as to
    make living conditions untenable.
25. Finally in relation to privacy, from the DSAS the windows that would be affected by
    the proposal have been identified as kitchens and secondary windows into dual
    aspect living rooms. In combination with the separation gaps proposed it is not,
    therefore, found that the impact on privacy for the occupants of the effected units
    would be so great as to render living conditions unacceptable.
26. In summary, therefore it is found that the proposal would have a harmful impact on
    the living conditions of a number the occupants within Elmers Court, but only in
    regard to access to light would this be to such a level which could be considered
    significantly detrimental. This, however, cannot be negated by the lack of harm
    identified in relation to outlook and privacy. It would therefore fail to comply with LP
    Policies EP3, EP5, and H9 insofar as they seek new development to not adversely
    affect the amenities of neighbouring properties and not result in a significant loss of
    daylight or sunlight to adjacent buildings.
Living conditions of the occupants of The Hollies
27. The Hollies is a 3-storey residential complex set back from the appeal site behind
    its own private access road and a public footpath. It is recognised that the first 4
    floors of the side elevation of the proposal would be less then 21m from the nearest
    parts of The Hollies and would include 6 balconies. As such the only private
    outdoor space and main living spaces of a number of units would have direct views
    towards and over The Hollies.
28. It is therefore found that in all probability the perception of privacy would be
    reduced for those units in The Hollies on the upper floors which would directly face
    the proposed new building, especially if the proposed balconies are in use. As with
    the access to light in relation to Elmers Court, the quality of life of an individual can
    be significantly impacted if there living conditions are impinged and in terms of
    privacy perception is important. Therefore, again taking a precautionary approach
    there is potential the proposal could have a detrimental impact on the privacy of the
    occupants of the first and second floor units located directly opposite the proposed
    new building.
29. Turning to outlook the elevation of the proposed new building that would face The
    Hollies would be a similar width, height, and proximity as that of Elmers Court.
    Accordingly, a similar impact on outlook would be had, and this would be in keeping
    with the urban character of the area. Therefore, although it would constitute



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007582


        change, it is not considered the impact on outlook would be so great as to be
        detrimental to the living conditions of the occupants of The Hollies.
30. However, a lack of harm in relation to outlook does not mitigate the harm identified
    in relation to privacy. Therefore, as the proposal could have a detrimental impact on
    the living conditions of some of the occupant of The Hollies with regard to privacy it
    would again fail to comply with LP Policies EP3 and H9.
Obligations
31. The appeal site is in the recreation impact zone of influence for the Burnham
    Beeches Special Area of Conservation (SAC). The SAC qualifies for protection due
    to its rare Atlantic acidophilus beech forests with Ilex and Taxus in the shrub layer
    (Quercion robori-petraeae or Ilici Fagenion); and Beech forests on acid soils
    habitats. Regulation 63 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 require an appropriate assessment to ensure that the development would not
    adversely affect the integrity of the SAC. This is echoed in CS Policy CP9, which
    also seeks to ensure the integrity of the SAC is maintained, and appropriate
    mitigation is secured when necessary.
32. The Council’s SAC Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM)
    Strategy11, the SAC it particularly sensitive to disturbance from recreational
    pressures. The additional dwellings proposed would contribute to an increased
    population. Given the proximity of the development to the SAC, it is likely that its
    contribution to the increase in population could lead to an increase in visitor and
    recreational pressure within the SAC. It cannot be concluded that the development
    would not adversely affect the integrity of the protected sites in combination with
    other projects and developments in the area.
33. To mitigate recreational pressure on the SAC the Council requires contribution to
    the SAMM to be secured by obligation. This is therefore considered necessary,
    reasonable, and directly related to the development, and the submitted s106 would
    secure the appropriate contributions in compliance with CS Policy CP9.
34. CS Policy CP3 seeks at least 40% of dwellings in a scheme of 5 units or more to be
    affordable, with 2 thirds of that provision being socially rented and the remainder as
    intermediate affordable dwellings. For the proposal to comply with this, it would
    require an obligation to secure the provision of 11.2 affordable dwellings. The s106
    secures this in the form of 8 social rented units, 3 shared ownership units and a
    commuted sum which would equate to 0.2 of an affordable dwelling, in accordance
    with the South Buckinghamshire Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning
    Document. It is therefore found that this obligation would be necessary, reasonable,
    and directly related to the development in compliance with CS Policy CP3.
35. CS Policy CP6 requires new development to provide for the necessary
    infrastructure needs arising from that proposal. The local NHS board identified that
    the number of proposed new residents would require additional clinical capacity at
    the nearby Simpson Centre. It was calculated to require a contribution of £27,374.
    The calculations provided by the Council within Appendix C of its Statement of
    Case confirms this has been calculated on the presumption of 29. However, the
    proposal is for 28 dwellings. Accordingly, although it is found that a contribution to
    the Simpson Centre as part of the necessary infrastructure is necessary, would

11
     Developed in combination with Natural England


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             6
Appeal Decision 6007582


     relate to the development and would comply with the requirements of CS Core
     Policy 6, it would not be seen as reasonable as the quantum of contribution would
     be greater than the calculated impact of the proposal. However, this difference
     would not be so significant when considering the overall obligations required by the
     proposal, and the appellant has found it acceptable to agree to this amount within
     the s106.
36. Therefore, taken in the round it is found the proposal would secure appropriate
    obligations, in compliance with CS Policies CP3, CP6 and CP9.
Other Matters
37. In respect to the Biodiversity Net Gain Regulations (BNGR), the main parties
    consider that due to the previously developed nature of the appeal site the proposal
    would not impact any priority habitats, and impact less than 25 square metres (e.g.
    5m by 5m) of onsite habitat, and less than 5 metres of linear habitats. Therefore,
    would comply with the de-minimus exemption of the BNGR. There is nothing before
    me to conclude otherwise.
38. It is recognised that the appellant considers the proposal would significantly exceed
    the 10% BNG aspirations of the BNGR. As the proposal is exempt from these
    Regulations the ecological benefits have been considered in their own right below
    in the planning balance.
39. Concerns have been raised in relation to character and appearance, the living
    conditions of future occupants, highway safety, building sustainability,
    contamination, noise, waste management, parking quantum, construction
    disturbance, protected species, and childcare provision in the area. The Council
    has not found harm in relation to these matters, though it is note in some cases it
    would require additional information by condition. There is no substantive evidence
    before me to conclude otherwise.
40. That the Parish Council were not consulted on amendments during the application
    process and that interested parties considered no meaningful public engagement
    was undertaken, does not alter the planning merits of the case.
Planning Balance
41. Framework Policy S3:1.a sets a presumption in favour of sustainable development,
    requiring the application of Framework Policy S4 for development proposals within
    settlements. Policy S4:1 requires that development within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the decision-making policies in the
    Framework.
42. The Council cannot demonstrate a 5-year housing land supply, therefore
    Framework Policy HO7 requires substantial weight to be given to the benefits of
    providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, and this includes the provision of
    affordable housing. Framework Policy TC2 also gives substantial weight to
    development which supports the overall vitality and viability of a town centre,
    including through diversification and provision of residential accommodation as
    proposed. As does Framework Policy L2:1.b for the better use of vacant or
    underutilised land, such as the appeal site.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007582


43. The proposed use of renewable / low carbon energy sources, energy efficient and
    sustainable building methods, promotion of sustainable transport methods and
    improved site biodiversity through landscaping and ecological features are given
    moderate weight as these align with good design, ecological and construction
    practices. Due to the location of the appeal site in the centre of a well provided for
    town, the economic and social benefits a development of the size proposed would
    provide for the surrounding area would be proportionally modest also. Whilst limited
    weight is given to the financial contribution to the NHS board as this is required to
    negate the additional pressure the increase in residents would have.
44. The appellant has drawn my attention to Framework Policy L3, which deals with
    appropriate densities. However, although an emerging policy document with little
    weight, the new Local Plan proposes an allocation for the appeal site of more
    residential dwellings than that the proposed, consequently I give compliance with
    L3 limited weight. They have also drawn my attention to Framework Policy HC6,
    which deals with the retention of key community facilities and public service
    infrastructure. Again, this attracts limited weight as although the proposal would
    replace a public house the main parties agree that in its current form it is not
    commercially viable.
45. The lack of harm identified in relation to the living conditions of the occupants of
    Elmers Court and The Hollies in terms of privacy and outlook, and the SAC, and in
    ‘other matters’, by definition, cannot weigh for or against the proposal.
46. However, the proposal has not satisfactorily addressed surface water flood risk and
    Framework Policy F7 requires amongst other things for development proposals to
    not present a risk from flooding to potential occupiers and should not increase flood
    risk elsewhere, otherwise they should be refused.
47. Further, the proposal causes harm in relation to the living conditions of some
    occupants of Elmers Court with regard to access to light, and some occupants of
    The Hollies in regard to privacy. Framework Policies DP3.1 and P3 seek to ensure
    living conditions are protected and new development integrates with its
    surroundings. With Policy DP3.3 going as far as to state that proposals should be
    refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with Policy DP3.1.
48. Framework Policy S4:2.c clearly states that an adverse effect includes situations
    where the proposal would fail to comply with one of the Framework decision-
    making policies which state that the development proposal should be refused.
    Therefore, although it is found the benefits of the proposal which are substantial,
    they would not in this instance substantially outweigh the adverse effects of the
    proposal which would fail to comply with 2 Framework policies that set out specific
    circumstances for refusal.
Conclusion
49. For the reasons given above the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan when read as a whole and there are no sufficiently weighted
    material considerations, including the Framework, which would indicate a decision
    otherwise. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.

R J Redford
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
