Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Andrew Owen MA BA(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007526
Mulberry Interiors, 8, Church Hill, Loughton, Essex IG10 1LA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Hopkins of Amarok London Ltd against the decision of Epping Forest
    District Council.
•   The application Ref is EPF/2305/25.
•   The development proposed is the erection of new dwelling within rear garden of 8 Church Hill,
    alterations to front elevation of main building, internal alterations to existing first floor flat and
    combining of two commercial units to form one commercial unit.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
2. The Council raise no objection to the alterations to the front of the main building,
   the internal alterations to the existing first floor flat or the combining of two
   commercial units to form one. As such I have focussed my decision on the erection
   of the dwelling within the rear garden and the pedestrian access to it.
3. During the consideration of this appeal, the government published a revised version
   of the National Planning Policy Framework (the ‘Framework’). I have taken account
   of that in my decision.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
        i)    the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the
              area; and
        ii) whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for its
              future occupiers in respect of outlook, sunlight, outdoor amenity space
              and access.
Reasons
       Character and appearance
5. The appeal site comprises a long narrow plot accommodating a pair of commercial
   units at its front with a flat above, and an overgrown rear garden. The commercial
   units are positioned in a row of buildings facing Church Hill, most of which are also
   in commercial use at ground floor with flats above. Behind these frontage units, the
   rear parts of the plots are used either as garden areas or for parking. There is also
   a car park behind these plots accessed from Queens Road. Although some of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007526


     frontage buildings extend prominently into their plots, such as the large rear
     extension at No. 20/22, the space behind is generally devoid of buildings. This
     pattern creates a sense of openness behind the frontage buildings which is framed
     by mature trees along the south boundary of the appeal site, in the garden of No.
     32/34, and along the rear boundaries. Moreover, the openness of this area is
     keenly felt when using the public footpath which bisects it, running from Queens
     Road to Church Hill through the car park at No. 10
6. The proposed dwelling would be small in scale and would be positioned towards
   the rear of the plot, a substantial distance from the existing building. Due to the lack
   of any other detached outbuildings in the nearby plots, the dwelling would represent
   an incongruous feature detracting from the characteristic openness. It would be
   visible when using the public footpath and from neighbouring properties.
7. The plans indicate the dwelling would be partly sunken to reduce its height above
   ground level. Nonetheless, even if this were the case, it would remain to be visible
   from the public footpath over the boundary fence which separates the site from the
   car park at No. 10.
8. It is understood that there is a large outbuilding to the rear of No. 38. However, this
   is not readily perceptible from public viewpoints, being visually hidden from the
   public footpath by the vegetation at No. 32/34, and from Church Hill by the frontage
   building at No. 38. As such, it does not add to the context of the appeal site.
9. The Council raise no objection in heritage terms as they suggest it would have no
   impact on views around the York Hill Conservation Area (YHCA). Whilst, from
   positions within the YHCA, views of the dwelling would be very limited, it would be
   clearly visible from the public footpath, which is outside the YHCA. It is from here
   that its contrast with its immediate surroundings, which are also mostly outside the
   YHCA, would be most obvious.
10. In summary, due to its contrast with the surrounding pattern of built development,
    the proposal would harmfully detract from the character and appearance of the
    area. It would therefore conflict with policy DM9 of the Epping Forest District Local
    Plan (2023) which requires all development to relate positively to their context and
    make a positive contribution to a place.
       Living conditions
11. The proposed dwelling would have both its bedrooms at its rear with windows
    facing into the rear garden. At present this area is enclosed by trees and shrubs
    around 7-8 metres tall along the southwest and rear boundaries, and a large
    sycamore tree on adjoining land which overhangs the appeal site. The appellant’s
    Arboricultural Impact Assessment (AIA) identifies that the trees along the rear
    boundary would be crown lifted to 2 metres. Even so, due to their height and
    proximity, these trees would continue to be a significant enclosing feature, along
    with the cypress trees along the southwest boundary which would be trimmed back
    but would still retain their height. Furthermore, although the AIA states that the
    large sycamore would have its crown reduced by 2.5 metres, it would still overhang
    the vast majority of the proposed rear garden. This leads me to conclude that the
    outlook from the bedrooms would be unacceptably restricted. In addition, bedroom
    1 would be particularly gloomy and be unlikely to receive any direct sunlight as it
    would not be served by rooflights, as bedroom 2 would.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007526


12. The living room/kitchen/diner would be served by large windows which would
    provide a reasonable outlook and I accept that bedrooms may have a lesser need
    for natural light than living rooms. But this does not negate the need for bedrooms
    to have a satisfactory degree of outlook themselves.
13. The dwelling would be served by front and rear gardens. The front garden would be
    overlooked by the first floor flat above the main building on the site but would be of
    a reasonable size, whilst the rear garden would be small and overshadowed, but
    would be private. The degree of overlooking into the front garden would not be
    dissimilar to that experienced by other nearby residents whose rear gardens would
    also be overlooked by neighbouring properties. Indeed, if the future occupiers of
    the development wished for a space with more privacy, the rear garden would
    provide that. As such, taken together, the gardens would provide acceptable
    amenity space.
14. The access to the dwelling, which would also be the new access to the first floor
    flat, would be created by reconfiguring the layout of the commercial units and
    inserting an access way under the first floor flat, past the bin stores and retained
    commercial yard. This is not an unusual arrangement in urban areas. The first floor
    rear windows in the flat would allow surveillance of the path, as would the windows
    in the side of the building at No. 10. In any case, as the access would be behind a
    gate, which could be made to be lockable, I see no reason why the use of this
    access would be unsafe. Furthermore, at 1.2 metres wide, as suggested by the
    appellant, this would be wide enough to be able to be readily used by cyclists and
    for manoeuvring bins to the street for collection.
15. In summary, although the access would be safe and practical, and the outdoor
    amenity area would, overall, be satisfactory, the outlook from the bedrooms would
    not be acceptable. Therefore, the development would fail to provide acceptable
    living conditions for its future occupiers. As such, in this regard also, it would fail to
    accord with policy DM9 which requires development to provide good sunlight,
    daylight and open aspects to all parts of the development.
Other Matters
16. As the site is adjacent to a listed building and within the YHCA, I have had special
    regard to sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
17. The site is located within, but at the edge of, the YHCA. The YHCA is mainly
    focussed around York Hill as it rises from Kings Green at the junction with Church
    Hill, and incorporates the properties that front it and other properties nearby on
    connecting roads, such as the appeal site. Its significance is largely informed by
    well-designed Victorian and 20th century houses plus a collection of more historic
    buildings. The appeal site currently contributes little to the character or appearance
    of the YHCA and due to the vegetative screening along the southwest and rear
    boundaries, the proposed dwelling would have little visual impact on the rest of the
    YHCA. As such its character and appearance would be preserved.
18. The adjacent building at No 6 is an early 19th century red brick house and is Grade
    II listed. Its significance lies in its historic interest and its setting is mainly informed
    by its position fronting Church Hill along with a number of other historic buildings
    close to Kings Green. Although the proposed dwelling would be visible from the
    listed building, and would be seen in its context when viewed from the public

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007526


     footpath, it would be subservient to it and as it would be to its rear, would have no
     harmful effect on its setting. The significance of this heritage asset would therefore
     also be preserved.
19. Policy S4 of the Framework, states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
20. The benefit of the proposal is the provision of an additional unit of housing at a time
    when the Council cannot demonstrate a five year supply and their latest Housing
    Delivery Test figure is less than 75%. This carries substantial weight.
21. The proposed dwelling would represent additional development within an existing
    plot so, in principle, would be supported by policy L2 of the Framework. However,
    this policy also requires such development to provide acceptable living standards
    for residents in terms of access to daylight and sunlight. As the proposal would fail
    to do this, it would conflict with this policy. Also, Framework policy DP3 advises that
    development proposals should respond to their context so that they integrate with
    and enhance their surroundings, including through the arrangement of buildings.
    For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with this policy. These
    conflicts with the Framework attract considerable weight.
22. Overall, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects. The presumption in favour of sustainable development does
    therefor not apply.
23. One of the reasons for refusal referred to the lack of a planning obligation to secure
    mitigation for the effect of the development on the Epping Forest Special Area of
    Conservation (SAC). An obligation has now been provided, though it is not dated
    so is incomplete. Nevertheless, as I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, I
    need not consider this matter further. Even if there was no harmful impact on the
    SAC, or if any harm was mitigated, this would not be a positive benefit of the
    development, could only carry neutral weight in the planning balance and so would
    have no determinative effect on my decision.
Conclusion
24. In conclusion, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the area
    and would not provide its future occupiers with acceptable living conditions. It
    therefore would conflict with the development plan taken as a whole. There are no
    other considerations, including the provisions of the Framework, that indicate a
    decision other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, the appeal
    is dismissed.

Andrew Owen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
