Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 June 2026
by N Unwin BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007094
38, 40, 42 Prebend Street, Islington, London N1 8PS
    • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    • The appeal is made by Mr Magnus Leask against the decision of the Council of the London
      Borough of Islington.
    • The application Ref is P2025/2929/FUL.
    • The development proposed is described as the: loft conversions, rear mansard roof extensions,
      proposed pitched front roof with conservation rooflights, replacement of roof coverings, and raising
      of chimney breasts and parapet walls as required.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the loft conversions,
   rear mansard roof extensions, proposed pitched front roof with conservation
   rooflights, replacement of roof coverings, and raising of chimney breasts and
   parapet walls as required at 38, 40, 42 Prebend Street, Islington, London N1 8PS in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref P2025/2929/FUL, subject to the
   following conditions:
           1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from
              the date of this decision.
           2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: PS -PL -00 V1, PS -PL -01 V1, PS -PL -02
              V1, PS -PL -03 V1, PS -PL -04 V1, PS -PL -05 V1, PS -PL -06 V1, PS -PL -
              07 V1, PS -PL -08 V1, PS -PL -09 V1, PS -PL -10 V1, PS -PL -11 V1, and
              Location Plan PP-14413100v1.
           3) Prior to their installation, samples of the materials to be used in the
              construction of the external surfaces of the development hereby permitted
              shall been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details / samples.
           4) The development shall be carried out in accordance with the Fire Safety
              Statement and retained as such thereafter.
           5) The development shall be carried out in accordance with the Sustainable
              Design and Construction Statement and retained as such thereafter.
Preliminary Matter
2. The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
    Framework) on 17 August 2026. It does not change the planning policy context in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007094


       respect of the main issue, and I have determined the appeal accordingly.
       References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   host properties and surrounding area, including whether it would preserve or
   enhance the Arlington Square Conservation Area.
Reasons
4. The appeal site is located within the Arlington Square Conservation Area (the CA)
   wherein I have a statutory duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings
   and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) to pay special attention to the
   desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the area.
5. The Arlington Square Conservation Area Design Guidelines (2002) (the ADG)
   describes the significance of the CA as being derived from its special architectural
   and historic interest. It highlights the areas strong visual unity of its 1840's terraces
   with these retaining most of their external architectural details and the streets being
   primarily wide, giving the area a pleasantly spacious feeling. Many of these
   properties originally related to a factory or workshop, contributing to the historic
   interest.
6. The appeal site comprises three properties that form part of a wider terrace adjacent
   to the highway. The terrace appears mostly uniform in its design and materials,
   creating a pleasing rhythm that benefits the street scene. The terrace, including the
   appeal properties, displays traditional architectural detailing which contribute to the
   character of the area. From the front and side elevation, the roof profile of these
   properties is well screened which limits their contribution to the street scene. The
   appeal properties are locally listed, with the Register of Locally Listed Buildings and
   Locally Significant Shopfronts (2010) describing the special features of 36-70 (even)
   Prebend Street as decorative cast iron window guards, and complete cast iron
   decorative railings to fronts and steps.
7. Whilst the roof line of the terrace remains largely unaltered, there are examples of
   roof alterations at the opposite end of the terrace to the appeal site and on
   properties within the surrounding streets. There is a variation in their styles with
   those which are lower profile and set back from the front and rear elevations
   reducing their visual presence and maintaining the original architectural features,
   preserving the character of their host and the wider terrace.
8. The proposal would involve identical roof extensions on each of the three properties
   comprising the appeal site. These would form a shallow pitched roof design to the
   front and mansard style rear. The shallow pitch of the front roof slopes would limit
   their visual presence within the street scene and permit a subservience to the host
   properties. This would maintain the prominence of the special features of the locally
   listed buildings and preserve the character of the wider terrace.
9. The roof extensions would require the parapets along with their corresponding
   chimneys to be raised by a relatively modest amount maintaining the overall form of
   these properties when viewed from the public realm. Whilst the rear roof line is
   partially visible from Canon Street and from the rear elevations and garden areas of
   the surrounding properties, the mansard roof would be recessed from the rear


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007094


    elevation and thus the butterfly roof feature would remain legible. As such, in this
    particular instance the proposal would preserve the significance of the CA and the
    appeal properties as heritage assets.
10.The ADG permits roof extensions where they are not visible from any street level or
   public area, stating that roof extensions visible from the street, including long views
   from neighbouring streets, will not be allowed. The Urban Design Guide
   Supplementary Planning Document (2017) (UDG) highlights the importance of roof
   lines within Conservation Areas. Nevertheless, the UDG states that in all cases,
   applications for roof extensions, dormers and roof lights will be assessed on merit.
   Therefore, for the above reasons, in this instance the proposed roof extensions are
   considered acceptable, and it is considered appropriate to depart from this element
   of the guidance.
11.The Council refer to previous appeal decisions for roof extensions at no 38 and 40
   Prebend Street, however their submissions indicate that the design of these differed
   to that of this appeal proposal. Based on the information before me I cannot be sure
   that the considerations of these previous appeals were comparable to this appeal.
12.As such, I conclude that the proposal would preserve the character and appearance
   of the host properties and surrounding area, including the CA. It would therefore
   accord with Policies D4 and HC1 of the London Plan: The Spatial Development
   Strategy for Greater London (2021), and Policies PLAN1, DH1 and DH2 of the
   Islington Local Plan Strategic and Development Management Policies (2023). When
   read together these require development to conserve or enhance Islington’s
   heritage assets including the significance of Conservation Areas and their setting.
Other Matters
13.Interested parties have raised concerns regarding the effect of the proposed roof
   extensions on overlooking from the rear mansard roof windows and loss of light.
   Given the area’s built-up nature, mutual overlooking is already possible between
   numerous properties with any increase resulting from the proposal limited. Further,
   the minor increase in height and built form would retain existing light levels of
   surrounding occupiers.
Conditions
14.I have considered the conditions suggested and I have had regard to the National
   Planning Policy Framework and Planning Practice Guidance in this regard. As a
   result, I have amended some of the suggested conditions for consistency,
   enforceability, clarity and reasonableness and not imposed others.
15.In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have imposed a condition specifying
   the approved plans as this provides certainty. I have also imposed a condition
   relating to materials to safeguard the character and appearance of the area.
16.Whilst not within the Council’s recommended conditions, its submissions refer to a
   mechanism to ensure that all 3 roof extensions are carried out together. Given I
   have found the individual roof extensions would not cause harm, a condition to
   require them to be carried out simultaneously would be unnecessary.
17.A condition requiring compliance with the Fire Safety Statement is considered
   necessary in the interests of fire safety.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007094


18.A condition requiring compliance with the Sustainable Design and Construction
   Statement submitted is needed in the interests of sustainability and energy
   efficiency.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
