Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026 by J Reed MPlan MRTPI
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007942
24 Ambleside Avenue, South Shields, South Tyneside NE34 0DY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Amy Hyde against the decision of South Tyneside Council.
•   The application Ref is 250412.
•   The development proposed is hip to gable conversion; flat roof dormer to rear elevation; rooflights to
    front elevation.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. Since the Council issued its decision on the planning application, the South
   Tyneside Local Plan (2026) (STLP) has been adopted. This replaces the South
   Tyneside Local Development Framework, such that the policies of that plan cited
   on the decision notice are no longer part of the development plan and have no
   weight. I have therefore considered the relevant policies within the South Tyneside
   Local Plan (2026). The Council have provided copies of the relevant STLP policies,
   and the appellant has had the opportunity to comment upon these.
4. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026. I
   have considered the changes and as they are not material to the proposal, further
   comments were not sought by the parties.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal dwelling is a two-storey semi-detached property situated on Ambleside
   Avenue, a residential street characterised by other similar two-storey semi-
   detached dwellings. The dwellings share key design features such as a hipped roof
   design which creates a sense of balance that contributes positively to the character
   and appearance of the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007942


7. In this context, the proposed hip to gable extension to the appeal dwelling would be
   read as an unacceptably anomalous feature on the most publicly prominent
   elevation of the building. Whilst the appeal scheme would utilise the existing
   dwelling’s footprint and would be an efficient way to maximise space, it would
   negatively impact the hipped symmetry the appeal dwelling possesses with its
   semi-detached neighbour, which emphasises its incongruity by unbalancing the
   prevailing character and appearance of the area. I note the reference made by the
   appellant to other hip to gable extensions in the wider area. Other changes that
   have taken place elsewhere are the exception rather than the norm. In addition,
   they do not prevail sufficiently for me to change my findings.
8. The rear dormer would accord with the guidance in the SPD 9: Householder
   Development (Revised 2014) (the SPD) in terms of being set in from the sides and
   up from the eaves. However, its size and ‘top heavy’ form due to its occupation of a
   majority of the roof slope would conflict with the guidance, which advises that
   dormer extensions should be subordinate to the host dwelling. This visual intrusion
   would be readily discernible in views from both the surrounding rear gardens as
   well as from Buttermere Gardens. Consequently, the dormer would not respect the
   character and appearance of the host dwelling.
9. The development would use materials to match the host dwelling and would not
   result in any significant consequences for the living conditions of neighbouring
   occupiers. However, due to its prominent contrasting gable roof design and
   increased bulk, overall, the appeal scheme would result in a conspicuous
   development.
10. I note the appellant’s comments that due to the existing two storey side extension
    there is already an imbalance between the appeal dwelling and its semi-detached
    neighbour. However, the existing two storey side extension is an appropriately
    designed subservient addition through virtue of its set down ridge height and
    setback front elevation. It also retains the hipped roof design of the host dwelling
    and therefore does not harm the character and appearance of the area unlike the
    appeal proposals.
11. In regard to the dormer extensions at King George Road, Mortimer Road,
    Ambleside Avenue, Grasmere Gardens and West Avenue referenced by the
    appellant, I do not have full details or have been presented with the circumstances
    of these schemes. Therefore, I cannot be certain that the circumstances are the
    same as the appeal scheme before me. Nonetheless, the design of these do not
    represent the prevailing character of the area and I am mindful that each
    development must be assessed on its own merits. The other examples do not
    therefore lead me to form a different view.
12. I also acknowledge that even if some elements of the development could be
    undertaken using the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
    Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) it is the totality of the
    development’s scale and design that I have found to be harmful.
13. To conclude, the proposed development would harm the character and appearance
    of the host dwelling and area. As such it conflicts with Policy 47 of the STLP. This
    seeks, amongst other things, for extensions to be of high-quality design and
    contribute positively to the character and visual amenity of the Borough’s
    townscape.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007942


14. The proposal would also fail to accord with the National Planning Policy Framework
    and its aims to achieve well designed places.
Other Matters
15. I note the appellant’s desire to create more usable space for their family. However,
    private benefits are not sufficient to outweigh the harm that I have identified in
    relation to the main issue. I have also had regard to the appellant’s submission that
    there are no objections to the proposal. However, the absence of objections is a
    neutral factor in the balance and does not preclude a full and proper assessment of
    the planning merits of the case.
16. I also acknowledge the evidence that the proposal would address a particular need
    for four-bedroom houses in the South Shields area. However, whilst this may be
    the case I am not persuaded that this could not also be achieved with a scheme
    that would not harm the character and appearance of the area.
17. The issue of property values has also been raised. It is a well-founded principle that
    the planning system does not exist in the interests of private matters such as the
    value of property or land. The Council’s handling of the case has not affected my
    consideration of the planning merits of the scheme.
Conclusion and Recommendation
18. The proposal would not accord with the development plan and, for the other
    reasons I have set out, material considerations do not attract sufficient weight to
    indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

J Reed
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
19. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
