Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by C Shearing BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007338
Sky Farm, New Years Lane, Knockholt, Kent TN14 7SF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Virginia Harii of Sky Farm Limited against the decision of the Council of
     the London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application ref is 25/04473/FPA.
•    The development proposed is retention of agricultural building for storage of hay/straw, farming
     equipment and lambing.

Appeal B Ref: 6007340
Sky Farm, New Years Lane, Knockholt, Kent TN14 7SF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Virginia Harii of Sky Farm Limited against the decision of the Council of
     the London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application ref is 25/04474/FPA.
•    The development proposed is retention of hard surface for vehicles and farming equipment, access
     and disabled access to existing barn.

Decision
1.     Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for retention of agricultural
       building for storage of hay/straw, farming equipment and lambing at Sky Farm,
       New Years Lane, Knockholt TN14 7SF in accordance with the terms of the
       application, ref 25/04473/FPA, and the plans submitted with it.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and planning permission is granted for retention of hard
       surface for vehicles and farming equipment, access and disabled access to
       existing barn at Sky Farm, New Years Lane, Knockholt TN14 7SF in accordance
       with the terms of the application, ref 25/04474/FPA, and the plans submitted with
       it.
Applications for Costs
3.     The appellant has made applications for costs against the Council in relation to
       both Appeal A and Appeal B. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
4.     In the case of Appeal A, I have used the description of development from the
       Council’s decision notice. This is because this is a more concise description and
       since the application sought planning permission, rather than an amendment to an
       earlier prior approval. The differences between the two schemes forms part of the
       appellant’s case rather than a description of development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007338 and 6007340


5.      Similarly, for Appeal B, I have used the description of development from the
        Council’s decision notice since this is more concise and omits factors which are
        part of the appellant’s case rather than a description of development.
6.      During the site visit I observed that the developments of both Appeal A and Appeal
        B had already been carried out.
7.      During the course of the appeals a new National Planning Policy Framework 2026
        was published (the Framework). Both main parties were invited to comment on the
        implications of that change and those responses have been taken into account.
        This decision assesses the appeals in light of the new Framework.
Main Issues
8.      The main issue in both Appeal A and Appeal B is whether the developments are
        inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Reasons
Appeal A
9.      Policy 49 of the Bromley Local Plan 2019 (the BLP) includes that the construction
        of new buildings in the Green Belt will be inappropriate unless for the purposes
        listed, which includes agriculture and forestry. Policy G2 of the London Plan 2021
        (the LP) states that the Green Belt should be protected from inappropriate
        development. The Framework establishes that development in the Green Belt is
        inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in policy GB7. Similarly to
        Policy 49, those categories include development which is for agriculture.
10. The floor plans for Appeal A show the building used for storage of hay and
    equipment, as well as having a workshop and breeding area. The internal
    mezzanine is also annotated for similar storage uses. The appellant has provided
    details of the business operating from the site, which includes grazing and
    breeding of pedigree sheep breeds, with an intention to increase livestock
    numbers in the future. This is consistent with the use of the site described by an
    Inspector in 20221 and, together with the findings of my own site visit, I have no
    strong reason to doubt that evidence. Together with the description of
    development for which the permission is sought, I am satisfied that the building
    can be considered as being for agriculture.
11. I noted during my site visit that the building incorporates features more akin to a
    domestic setting, including some downlighters and laminate floors throughout, as
    photographed in the Council’s evidence. However, the appeal decision is based on
    the development as applied for including the submitted drawings and description of
    development which, if the appeal were allowed, would be what received planning
    permission. While I note the Council’s concerns, including the adequacy of the
    building for livestock and lack of ventilation, based on the information before me I
    cannot be satisfied that these factors would prevent or preclude an agricultural
    use. Evidence has been submitted by the Council of the building being used by
    groups of children. However, I do not have detailed evidence surrounding that
    event and given the compelling evidence of the otherwise agricultural use, I am
    satisfied that, overall, it is development for agriculture.


1
    APP/G5180/W/20/3256137 and APP/G5180/W/20/3259004


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
Appeal Decision 6007338 and 6007340


12. Similarly, the other elements of the wider site including a mobile home and the
    absence of evidence of formal agricultural registrations do not convince me that
    the building should not be considered agricultural. Based on what I have seen,
    there is no provision under either the BLP or national policy to consider whether a
    need for the agricultural building exists.
13. In conclusion on this main issue for Appeal A, the building is not inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt having regard to Policy 49 of the BLP and Policy
    GB7 of the Framework set out above. Neither does Appeal A conflict with LP
    Policy G2.
14. Accordingly, and as set out in Policy GB7 of the Framework, Appeal A is not
    harmful to the Green Belt and is not required to demonstrate very special
    circumstances. Since it is not harmful, neither is it necessary to assess the effects
    of Appeal A on the openness of the Green Belt or its purposes.
Appeal B
15. Turning to the hard surfacing of Appeal B, Policy 49 of the BLP lists engineering
    operations among other forms of development which are not inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt, provided they preserve the openness of the Green
    Belt and do not conflict with the purposes of including land within it. The
    Framework similarly includes engineering operations among developments which
    are not inappropriate, but providing the impact on openness is minimised and
    there would not be a significant conflict with the Green Belt purposes, therefore
    being slightly different to the development plan policy.
16. The openness of the surrounding area is derived from the patchwork of fields and
    grassland enclosed by woodland, peppered with occasional clusters of
    development around homes and farmsteads. The appeal site contributes positively
    to the visual and spatial aspects of the area’s openness and this is appreciated
    primarily in views from New Years Lane, in limited glimpses through the trees and
    around the point of access.
17. The drawings of Appeal B relate to the hard surfacing immediately surrounding the
    building. This wraps fairly tightly around the building, appearing as a base to the
    structure. The visual and spatial effects of the hard surfacing itself are very limited
    given its extent, proximity to the building and set back from the road and public
    viewpoints. I observed the hard surfacing to accommodate some plant and
    equipment, and it could reasonably accommodate vehicles which would have
    greater effects on openness. However these would be transient effects and would
    be positioned close to the building where a level of activity is reasonably expected.
18. Given these factors in combination, the hard surfacing preserves the openness of
    the Green Belt and together these factors successfully minimise the impact on
    openness. For similar reasons, I do not find conflict with the Green Belt purposes.
    Similarly to Appeal A, having regard to the relevant development plan policies, and
    the provisions of the Framework, it is not necessary to establish whether there is
    an identified need or operational requirement for the hard surfacing.
19. In conclusion on this main issue, Appeal B is not inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt and is compliant with Policy 49 of the BLP, Policy G2 of the LP and the
    provisions of the Framework. It is not necessary to establish whether very special
    circumstances exist.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007338 and 6007340


Other Matters
20. Policy S3.1c of the Framework states that in all locations, development proposals
    that accord with both an up to date development plan and the decision-making
    policies in the Framework should be approved without delay, which has been
    found to be the case here. Given both appeal schemes are intended for
    agricultural purposes, they fall under the uses supported by the Framework
    outside settlements. Both appeals benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out in the Framework, which is a material
    consideration of critical importance for making decisions.
21. I am mindful of the provisions of policy DM8 of the Framework relating to
    unauthorised development. However there is not substantive detail before me to
    establish that the unauthorised development here was intentional, particularly
    given the events described by the main parties and earlier applications and
    approvals. As such this does not weigh against the developments.
22. Both appeal schemes include provisions to support an employee with disabilities.
    While constituting an important benefit of the schemes, given both appeals have
    been found to be compliant with the development plan in any event, I have not
    considered this matter in further detail since it would not alter the outcome of the
    appeals.
23. There is reference to the use of the site for a children’s camp, supported by
    photographs, and other uses and structures around the site and on neighbouring
    land. However, the considerations of this appeal are limited to the developments
    for which planning permission was sought, and any enforcement matters are for
    the Council.
24. I note the findings of the Officer Reports relating to other matters, including
    protected trees and ecology, impacts on the character and appearance of the area
    and highway safety. I have no strong reason to reach a contrary conclusion on
    those matters.
Conditions
25. For both appeals the Council have suggested conditions which it considers would
    be appropriate in the event that the appeals were allowed. I have considered these
    in light of the relevant tests for conditions and guidance in the Planning Practice
    Guidance (PPG).
Appeal A
26. Given the building of Appeal A is of a typical design and appearance for this rural
    setting and the thickness of the tree belts along the road edge, I do not consider
    additional screening and landscaping meets the test of necessity. In the absence
    of a policy reason for its imposition, I have not imposed a requirement for
    biodiversity enhancements. The Officer Report similarly discusses a condition
    survey of the woodland and accordingly this would not meet the tests of necessity
    or reasonableness.
Appeal B
27. While noting the need for appropriate surface water drainage and that the hard
    surface would increase run-off, given its scale and location within an otherwise

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007338 and 6007340


       greenfield site, I am not satisfied that Appeal B would otherwise increase the risk
       of flooding on the site or elsewhere. As such it has not been substantiated that a
       condition for surface water drainage meets the test of necessity here.
28. Since both appeal schemes have already been carried out, further conditions are
    not required.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given, both appeal schemes comply with the development plan.
    There are not material considerations of sufficient weight to indicate the decisions
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Appeal A and Appeal B are
    therefore allowed.

C Shearing
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
