Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007677
Land Opposite Nash Cottage, Ashford Road, Brenzett, Romney Marsh, Kent
TN29 0BL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Hawes against the decision of Folkestone and Hythe District Council.
•    The application ref is 25/2053/FH.
•    The development proposed is change of use from commercial storage area to residential, with
     demolition of existing garages/storage area and construction of a 3 bedroom chalet bungalow; self
     build.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of the proposed development differs between the application form
       and the decision notice. In the interests of clarity, I have taken the description of
       development from the application form which adequately describes the proposed
       development and I have no evidence that the appellant agreed to the change of
       description.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. Accordingly, I sought the views of the parties on the implications of
       the new Framework on the appeal. I have taken these submissions into account in
       reaching my decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are the:
       •   effect on the character and appearance of the area;
       •   location of the development outside a defined settlement boundary; and
       •   accessibility to services and facilities for future occupants.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The area predominantly comprises a rural and pastoral landscape with open rolling
       fields set on the same side of Ashford Road as the appeal site. On the opposite
       side of the road is a low-density cluster of rural residential properties, broadly set
       facing towards Ashford Road. The appeal site comprises an unimposing

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007677


       dilapidated concrete building set on an apron of hardstanding. The presence of the
       appeal building in an otherwise undeveloped field, along with its dilapidated
       appearance detracts from the overall character and appearance of the area,
       although given its small size this amounts to a localised effect.
6.     The appeal proposal would introduce to the site a much larger detached residential
       dwelling with a bulky and prominent roof space orientated at an angle to Ashford
       Road, rather than directly facing onto it. Therefore, the proposed development
       would appear far more prominent and intrusive within the streetscene and wider
       landscape than the existing single storey structure given its bulky appearance. In
       addition, its orientation and location on the opposite side of the road would
       distinctly contrast with the wider pattern of residential development which is
       situated facing towards and on the opposite side of Ashford Road.
7.     Furthermore, the proposal would result in the creation of a large residential
       curtilage and the subsequent domestication of the appeal site which incorporates
       open field space as well as the existing hardstanding. The domestic formalisation
       of the site and the associated garden paraphernalia would appear out of keeping
       with the wider field surroundings. Whilst mature indigenous hedgerows are
       proposed, this would be distinctly out of keeping with the sparse low-density
       planting on the open field boundaries fronting onto Ashford Road.
8.     Therefore, whilst the dilapidated structure would be removed, the proposal would
       nevertheless result in considerable harm to the character and appearance of the
       area. It would therefore conflict with Policies HB1 and NE3 of the Folkestone &
       Hythe Places and Policies Local Plan (2020) (LP). These policies, amongst other
       matters, seek to ensure that development protects or enhances the landscape
       character and makes a positive contribution to its location and surroundings.
Location of development
9.     Policy SS2 of the Folkestone & Hythe Core Strategy Review (2022) (CSR) sets out
       the housing requirement for the plan period and that this will be met through
       various allocations. Policy SS1 of the CSR sets out development within the urban
       area will be led through strategic allocations, with remaining development needs
       focused at the most sustainable towns and villages. Development within the
       countryside will only be allowed exceptionally where a rural location is essential,
       as defined by CSR Policy CSD3. The development proposal would not meet any
       of the criteria listed in Policy CSD3. It would therefore conflict with the evidence-
       based plan-led approach to development within the area.
Access to facilities and services
10. The nearest settlement to the site is the village of Brenzett, which includes
    services and facilities such as a shop and a bus service to Ashford and new
    Romney. To access the settlement and its services and facilities, future occupiers
    would be required to travel along Ashford Road.
11. Ashford Road is a rural unlit countryside road which I observed featured fast
    moving vehicles and narrow banks to the side of the carriageway. Future
    occupiers would be required to walk or cycle along the carriage to access Brenzett
    where there would be limited points to step off of the road. Given the distance and
    characteristics of the countryside road, it would not be comfortable, convenient or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007677


       perceived as safe or realistic for future occupiers to walk or cycle to Brenzett to
       meet their daily needs.
12. The site has a lawful commercial use and the appellant has provided a rates notice
    for the site dated 12 March 2025. However, from my visit, based on the dilapidated
    state of the building and overgrown nature of the site, on the balance of
    probabilities, the site does not appear to have been recently used for commercial
    purposes. In any case, the nature of the activity that likely would have been
    generated by the small-scale commercial enterprise would not be directly
    comparable to the regular need for residential occupiers to frequently access and
    utilise services and facilities to meet daily needs. The previous commercial use
    would therefore not mitigate or justify the introduction of a car-dependent
    residential dwelling.
13. Future occupiers of the development would be reliant on the private vehicle to
    access the services and facilities to meet their daily needs. This would conflict with
    CS Policy SS3 criteria c, which seeks to ensure development is suited to the
    locality and its needs and transport infrastructure (particularly walking and cycling).
Other Matters
14. I am aware that the site is proximate to the Grade II listed building Nash Cottage.
    Mindful of the statutory duty set out in s66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have had special regard to the desirability of
    preserving its setting. I have been provided with very limited evidence regarding
    the significance of the asset or the contribution of the site to its significance.
15. Having regard to my site visit, I consider that the special interest and significance
    of Nash Cottage is derived from its architectural and historical interest, including
    the historic fabric of the building itself and the countryside surroundings as a rural
    dwelling. In this regard, the appeal site forms part of the extensive wider rural
    surrounds of the asset which as a whole positively contributes to its significance.
    However, I consider that the existing building on the site acts as a detracting
    feature within this countryside setting, particularly given its location within an
    otherwise undeveloped rural field.
16. The appeal proposal would introduce a different type of built form to the appeal
    site. Whilst larger, it would be located in a similar position set diagonally to the
    asset on the other side of the road rather than directly opposite it, allowing for
    wider the countryside to be readily tangible to the asset. Therefore, in my
    judgement, the appeal proposal would not materially affect the ability to appreciate
    the rural countryside surroundings of the heritage asset and would not result in any
    additional harm to the setting of Nash Cottage compared to the existing situation.
    Its significance is therefore preserved. However, this does not alter my overall
    conclusions on the main issues.
17. Whilst no objections have been received from neighbours, the lack of objections
    does not equate to a lack of harm.
Planning Balance
18. The proposed development is not in accordance with the aforementioned policies
    of the LP and CSR. Annex A of the Framework sets out development plan policies



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007677


       which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies in the
       Framework should be given very limited weight.
19. In relation to matters of character and appearance, LP Policies HB1 and NE3 are
    consistent with sections 14 and 19 of the Framework, in particular Framework
    Policy DP3 which seeks to ensure development proposals respond to their context
    so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings and Policy N2 which
    seeks for proposals to contribute positively to the natural environment by
    considering the landscape character and the natural beauty of the countryside,
    and identify opportunities for those qualities to be conserved or enhanced. On this
    basis the conflict with these policies carries significant weight against the
    development.
20. Whilst I have not been provided with an exact figure, the Council accepts that it
    cannot demonstrate a five-year housing land supply. The Council’s spatial strategy
    is therefore not meeting the local housing needs of the area and is therefore not
    delivering a sufficient supply of homes. It would therefore not be consistent with
    section 6 of the Framework, including Policy HO7 which seeks to meet the need
    for homes. Therefore, Policies SS1, SS2 and CSD3, insofar as they relate to
    restricting development is materially inconsistent with the Framework and the
    conflict with them therefore carries very limited weight.
21. In relation to accessibility to services and facilities, CS Policy SS3 is consistent
    with Policy DP3 paragraph 2(d) which seeks for development to provide good
    connections to the wider settlement and prioritise walking, wheeling, cycling and
    public transport. Given a car-dependent development would be introduced the
    conflict with this CS policy carries considerable weight against the proposal.
22. Overall, the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole.
23. In terms of the benefits of the proposal, it would provide an additional dwelling
    utilising brownfield land. Policy HO7 sets out that substantial weight should be
    given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the
    evidenced accommodation needs of the community, which the proposal would do
    by contributing towards the Council’s deficient housing land supply.
24. In addition, it would provide biodiversity enhancements, along with small and time
    limited economic benefits during the construction phase, as well as some limited
    social and economic benefits within the wider area resulting from the spend of
    future occupiers. However, given the small scale of the proposal this would result
    in limited benefits. In addition, whilst the proposal would remove the dilapidated
    building from the site, this would carry limited weight given I have no evidence
    before me demonstrating that this benefit is solely reliant on the specific scheme
    before me.
25. Policy S5 of the Framework sets out only certain forms of development should be
    approved outside settlements. These should be approved, unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework. One
    such development is the redevelopment of previously developed land, which the
    parties agree the appeal proposal would comprise. I see no reason to come to a
    different conclusion.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007677


26. However, paragraph 2 of Policy S5 sets out that in applying the policy, the
    circumstances in which the benefits of approving development proposals are likely
    to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include situations where the
    development proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-
    making policies which state that development proposals should be refused in
    specific circumstances.
27. In this regard, paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 of the Framework states development
    proposals should be refused if they conflict with paragraphs 1 and 2 of the policy
    without clear justification. For the reasons that I have given, the proposal results in
    significant harm to the character and appearance of the area and would not
    respond to its context and would not integrate with or enhance the surroundings,
    thereby conflicting with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3. It would also conflict with
    paragraph 2(d) of Policy DP3 as walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport is
    not prioritised through the introduction of a car dependent development. There is
    no clear justification for the conflict with these paragraphs. In these circumstances,
    in accordance with paragraph 2 of Policy S5, the benefits of the proposal are
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
28. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.



C Housden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
