Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 July 2026
by Claire Coles MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007121
Deerleap Bank, Halstead Lane, Halstead TN14 7EP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Brian Axford against the decision of Sevenoaks District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/03516/PIP.
•    The development proposed is erection of dwellings with a minimum of 4 or maximum of 6 net
     dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
       the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
       suitable in-principle and the second (technical details consent) stage is when the
       development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2
       stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     I have sought comments from the main parties on the relevance of the changes to
       the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) dated 17 August 2026 to
       the appeal and have taken these into account in making my decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
            •    Whether the appeal site is grey belt land and whether the proposal would
                 be inappropriate development in the Green Belt (having regard to the
                 Framework and development plan policies;
            •    The effect of the proposal on the openness and purposes of the Green
                 Belt;




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007121


            •    Whether the amount of development would be appropriate having
                 particular regard to development plan policy on density of residential
                 development.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site falls wholly within the Green Belt and is located between two
       settlements, Halstead and Knockholt. The site consists of an existing bungalow,
       garage and outbuilding and there is sporadic residential development within the
       immediate surroundings. The site is in existing residential use therefore this use is
       considered appropriate for the site.
Whether the site is grey belt land and whether the proposal would be inappropriate
development in the Green Belt
7.     It is common ground between the main parties that the site constitutes grey belt
       and would not conflict with or criteria i) ii) or iii) of Policy GB7 (g) of the Framework.
       GB7 (iv) is not relevant to this case. I have not been provided with substantive
       evidence to take a different view.
8.     As a result of the above, the proposal would not be considered inappropriate
       development within the Green Belt and should not be regarded as harmful to the
       Green Belt or be required to demonstrate very special circumstances.
Effect on openness
9.     It is also common ground between the parties that the site is previously developed
       land and therefore falls within exception (e) of Policy GB7 of the Framework.
       Policy GB7 (e) states that the following categories of development are not
       inappropriate in the Green Belt:
       The redevelopment of previously developed land (including a material change of
       use to residential or mixed-use including residential), which would not cause
       substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
10. The Framework makes it clear that the essential characteristics of the Green Belt
    are their openness and permanence. Openness can be perceived visually and
    spatially and factors to be considered include the duration of the development and
    its ability to return to its original state as well as the degree of activity to be
    generated.
11. Policy LO7 of the Sevenoaks Core Strategy (CS) refers to development within
    rural settlements, such as Halstead and Knockholt and states that these will be
    locations for small scale development. Elsewhere, development will only take
    place where it is compatible with policies to protect the Green Belt. Policy LO8 of
    the CS states that the extent of the Green Belt will be maintained, that the
    countryside will be conserved and that the distinctive features that contribute to the
    special character of its landscape and its biodiversity will be protected and
    enhanced where possible. Development should cause no adverse impact on the
    character of the countryside or the openness of the Green Belt.
12. The erection of four to six dwellings on the site would have a greater impact on the
    openness of the Green Belt when compared to the existing development on site
    due to the increase in scale, bulk and mass of built form and the greater spread of
    built form across the site. There would also be an increase in activity across the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007121


       site and the gardens of the proposed development would likely be the subject of
       residential paraphernalia which could further affect the openness of the site.
13. Despite the identified changes to the site, the site would be visually contained and
    located between existing residential development. The site also forms only a small
    part of a wider parcel of Green Belt land and as such, the development would have
    a fairly limited effect on the wider Green Belt. In conclusion, the proposal would not
    amount to substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt. The proposal would
    therefore constitute appropriate development in the Green Belt in accordance with
    Policy GB7 (e).
Amount of development
14. Policy SP7 of the CS states that outside urban areas, new residential development
    would be expected to achieve a density of 30 dwellings per hectare (dph). The
    policy recognises that development that fails to make efficient use of land for
    housing may be refused permission. The Regulation 18 Consultation for the New
    Local Plan seeks a greater density at the edge of villages and rural locations, with
    a minimum of 30dph and a maximum of 60dph.
15. Policy L3 2.b. of the Framework requires development outside settlements to
    make the best use of a site’s development potential, taking into account the
    policies in the Framework. Development proposals that do not make efficient use
    of land in accordance with Policy L3 2 of the Framework should be refused.
16. Policy L3 2.a. recognises that in considering the potential to increase densities, the
    existing character of an area should be taken into account, in accordance with
    Policy DP3 of the Framework, but should not preclude development which makes
    the most of an areas potential.
17. Policy DP3 1. of the Framework states development proposals should respond to
    their context …. So that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings…..This
    should not preclude innovation or change where appropriate, especially where an
    increased scale or density of development is justified in accordance with policies
    L2 (making effective use of land) and L3.
18. Based on the size of the site and the maximum number of dwellings that could be
    built out under this appeal, the site would achieve a density of 13dph, which is
    significantly below the required density. The density would be lower if four houses
    were developed instead of six.
19. The appellant considers the proposal complies with the character of the area. The
    density of development surrounding the site varies from more sporadic detached
    dwellings to closer knit properties, particularly in Knockholt and newer
    development in Halstead, including that recently permitted at Warren Court Farm.
    Whilst it is recognised that the development at Warren Court Farm still does not
    meet the density target set out in policy SP7 of the CS, it is arguably much closer
    to the 30dph target than the appeal proposal and demonstrates that a density of
    close to 30dph is in character with the area.
20. The appellant has not demonstrated that the proposal would achieve the maximum
    density of development on the site, taking into account all the constraints on the
    site such as the location of tree root protection zones, landscaping, the location of
    vehicular access, ecological surveys, drainage and the site layout taking into


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007121


       account shading from the trees. Whilst there is variation in the density of
       development surrounding the site, where the Council has a shortage of housing
       land and a substantial shortfall in the 5-year housing land supply (2.96 years), the
       proposed development on the site should make the most efficient use of land.
21. In conclusion, the proposal would be contrary to Policy SP7 of the CS insofar as
    this requires development proposals make the most effective use of land.
Other considerations
22. It is common ground that the Council cannot demonstrate a 5-year housing land
    supply and can only demonstrate 2.96 years. Policy HO7 (1) of the Framework
    gives substantial weight to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute
    towards meeting the needs of the community. The proposal would make a small
    contribution towards remedying this shortfall and I attach this benefit moderate
    weight.
23. I have been referred to other planning decisions within the locality where planning
    permission has been granted for development at a similar density to the appeal
    site. However, each case is determined on its merits, with particular regard to the
    context of the site and developmental constraints as well as the emphasis in the
    Framework on making the most efficient use of land. I therefore give limited weight
    to these decisions in my determination of this appeal.
24. I have taken account of the representations received including regarding the
    proposal being too dense. However, for the reasons given above the proposed
    development does not accord with national policy or local policy regarding density
    and I am satisfied that a higher density of development on the site can be
    achieved.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
25. The proposed development would be appropriate development within the Green
    Belt and whilst there would be some loss of openness, this would not equate to
    substantial harm.
26. Policy S5 5. of the Framework states that where development would not be
    inappropriate in the Green Belt, proposals should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in this Framework and
    applying paragraph 2 of Policy S5 of the Framework.
27. Policy L3 of the Framework requires development proposals to make efficient use
    of land. The appellant has not demonstrated that the proposal would achieve the
    maximum density of development on the site, taking into account all the
    constraints on the site as identified above.
28. Although I have taken into account the benefits to housing delivery of the proposal
    and subsequent benefits to the local economy from additional spending, these
    considerations are not sufficient to outweigh the adverse effects of low-density
    development on the site. The proposal would therefore not constitute sustainable
    development in terms of the Framework and therefore the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development would not apply.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007121


29. Consequently, I conclude that the amount of development would bring the
    proposal into conflict with the development taken as a whole. Material
    considerations do not indicate that a decision should be made other than in
    accordance with the development plan. For the reasons given above, the appeal
    should be dismissed.



Claire Coles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
