Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by B Phillips BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007924
Beehive Cottage, Portway, Salisbury SP4 6BL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Harvey Euidge against the decision of Wiltshire Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/2025/03776.
•    The development proposed is up to two dwellings.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for up to two dwellings
      at Beehive Cottage, Salisbury SP4 6BL in accordance with the terms of the
      application, Ref PL/2025/03776, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the
      conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    I have removed wording from above that does not describe development.
3.    The application is in outline with access, appearance, layout, scale and
      landscaping reserved for future consideration.
4.    The submitted site plan and elevation drawings are therefore indicative only. An
      updated Arboricultural Report has been submitted with the appeal. This does not
      alter the proposal in any way and all parties have had opportunity to comment on
      its contents. There is therefore no harm to natural justice in my accepting this
      information.
5.    The Government published in August 2026 a revised version of the National
      Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The Council and the appellant have
      had opportunity to comment on this and I have taken into account any
      representations received.
Main Issues
6. The main issues in this case are:
      • whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposal having regard to
      the development strategy for the area;
      • whether the proposal would preserve the setting of the Grade II listed property
      ‘The Beehive’;
      • whether future occupiers of the proposal would be likely to experience
      acceptable living conditions, with particular reference to noise and disturbance;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007924


         • the effect of the proposal on trees; and
         • the effect of the proposals on ecology, including whether the proposal would be
         likely to have a significant effect on the integrity of the Hampshire River Avon
         Special Area of Conservation (SAC).
Reasons
Location
7.       The proposed dwellings would be located outside any defined settlement
         boundary, in accordance with Policies CP1 and CP2 of the Wiltshire Core Strategy
         (2015) (CS), and for the purposes of planning policy, the site is therefore located
         within the open countryside.
8.       Part C of this policy sets out that development in the open countryside is strictly
         controlled. The purpose of this policy is, amongst other matters, to provide for and
         facilitate the delivery of sufficient housing and to safeguard and, wherever
         possible, enhance the open countryside.
9.       The proposal would not comprise of development that meets the exceptions set
         out in paragraph 4.25 of the CS. However, Policy S5.1 of the Framework also
         includes within the list of forms of development outside settlements that should be
         approved:
        (j) Development which would address an evidenced unmet need (including, but not
         limited to, development proposals involving the provision of housing where the
         local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable
         housing sites …, and where the development would:
         i. Be physically well-related to an existing settlement (unless the nature of the
         development would make this inappropriate) and be of a scale which can be
         accommodated taking into account the existing or proposed availability of
         infrastructure.
10. The Council accepts that it cannot demonstrate a five year housing land supply.
11. The term ‘physically well related’ is not defined within the Framework. However,
    whilst neighboured by open fields on two sides, as set out below, the original
    isolated rural surroundings of the site have been diminished and has evolved. I
    observed that the appeal site is well related to the park and ride facility on the
    opposite side of the roundabout that it sits immediately adjacent to. This facility is
    in turn adjacent to the mixed use and expanding development of the settlement of
    Old Sarum. There is also a pavement linking the appeal site to the settlement.
12. As such, I find that the site is physically well related to an existing settlement. It is
    noteworthy that a previous Inspector1 found similarly and that the site ‘sits at the
    southernmost point of the consolidated development at Old Sarum aerodrome’.
13. In accordance with Framework Policy S5, this is a form of development that should
    be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision making policies.



1
    Appeal decision APP/T3915/A/08/2088072


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6007924


14. Nevertheless, the proposal does not meet any of the circumstances for new
    development within the countryside outlined within CS Policies CP1 and CP2. I
    conclude that the appeal site is not a suitable location for housing having regard to
    the development plan for the area.
The Beehive
15. The Beehive is a Grade II listed2 19th century former toll house. First listed in 1979,
    the two storey brick property was originally associated with two historical turnpike
    roads, including the Salisbury-Amesbury toll road. The gable end facing
    southwards has a cream-coloured render, and all three sections of its pitched
    roofscape are finished with slate tiles. While the historic windows and doorways
    have been replaced, their triangular headed casements remain.
16. The surroundings of the property have evolved over time and now includes a busy
    adjacent highway and roundabout, with roadside signage, lighting, bus laybys and
    a large park and ride facility nearby. Nevertheless, the link between the original toll
    house use and historical routes remains evident.
17. Given the above, I find that the special interest and significance of the listed
    building to be primarily associated with its historic and architectural interests as a
    fine example of a 19th century toll house. Important contributors in these regards
    are its architectural detailing and remaining historic integrity, in addition to the
    remaining relationship to historic routes.
18. As set out above, the setting of the heritage asset has evolved to include major
    highway works, which apart from retaining a link with historical routes, has eroded
    the otherwise once open countryside surroundings. The property is now seen in
    the same context as these highway works. Immediately next to the property is an
    overgrown unattractive, dilapidated parcel of land, part scrub, part loose
    hardstanding. As such, the setting of the property does not contribute positively to
    its significance, other than the discernible relationship to historical routes.
19. The proposal seeks consent for up to two dwellings to be located in this existing
    dilapidated parcel of land. Given the outline nature of the proposal, with all matters
    reserved, no siting, scale nor design is secured at this stage. Two new dwellings of
    appropriate scale and siting would not obscure the remaining relationship between
    Beehive Cottage and the historical routes and would be seen in the same context
    as the adjacent significant built form. Appropriately scaled and sited dwellings,
    supported by an appropriate detailed Heritage Statement, would also not
    overwhelm nor dominate Beehive Cottage in any way that would harm its
    significance. The intensification of residential use on the site would also not detract
    from any qualities of the setting that contributes positively to the significance of
    Beehive Cottage.
20. The appeal referenced by the Council in relation to heritage matters3 relate to a
    different location and heritage assets. As such, it is not directly comparable to the
    proposal before me.
21. I conclude that the proposal would preserve the Grade II listed building known as
    Beehive Cottage and its setting and any of the features of special architectural or
    historic interest that it possesses. The proposal, therefore, satisfies the
2
    List Entry Number: 1023822
3
    APP/Y3940/W/25/3367873


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007924


      requirements of the Act and the Framework’s desirability to sustain and enhance
      the significance of a designated heritage asset. It also accords with CS Policy
      CP58 which requires development to protect, conserve and, where possible,
      enhance the historic environment, amongst other provisions.
Living conditions
22. The existing access to Beehive Cottage would be utilised to serve the additional 2
    dwellings. Vehicular movements would therefore increase, and this may be in
    close proximity to the frontages of the proposed dwellings. Nevertheless, given the
    small number of additional dwellings, in addition to the adjacent bus stop and
    nearby cycle routes providing alternative methods of transportation, the
    subsequent amount of additional vehicular movements would be modest. This
    would not result in unacceptable level of noise and disturbance to future occupiers.
23. Given the size of the appeal site, suitable details of parking, layout and siting could
    be secured at reserved matters stage in order to achieve satisfactory amenity with
    regards to the effect of vehicular movements.
24. The proposed dwellings would be sited in close proximity to the A345 highway and
    roundabout. Mitigation in terms of noise disturbance in this regard is set out in the
    submitted noise assessment4, which includes the use of glazing and a mechanical
    supply and extract with heat recovery system. No reference to a required acoustic
    barrier on the northern boundary is made within this noise assessment.
25. The report concludes that subject to these suggested mitigation measures, the
    impact of noise will not prejudice the amenities of any future occupants. There is
    no substantive evidence before me to contradict this conclusion. Details of the
    chosen measures can be secured through condition to ensure that any external
    manifestation is appropriate in terms of its visual impact. Based on the information
    before and what I have observed, there is nothing to suggest that this would not be
    possible.
26. Whilst the Council set out that reliance on such mitigation would not normally be
    acceptable, it is noteworthy that the Council do not dispute the appellants
    assertion that the same conclusions and recommendations were made in relation
    to noise for a previously allowed residential scheme on this site5, which remains
    extant, where the Council did not raise an issue in this regard.
27. I conclude that future occupiers of the proposal would experience acceptable living
    conditions, with particular reference to noise and disturbance. The proposal,
    therefore, accords with CS Policy CP57 insofar as it relates to ensuring that
    appropriate levels of amenity (living conditions) are achievable within the
    development itself.
Trees
28. The submitted Ecological Impact Assessment6 (EIA) sets out that all trees,
    including the protected Yew Tree7, should be fully protected during any
    construction works, including through clear demarcation and fencing of root


4
  By DAA Group, June 2025
5
  Appeal APP/Y3940/W/24/3356285
6
  By Twelve Fifteen Heritage Homes, July 2025
7
  Tree Protection Order reference S/TPO193


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
Appeal Decision 6007924


         protection areas (RPA). An updated Tree Survey8 adds that construction of a
         parking space slightly within the RPA should not lead to adverse impact if
         precautions were followed.
29. It is evident therefore that a layout can be secured that would not result in any
    harm to the RPA of the Yew Tree or any other boundary tree.
30. There would therefore be no conflict with CS Policies CP50 and CP57 which
    require development to protect, conserve, and enhance Wiltshire’s natural
    environment, including important landscape features such as trees.
Ecology and SAC
31. The information before me suggests that a baseline habitat map, ecological
    parameters plan and ecological assessment were submitted as part of the
    application. Even if they were not, they have been provided as part of the appeal
    and all parties have had opportunity to comment upon them. The submitted EIA
    sets out that there are no priority habitats on the site, and no evidence of protected
    species were found. It concludes that subject to recommendations for avoidance,
    mitigation and enhancements, set out in section 4 of the assessment and the
    Ecological Parameters Plan, then the proposal would comply with all relevant
    legislation. A suitable condition would secure these measures.
32. From the information before me and what I have observed, I have no reason to
    disagree with these conclusions. There would therefore be no conflict with CS
    Policy CP50, which seeks to ensure that development proposals demonstrate how
    they protect features of nature conservation.
33. The conservation interest of the River Avon SAC relates to its watercourses of
    plain to montane levels habitat type which support internationally important
    vegetation together with populations of protected invertebrate and fish species.
    The ongoing protection and maintenance of these habitats and species is,
    consequently, the core conservation objective for the SAC. One of the main issues
    preventing this objective from being met relates to the increase in wastewater
    being discharged into the River Avon. This includes pollutants and nutrients such
    as nitrates and phosphates which affect water quality and can threaten the
    condition of these habitats and their ability to support the aforementioned
    protected species.
34. As the proposal comprises new dwellings, it would result in an increase in the
    number of people staying overnight in the area, thereby leading to an increase in
    the amount of wastewater being discharged into the catchment of the River Avon.
    As such, it is likely that the proposal, taken both in isolation and cumulatively,
    would have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the SAC.
35. The evidence before me indicates that it is not possible to connect the site to a
    public sewer. Beehive Cottage is currently served by a septic tank with a total
    annual phosphorous load set out within the submitted nutrient calculator. The
    proposal comprises the installation of a package treatment plant (PTP) which will
    serve the new dwellings and, in respect of the Cottage, would replace the septic
    tank. The location of the proposed PTP is indicated within the submitted location
    plan.

8
    By Twelve Fifteen Heritage Homes, March 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           5
Appeal Decision 6007924


36. As shown on the nutrient calculator9, the installation of the PTP, secured by the
    use of a suitably worded condition, would result in an annual phosphorous load
    from the three dwellings entering the SAC significantly below the current situation
    from one dwelling. Natural England have been consulted and are satisfied with this
    arrangement.
37. I conclude that therefore, subject to the proposed mitigation, the proposal would
    not result in an adverse effect on the integrity of the SAC, in accordance with the
    Habitat Regulations and the Framework’s approach to promoting the conservation,
    restoration and enhancement of designated habitats.
Other Matters
38. Located on higher ground to the southwest of the appeal site, the Old Sarum
    Scheduled Monument (SM) comprises an Iron Age hillfort, likely to have been
    constructed between the sixth century BC and the mid first century AD. It is
    encompassed by multiple concentric defensive ramparts (multivallate), having
    been refortified and modified in later periods, including the construction of a royal
    motte and bailey castle following the Norman conquest in 1066. Remains of the
    medieval town previously located within the ramparts have also been discovered,
    along with those of a cathedral and a bishop’s palace. The significance of the Old
    Sarum SM, insofar as is relevant to the appeal scheme, relates to its prominent,
    strategic and elevated position close to several Roman roads, its royal
    connections, historical use and later adaptions plus its archaeological potential that
    assists in understanding the Iron Age period.
39. Although the distance between the appeal site and the monument is significant,
    the cream rendered gable end of the Cottage remains identifiable against the
    backdrop of the large and mature trees associated with the nearby roundabout.
    However, the appeal site predominately screened by the Cottage in the views from
    the Old Sarum SM given its siting behind and with a lower roof height than the
    existing dwelling. The existing yew tree on the site would also assist in screening
    and softening the proposed built form. Therefore, I conclude that the introduction
    of an additional dwelling on the site would not harm the setting of the Old Sarum
    SM. It is noteworthy that the Council have not raised any issue in this regard.
40. The appeal site is also outside but nearby both Stratford-sub-Castle and Old
    Sarum Airfield Conservation Areas (CA).
41. The significance of this part of the Stratford-sub-Castle CA is derived from its
    relationship with the Old Sarum SM and the views allowed from the former hillfort
    across the currently undeveloped landscape. Given my conclusions on the effect
    of the proposal on the Old Sarum SM, I similarly conclude that the proposal would
    preserve the contribution the setting of this CA makes to its significance.
42. The significance of the Old Sarum Airfield CA relates to its history of aviation use.
    Agricultural fields lie between the grassy airstrip within the CA and the appeal site.
    Given this distant relationship between this CA and the appeal site, even if the
    proposed dwellings would be visible from locations within the CA, its open
    character would be retained, and the setting of this CA would also be preserved.



9
    Appendix 7 of the appeal statement


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007924


Planning Balance
43. The Framework is clear that ‘Development plan policies (or parts of those policies)
    which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies in this
    Framework should be given very limited weight. ‘
44. As such, whilst I have found that the proposal would not meet the spatial policy
    goals of CS Policies CP1 and CP2, given the identified inconsistency with the
    Framework, these development plan polices should be given very limited weight.
    Accordingly, I have given significantly greater weight to the Framework on this
    matter, and Policy S5.1 (j)i supports the proposal.
45. Framework Policy S5 sets out that development that meets the criteria within the
    policy ‘should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in this Framework’.
46. I have found no other harm and no conflict with any other Framework policy. There
    are consequently no adverse effects to substantially outweigh the benefits of the
    proposal, which include the substantial weight afforded to housing.
47. On the basis of the individual merits of the scheme, the material considerations
    indicate that planning permission should be granted notwithstanding the conflict
    with the development plan.
Conditions
48. The Council has provided a list of suggested conditions that it considers would be
    appropriate. I have considered these in light of the Planning Practice Guidance
    (PPG) and the tests set out in the Framework. For clarity and to ensure
    compliance with the tests, I have amended some of the Council’s suggested
    wording.
49. In addition to the standard time limit for the reserved matters submissions, I have
    imposed a condition requiring the development to be carried out in accordance
    with the approved plans, and imposing a maximum number of dwellings as this
    provides certainty.
50. A condition relating to archaeological evaluation, investigation and safeguarding is
    necessary to protect historic features of the site or the discovery of irreplaceable
    historic features. This is a pre-commencement condition as it involves the first
    stages of development.
51. A condition securing further details of noise mitigation measures is necessary
    because the submitted assessment gives a number of options, which includes for
    example screened wall mounted mechanical acoustic ventilators. An assessment
    of the suitability of any visual impact is therefore necessary given the heritage
    sensitivity of the site. I have removed reference to section 9 of the Noise Impact
    Assessment as this section is the conclusions.
52. A condition securing the proposed ecological benefits and tree protection
    measures are necessary for ecological reasons, as is a condition securing the
    SAC mitigation measures. Further details are required in relation to the SAC
    measures given the lack of current information regarding siting. The ecological



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007924


      report sets out lighting measures and as such a separate condition in this regard is
      not necessary.
53. Conditions relating to landscaping and design, including materials and boundary
    treatments, are not necessary as they relate to the reserved matters.
54. No details of why the site potentially includes contamination is provided, and as
    such, based on the information before me, a condition relating to the submission of
    details and investigations in this regard is not necessary.
55. A condition requiring the submission of a Construction Management Plan is not
    shown to be necessary, given the space within the site and ease of existing
    access. Similarly, given the limited scale of development and the existing site,
    conditions relating to the submission of a Construction Environmental
    Management Plan and a Landscape and Ecology Management Plan, referencing
    ‘each ecological feature within the development’, are also not necessary. It is
    noteworthy that no such conditions, including regarding contamination, were
    suggested nor imposed for the recent extant residential permission on the site
    referenced above.
Conclusion
56. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, the
    appeal is allowed.

B Phillips
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007924


Schedule of Conditions

    1. Details of the access, appearance, layout, scale and landscaping, ("the reserved
       matters") shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
       authority before any development takes place and the development shall be
       carried out as approved.

    2. Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
       planning authority not later than three years from the date of this permission.

    3. The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than two years from
       the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.

    4. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawing no: Location Plan reference PP-12447743v1.

    5. The total number of dwellings hereby permitted shall be a maximum of 2
       dwellings.

    6. No development shall take place until:

         (i)       An archaeological field evaluation has been carried out in accordance
                   with a specification and timetable that shall first have been submitted to
                   and approved in writing by the local planning authority; and

         (ii)      Safeguarding measures to ensure the preservation in situ of important
                   archaeological remains and/or further archaeological investigation and
                   recording identified in the archaeological field evaluation have been
                   undertaken in accordance with a specification and timetable that shall first
                   have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
                   authority.

         No development shall take place other than in accordance with the approved
         archaeological field evaluation.

    7. Prior to the occupation of the dwellings hereby permitted, the existing septic tank
       serving Beehive Cottage shall be removed and a Package Treatment Plant
       (PTP) and drainage field shall be installed in accordance with details submitted
       to and approved by the Local Planning Authority. The PTP and drainage field
       shall, thereafter, be maintained and operated in accordance with the
       specification and details hereby approved.

    8. The proposal shall be carried out in accordance with the recommendations for
       avoidance, mitigation and enhancements, set out in section 4 of the Ecological
       Impact Assessment by Twelve Fifteen Heritage Homes, July 2025 and the
       submitted Ecological Parameters Plan, and retained thereafter.

    9. Prior to the commencement of development above ground, full details of all
       noise attenuation measures shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
       Local Planning Authority. These details shall be in accordance with the
       recommendations as set out in Sections 6 and 8 of the DAA Group Noise Impact


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
Appeal Decision 6007924


         Assessment dated June 2025. The approved details shall be implemented in full
         and maintained at all times thereafter.

End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
