    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 3 September 2026
    By G Powys Jones FRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 18 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6007305
    151 Northfield Avenue, West Ealing, London, W13 9QT
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
        amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr Taz against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
        Ealing.
    •   The application Ref is 260351FUL.
    •   The development proposed is the construction of an additional storey with a room in the
        roof space to provide 2No. 1person studio flats on the second floor and rear roof extension
        incorporating a Juliet balcony, and installation of two roof lights to front roofslope (following
        demolition of the external staircase).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural and preliminary matters
2. My site visit had been arranged as an access required visit, but no-one was at the
   site when I arrived. I conducted an unaccompanied visit without entering the upper
   part of the building or the open area to the rear. This was conveyed to the
   appellant’s agent by telephone at the time. I am satisfied that I saw all that I
   needed to see to make an appropriate assessment.
3. Planning permission was recently granted for an additional storey to the property1.
   On this basis the Council did not originally object to the external design of the
   building works proposed now, which is very similar to that approved.
4. The appellant has made an application for costs against the Council. This is the
   subject of a separate decision.
Main Issues
5. These are (a) the acceptability of the living conditions for future residents and (b)
   the adequacy of the refuse storage, disposal and recycling proposals.
Reasons
Living conditions
6. The appeal property is a two-storey property situated within a parade of shops and
   other commercial uses. It has a shop on the ground floor with two flats above. The

1
    Ref 250347FUL dated 23 April 2025, subject to a non-material amendment approval approx. 3 months later.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6007305


       proposal involves the addition of a single storey, but a one-bed unit would be
       accommodated in the loft.
7. Using the guidance provided in policy D62 of the London Plan (LP), the Council is
   satisfied that the overall Gross Internal Floor Area (GIA) of all new units of
   accommodation meets the required standard. The Council’s concern centres on
   the proposed loft accommodation. Whilst meeting the overall GIA standard set out
   in LP policy D6, it fails to meet the space requirement for Living Dining & Kitchen
   (LDK) space requirement of the London Plan Guidance: Housing Design Standards
   (LPG). In addition, in view of the sloping nature of some of the ceilings, the Council
   express concerns regarding floor-to-ceiling heights in habitable areas and the
   shower.
8. The appellant produced a section with his final comments to illustrate that, in his
   view, the use of the shower is feasible, notwithstanding the sloping nature of the
   roof. No such section has been produced across the most active part of the
   kitchen. He does not dispute that the minimum LDK spatial requirement of the LPG
   is not met. However, he considers the Council’s LDK floorspace measurement as
   inaccurate and regards any deficiency as ‘de minimus’. He suggests that the
   minimum requirement could be met by rejigging storage areas, and that this could
   be achieved by condition, should the appeal succeed.
9. The LPG standards are given significant weight in my considerations since they are
   designed to ensure that housing standards in the Capital city are acceptable in
   practice. With regard to LDKs, they are expressed as areas that should be met or
   exceeded, so that the standard cited is a minimum. The appellant comments on
   what he regards as the open plan nature of the accommodation, which he regards
   as flexible, particularly with regard to the use of beds, but in this respect Note 1 to
   section C2.5 of the Guidance clarifies the measurement methodology. No
   clarification has been provided as to the basis of the measurement carried out by
   the appellant.
10. It is for the appellant to clearly demonstrate that the appropriate minimum
    standards of both policy and guidance are met which, in my view, has not been
    satisfactorily achieved. Whilst the appellant has rather belatedly submitted a
    section to explain the proposal more clearly, this has not previously been seen by
    the Council. I consider it lawfully inappropriate to impose conditions requiring
    submitted layouts to be amended, even if I were satisfied that to do so would make
    the submission acceptable in spatial terms.
11. I conclude that the internal living conditions of the proposed loft accommodation
    have not been shown to be acceptable in terms of minimum internal space
    provision and ceiling heights, as required by the adopted housing standards
    already referred to.
Refuse & recycling
12. Other than the reference number and description, little detail of the previously
    approved scheme has been provided, but the appellant contends that no external
    storage of refuse/recycling material was proposed at that time. Instead
    refuse/recycling would be set down in the footway for collection. Presumably,

2
    Which is based on the Technical housing standards – nationally described space standard (2015)



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                     2
 Appeal Decision 6007305


     although this has not been clearly explained, the intention was that the storage of
     refuse/recycling would take place within each flat until collection time, when the
     various receptacles would be put outside.
13. However, in response to a question on the application form, the applicant affirms
    that every unit in the proposal (residential and non-residential) have dedicated
    internal and external storage space for dry recycling, food waste and residual
    waste. A storage area is shown at the rear on the submitted proposed ground floor
    plan drawing, albeit its specific purpose is not identified. It is therefore possibly
    understandable why the Council should be confused on the appellant’s intentions.
14. It is unusual in my experience for refuse/recycling material to be stored internally
    until collection day in new development. The plans do not show dedicated storage
    facilities for this purpose within the proposed flats. It would be unusual and far from
    ideal for food waste, in particular, to be stored internally in new development, since
    it would likely give off unpleasant smells particularly during hot summers, affecting
    residents’ living conditions.
15. An external space is available where proposed bike parking is shown, and there
    appears to be adequate space for refuse/recycling storage. The demolition of the
    external staircase make access to the rear external space for the upper floor flats to
    this area more difficult. Whether access to this area from within, is capable of being
    resolved by design is a matter for the appellant.
16. As matters stand, and irrespective of any previous approval, I consider the
    proposed waste storage arrangements to be unacceptable since no dedicated
    refuse space provision is shown to have been provided for the proposed flats,
    either internally or externally, bearing in mind that storage of food waste within the
    flats would likely give rise to problems of unpleasant smell during the summer, in
    particular.
17. I therefore conclude that the refuse/recycling arrangements are inadequate and
    conflict with those provisions of LP policy D6 requiring housing to be designed with
    adequate and easily accessible storage space that supports the separate collection
    of dry recyclables (for at least card, paper, mixed plastics, metals, glass) and food
    waste as well as residual waste.
Other matters
18. I have seen the references made to the planning history of the site and other
    development plan policies. I have taken account of these and local residents’
    concerns regarding privacy, daylight/sunlight and visual intrusion. These were
    considered by officers at application stage, and I have no reason, judging from that
    seen at my site visit, to disagree with their assessments. No other matter raised is
    of such strength or significance as to outweigh the considerations leading me to my
    conclusions.

G Powys Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
