Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18th August 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007715
Pavement outside Waitrose, 21 Liverpool Road, London N1 0RW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant full planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/3517/FUL.
•    The development proposed is removal of two existing telephone kiosks and the deployment of a
     replacement Street Hub 3 unit


Appeal B Ref: 6007714
Pavement outside Waitrose, 21 Liverpool Road, London N1 0RW
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/3518/ADV.
•    The development proposed is removal of two existing telephone kiosks and the deployment of a
     replacement Street Hub 3 unit



Decision
1.     Appeal A and Appeal B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The location of the appeal site in the above banner heading has been taken from
       the Council’s decision notice as this is a more accurate description of the location
       of the appeal site.
3.     The description of development in the above banner heading has been taken from
       the original application forms. The Council’s decision notice includes advert
       screens which is the subject of Appeal B, and I have determined the appeal
       accordingly.
4.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
       amendments against the December 2024 version. Although there have been
       significant amendments made, the changes relevant to this appeal are not
       substantive or determinative to the outcome of my decision. I have therefore not
       gone back to the parties to seek any comment.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007715, 6007714


5.     As set out above there are two appeals on this site. They differ only in that Appeal
       B is for advertisement consent for the illuminated advertisement. I have considered
       each proposal on its individual merits. However, to avoid duplication I have dealt
       with the two schemes together, except where otherwise indicated.
6.     Regulations to control advertisements may be exercised only in the interests of
       amenity and public safety taking into account (a) the provisions of the development
       plan, so far as they are material; and (b) any other relevant factors. Although the
       reasons for refusal set out on the decision notice for Appeal B refers to policies
       contained in the London Plan, 2021, Islington’s Strategic and Development
       Management Policies, 2023, the Framework and guidance contained within
       Islington's Urban Design Guide, 2017, these are material considerations rather
       than being decisive in the determination of Appeal B.
7.     The appeal site is located within close proximity to the Chapel Market/Penton
       Street Conservation Area (CA). I therefore have a duty under Section 72(1) of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (PLBCAA) to pay
       special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
       appearance of the CA.
8.     I have also had regard to Policy HE5 of the Framework which explains that
       assessments of the potential effects of development proposals on the significance
       of heritage assets (including through effects on their setting) should identify
       whether proposals would be likely to: a. have a positive effect, which is where the
       significance of a heritage asset would be enhanced, or better revealed; or b. have
       no effect on the significance of a heritage asset; or c. result in harm to the
       significance of a heritage asset, either from work affecting the asset itself or from
       development within its setting. This policy explains that the degree of harm should
       be identified. Policy HE6 of the Framework explains that when considering the
       potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a designated
       heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation (and
       the more important the asset, the greater the weight should be). This is
       irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm,
       substantial harm, or total loss of its significance.
9.     Policy HE9 of the Framework specifically covers CAs explaining that development
       proposals within or affecting the significance of CAs should: a. retain and conserve
       buildings and other features which make a positive contribution to the character or
       appearance of the CA where possible; and b. consider the area’s special
       architectural or historic interest (as identified as part of the designation of the CA)
       in the design of development. In advertisement appeals this is only relevant in so
       far as it relates to amenity.
Main Issues
10. It is considered that the main issues for Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
    development on:
           •    The character and appearance of the surrounding area, including whether it
                would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA; and
           •    The free flow of pedestrians.
11. For Appeal B, the main issues are the effect of the proposed advertisement on:


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007715, 6007714


           •    Amenity; and
           •    Public safety
Reasons
Character and appearance
12. The appeal site relates to a section of pavement located outside 21 Liverpool
    Road. The surrounding area has a substantial level of street furniture including
    lampposts, bins, bike stands, and wayfinding signs. It is a town centre location,
    and the surrounding area is commercial in nature. There are two telephone kiosks
    located at the site understood to have been in situ for some time. The appeal site
    is located in a prominent position and is in close proximity to the CA which lies to
    the south.
13. The proposed development seeks consent for the installation of 1no. new BT
    Street Hub, incorporating 2no. digital 75" LCD advert screens. The advertisement
    display is the subject of Appeal B. The unit would provide facilities such as free
    public Wi-Fi, free UK calls, USB charging, wayfinding assistance, an emergency
    services button, plus a range of other digital services for those in the vicinity. The
    LED display screens on each side of the unit carry advertising, which helps fund
    the free public services and can be used for Local Authority-specific messaging.
    As part of the proposals, the unit would remove the existing telephone kiosks
    located at the site.
14. To the south of the site lies the boundary of the CA which is clearly visible to and
    from the appeal site. Given the relationship that exists, I find that the appeal site
    falls within the setting of the CA and development at this site could alter how the
    CA is experienced and thus needs to be carefully considered.
15. The CA Design Guidelines, 2002 explains that in the mid-nineteenth century
    Chapel Market developed as a thriving street market and the whole area became
    more commercial in character with shops at ground floor and many small-scale
    industrial and workshop uses. Despite alterations and changing commercial
    requirements many of the old Georgian houses have survived to give this area a
    special historic and architectural character and appearance, which is desirable to
    preserve and enhance. It is explained that advertisements and signs can often
    detract from the visual amenity of the area.
16. The proposed location is in a busy commercial area where there are a variety of
    retail outlets and buildings of varying ages and styles including the Angel Shopping
    Centre opposite the site. The western side of Liverpool Road is visually cluttered
    as there is a lot of street furniture as set out above. All of which is located within
    close proximity to the appeal site. Although the proposed development would
    replace two existing telephone kiosks, the proposal would be wider and taller than
    the existing telephone kiosks as well as being of a solid dark design, more
    monolithic and would also have two large digital displays. The proposed Hub
    would therefore be more noticeable than the existing kiosks, and its large digital
    display screens would draw the eye from some distance away. The Hub, together
    with the digital advertisement panels, by reason of its size, siting and design,
    would result in an unduly dominant addition and increase the visual clutter on this
    side of the street. It would be detrimental to the character of the street scene and
    public realm.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007715, 6007714


17. The Communications Hub would stand out in views to and from the CA which
    would draw excessive attention. This would detract from the CA’s special
    character. While conditions could be imposed to control the degree of illumination,
    this would do little to alleviate the visual prominence of the proposals.
18. I understand that a Communications Hub (with an integrated advertisement
    display) outside the Angel shopping centre (opposite the site) was refused and
    dismissed at appeal1. The Inspector did not find that the Hub would harm the
    character and appearance of the area. However, while nearby, its overall context
    is different to that of the appeal site, where the proposed development would be
    read differently. To this end, the Inspector did note that the western side of
    Liverpool Road had a more cluttered appearance than the eastern side. I do not
    therefore find that scheme to be directly comparable and have determined this
    scheme based on its own merits.
19. The appellant refers to bus shelters and other Communication Hubs in the area
    including along Upper Street. However, in a similar way to the appeal across the
    road, these are read as part of their site-specific context which I find is indeed
    different to the appeal site subject to this appeal. It is therefore important to assess
    such schemes on their individual merits. Bus shelter displays are also of different
    function and design to the appeal before me and have a different form and
    relationship with the street scene. I do not therefore find them to be directly
    comparable. Although shop fronts and signage provide some colour and visual
    interest to the street scene, my site visit identified very few illuminated features
    particularly free-standing displays in the immediate vicinity of the site.
    Consequently, the prevailing character of the immediate area is not one that is
    defined by illuminated or digital displays. In this context, the proposed unit would
    appear as a visually intrusive addition, which the surrounding townscape lacks the
    capacity to absorb without harm to visual amenity.
20. Approvals elsewhere would not constitute a blanket position that a unit can be
    accepted in any part of the borough as all sites have different visual considerations
    and subject to site specific assessments.
21. For the above reasons, the proposed development would unacceptably harm the
    character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would fail to preserve the
    character or appearance of the CA which would result in harm to the significance
    of the heritage asset. Given the scale and prominence of the proposals, the extent
    of harm would be at the higher end of the spectrum.
22. Policy HE4 of the Framework explains that any harm to, or loss of, the significance
    of a designated heritage asset (including from development within its setting)
    should have a clear and convincing justification. Policy HE6 of the Framework
    explains that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of
    considerable importance and weight. It goes on to explain that where a
    development proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
    benefits resulting from the proposal. This balancing exercise applies to Appeal A.
23. The benefits associated with the scheme include the removal of the existing
    telephone kiosks and the provision of a Communications Hub providing free public

1
    APP/V5570/W/18/3209541 & APP/V5570/H/18/3209316.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decision 6007715, 6007714


       Wi-Fi, free UK calls, USB charging, wayfinding assistance, an emergency services
       button, plus a range of other digital services for those in the vicinity. The LED
       display screens on each side of the unit carry advertising, which helps fund the
       free public services and can be used for Local Authority-specific messaging. I am
       also aware of features and capabilities including, environmental sensors, insight
       counting and small cell mobile connectivity.
24. My attention has been drawn to the Code of Practice for Wireless Network
    Development in England, 2022 and the London Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2050,
    2014 which amongst other matters, sets out the importance of connectivity.
    Chapter 9 of the Framework also relates to supporting high-quality
    communications where the objective is to support the expansion and upgrading of
    telecommunications infrastructure, in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation
    of equipment and respect important environmental safeguards. Policy CO1 of the
    Framework explains that in considering proposals for the expansion or upgrading
    of electronic telecommunications networks, substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of maintaining or improving network coverage, capacity, reliability and
    resilience. The Framework also supports emergency services telecommunications
    infrastructure. On this basis, I attach substantial weight to the benefits of the
    scheme.
25. The proposed development would result in a high level of harm to the significance
    of the CA. In accordance with the Framework, this harm is afforded substantial
    weight. Whilst the benefits of the proposal also attract substantial weight, the
    magnitude of those benefits taking into account the nature and scale of the
    proposals is not sufficient to outweigh the identified heritage harm, to which
    considerable importance and weight must be given. The harm is not therefore
    justified having regard to Policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework. Consequently,
    the planning balance weighs against the proposal.
26. Within the context of my statutory duties in the PLBCAA, I conclude that Appeal A
    would unacceptably harm the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
    It would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. This
    would be contrary to Policies D3, D4, HC1 and T2 of the London Plan, 2021 and
    Policies PLAN1, DH1, DH2 and ST3 of the Islington's Local Plan Strategic and
    Development Management Policies, 2023. Such policies together, amongst other
    matters, explain that all forms of development are required to be of high quality
    and make a positive contribution to local character, legibility and distinctiveness,
    based upon an up-to-date understanding and evaluation of the defining
    characteristics of an area. For the same reasons, the proposed development
    would also be contrary to the Framework and guidance contained within Islington's
    Urban Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document, 2017. I am aware of
    other policies the appellant refers to which provide support for digital connectivity
    infrastructure, but the proposed development would still be contrary to the above-
    mentioned policies which I must consider.
27. I have reviewed the application of the policies set out on the decision notices and
    find them to be relevant in the particular circumstance of this case. This is because
    amongst other matters, they relate to design, public realm and heritage.
28. The Council cite Policy DH6 of the Islington's Local Plan Strategic and
    Development Management Policies, 2023 within their first reason for refusal on


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007715, 6007714


       Appeal A relating to character and appearance matters. Policy DH6 relates to
       advertisements, which are the subject of Appeal B only which is covered below.
29. Given my findings above in terms of character and appearance matters, it is
    concluded that Appeal B would also harm amenity. It would therefore conflict with
    the relevant policies above as well as Policy DH6 of the Islington's Local Plan
    Strategic and Development Management Policies, 2023 which specifically relates
    to advertisements requiring amongst other matters, advertisements to respect
    local context, including listed buildings and CAs.
Free flow of pedestrians and public safety
30. The proposed Street Hub would be located within quite a wide pavement and at
    my site visit, I noted that there was adequate movement available around the
    existing telephone kiosks. I recognise that the proposals would have an increased
    width compared with the existing telephone kiosks. However, the difference is
    such where it would not unacceptably obstruct pedestrian flows even taking into
    account the busy nature of the street. There would be little difference to that which
    currently exists. An adequate pavement width would also remain having regard to
    the Transport for London Streetscape Guidance which requires 2 metres of
    unobstructed footway.
31. The Council raise concern that the wider Hub would further obscure the legibility of
    the adjacent wayfinding sign. This sign is already obscured particularly in the
    direction north to south by the existing telephone kiosks and the proposed
    development would make very little difference to the legibility of the adjacent
    wayfinding sign. This element is therefore of lesser concern to me.
32. For the above reasons, I conclude on this issue that the proposed development
    would not unacceptably harm the free flow of pedestrians or public safety. Appeal
    A would therefore accord with Policies T2 and T4 of the London Plan, 2021 and
    Policies T1, T2 and T4 of the Islington's Local Plan Strategic and Development
    Management Policies, 2023. Such policies, together amongst other matters,
    explain that development proposals should reflect and be integrated with current
    and planned transport access, capacity and connectivity.
33. In Appeal A, the Council cite Policy DH6 of the Islington's Local Plan Strategic and
    Development Management Policies, 2023 within their second reason for refusal
    relating to the free flow of pedestrians. Policy DH6 relates to advertisements which
    are the subject of Appeal B only which is covered below.
34. Given my findings above in terms of free flow of pedestrians and public safety
    matters, it is concluded that Appeal B would also not unacceptably harm public
    safety. It would therefore accord with the above-mentioned policies as well as
    Policy DH6 of the Islington's Local Plan Strategic and Development Management
    Policies, 2023 which specifically relates to advertisements requiring amongst other
    matters, advertisements to not restrict pedestrian movements.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
35. Policy S3 of the Framework explains that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4
    explains that development proposals within settlements should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007715, 6007714


       effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
       Framework. Whilst I have found a lack of harm in relation to the free flow of
       pedestrians and public safety, I have found that the proposed development would
       unacceptably harm the character and appearance of the surrounding area. It
       would fail to preserve the character or appearance of the CA. Considering my
       findings above, the benefits of the proposed development would be substantially
       outweighed by the adverse effects identified, when assessed against the national
       decision-making policies in the Framework.
36. Bringing everything together, the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan when considered as a whole. There are no material
    considerations, either individually or in combination including the provisions of the
    Framework, that would outweigh the identified harm and associated plan conflict. I
    conclude that Appeal A and Appeal B should be dismissed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
