Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 22 July 2026
Site visits made on 21 and 22 July 2026
by R Gee BA (Hons) Dip TP PGCert UD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007184
Land South of Daws Heath Road, Thundersley SS7 2TA
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Rainer Developments Limited against the decision of Castle Point Borough
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/0660/OUT.
•      The development proposed is outline planning permission (all matters reserved except for vehicular
       access) for up to 58 dwellings (50% of which to be provided as affordable homes) together with new
       vehicular access, parking, public open space, play space, attenuation basins and enhanced
       landscaping.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for outline planning
   permission (all matters reserved except for vehicular access) for up to 58 dwellings
   (50% of which to be provided as affordable homes) together with new vehicular
   access, parking, public open space, play space, attenuation basins and enhanced
   landscaping at Land South of Daws Heath Road, Thundersley SS7 2TA in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/0660/OUT, subject to the
   conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The appeal is submitted in outline with only access to be determined at this stage.
   The proposal is accompanied by a parameter plan that has been treated as broadly
   indicative in nature.
3. A draft Section 106 Agreement accompanied the appeal and was considered
   during the Hearing. Following the close of the Hearing, a completed Agreement
   dated 23 July 2026 was provided. This Agreement has been taken into account and
   is discussed further later in this decision.
4. An unaccompanied site visit was made on the 21 July 2026 and 22 July, as agreed
   with the main parties, when the appeal site was viewed from within the site, from
   Daws Heath Road and from Bridleway Benfleet 85 that runs through West Wood
   proximate to the west and southern boundaries of the appeal site.
5. My attention has been drawn to a previous dismissed appeal at the site1. Whilst
   there are similarities in terms of the description of development the extent of the
   appeal site differs in that it has been reduced. Moreover, the previous appeal was

1
    APP/M1520/W/23/3329585 dated 16 July 2024

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007184


     determined under a different version of the National Planning Policy Framework
     (the Framework). The importance of determining similar cases in a similar manner
     is acknowledged. However, in this circumstance the material considerations differ
     following the revisions to the Framework and the introduction of grey belt land. In
     any event I have determined the appeal on its own merits, and on the evidence
     before me.
6. The Council is preparing an emerging local plan (ELP). The information before me
   indicates that the Examining Inspectors have identified significant concerns about
   the soundness of the Plan in respect of housing requirement and supply.
   Consequently, this matter is due to be considered through a single-issue hearing
   session ahead of the ELP as a whole. As such, the ELP is a considerable way from
   being finalised and I, therefore, attach very limited weight to the ELP.
7. On 17 August 2026 a new Framework was published. As this could affect the
   issues and matters in this case, the Council and the Appellant were invited to make
   further comments. My decision reflects the latest version of the Framework, and the
   responses received on it.
Main Issues
8. The main issues are:

    i)        Whether or not the proposal would be inappropriate development in the
              Green Belt having regard to the Framework and any relevant development
              policies with particular reference to whether the appeal site represents Grey
              Belt land and meets the Golden Rules;

    ii)       The effect of the proposal on Ragwood Riding Centre;

    iii)      The effect of the proposed development on the significance of heritage
              assets;

    iv)       The effect of the proposal on landscape character; and

    v)        The integrity of habitats sites.


Reasons
Whether grey belt land and whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
9. The site lies within the Green Belt adjacent to the settlement of Thundersley. It sits
   within a relatively small gap between a footpath that runs alongside no 112 Daws
   Heath Road to its western boundary and the Ragwood Riding Centre to the east.
   The site is undeveloped and evidence of former paddocks, divided by vegetation,
   were evident at the time of my site visit.
10. The Council does not have an up-to-date adopted Local Plan policy framework for
    Green Belt matters and therefore the Green Belt reason for refusal relies upon
    national policy contained within the Framework.
11. The Framework (chapter 13) states that the objective of Green Belt policy is to
    prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The government attaches


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6007184


        great importance to Green Belts, the essential features of which are their openness
        and permanence.
12. Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out certain categories of development as not
    being inappropriate in the Green Belt, and therefore should not be regarded as
    harmful to the Green Belt or be required to demonstrate very special
    circumstances.
13. The appeal proposal is advanced as conforming with policies for grey belt land.
    Grey belt is defined in the Framework2 as ‘land in the Green Belt comprising
    previously developed land and/or any other land that, in either case, does not
    strongly contribute to any of purposes (a), (b), or (d) in policy GB2’.
14. Annex E of the Framework sets out considerations for informing judgements as to
    whether land is grey belt and methodology on how decision-makers should
    consider whether a site’s contribution to the Green Belt is strong, moderate, or
    weak / none. If it is grey belt, I will also need to consider whether development
    would fundamentally undermine the five Green Belt purposes taken together across
    the plan area. I consider these matters in turn as follows:
Purpose a) – to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas
15. In considering the relevant purposes of the Green Belt I have had regard to the
    Castle Point Borough Green Belt Review (2013) (GBBR), that was prepared and
    published by the Council, and included an appraisal of the appeal site’s contribution
    to the purposes of the Green Belt. Subsequent Green Belt reviews have been
    prepared by the Council which include appraisals of parcels of land which include
    the appeal site, but none of these specifically appraise the appeal site as a
    standalone parcel.
16. The 2018 Green Belt Review identified the appeal site as part of the much larger
    Parcel 4, which was assessed as making a very strong contribution to Green Belt
    purposes and was therefore not taken forward for Stage 2 assessment. However,
    this was a strategic, parcel-level assessment rather than a site-specific evaluation.
    The review acknowledges that broad parcels may contain local variations and that
    more detailed assessment is required where individual sites are promoted for
    development. Consequently, while the Stage 1 findings explain why Parcel 4 was
    excluded from further consideration, they do not determine the appeal site's own
    Green Belt performance or function.
17. The 2025 Green Belt Assessment identifies the appeal site as Parcel GB14 and
    assessed it together with the adjoining Parcel GB29 (Ragwood Riding Centre).
    Collectively, the parcels are found to make a strong overall contribution to the
    Green Belt, scoring strong against purpose (a).
18. Whilst development of the site would extend built form onto currently undeveloped
    land, the site is physically contained by strong features. At the Hearing, the Council
    conceded that development of the appeal site would not create an extended
    "finger" of development into the Green Belt. This is consistent with Annex E of the
    Framework, which identifies such development patterns as a characteristic of land
    making a strong contribution to Green Belt Purpose (a).


2
    Annex B: Glossary


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007184


19. Daws Heath Road provides a clear northern boundary, with ancient woodland
    defining the southern boundary and part of the eastern edge. Residential
    development associated with Thundersley lies to the west, with the Ragwood
    Riding Centre and a cluster of bungalows to the east. Together, these features
    represent clear and enduring boundaries, such that development of the site would
    be physically contained and further outward expansion would not readily follow.
20. Whilst the Council submits that the site's contained nature means it performs
    strongly in relation to Green Belt purpose (a), I reach a different conclusion.
    Although the proposal would extend built development onto currently undeveloped
    land and would therefore result in some urban sprawl, the containment of the site
    significantly limits the extent of that harm. Consequently, I do not consider that the
    development would lead to unrestricted urban sprawl or materially undermine the
    Green Belt's role in checking the outward spread of the urban area.
21. These findings broadly align with the Council’s GBBR 2013 which recognised that
    the surrounding ancient woodland would restrict the potential for further urban
    sprawl or encroachment. The review assessed the site as having an ‘amber’ Green
    Belt impact indicating that it could be removed from the Green Belt with limited
    effect on its strategic function. It further concluded that a revised Green Belt
    boundary could be established using existing field boundaries, woodland and built
    development.
22. It is recognised that the GBBR 2013 predates both the Planning Practice Guidance
    (PPG)3 and Annex E of the Framework on assessing the contribution that land
    makes to Green Belt purposes. Whilst Annex E incorporates the methodology
    previously contained in the PPG, neither document altered the purposes
    themselves. As such, the review’s conclusions regarding the site’s physical
    containment and limited potential to facilitate further sprawl remain relevant.
    Furthermore, my conclusions are also consistent with those of the Inspector in the
    2024 appeal decision, who found that the surrounding woodland would restrict
    further spread of development towards Daws Heath and that the proposal would
    not result in wholly unrestricted sprawl or fundamentally undermine the wider Green
    Belt's role in serving this purpose.
23. I have carefully considered the characteristics and context of the appeal site. Given
    its containment by strong and enduring boundaries, and the limited prospect of
    facilitating further outward expansion, I find that the appeal site’s contribution is not
    strong in respect of purpose (a).
Purpose b) – to prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another
24. The Framework clarifies that Purpose (b) of the Green Belt only concerns the
    merging of towns, and expressly states that it does not relate to villages.
25. The parties agree that Daws Heath is a village, the appeal site does not perform a
    role in preventing the merging of towns and, in that respect, Purpose (b) is not
    engaged. Accordingly, I conclude that Purpose (b) would not be compromised by
    the appeal proposal.




3
    Paragraph: 005 Reference ID: 64-005-20250225


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decision 6007184


26. However, the Council raises concerns regarding the role of the appeal site in
    maintaining separation of Thundersley and Hadleigh, which lies to the south of the
    appeal site, beyond the ancient woodland.
27. Notwithstanding the presence of ribbon development extending eastwards along
    Daws Heath Road from Thundersley, the appeal site provides a readily perceptible
    gap between Thundersley and Daws Heath. Whilst development of the appeal site
    would result in the small group of bungalows (nos 154-164 Daws Heath Road)
    being perceived as more closely associated with Thundersley, the extent of the
    intervening undeveloped land and the physical separation provided by the
    surrounding landscape would remain substantial. I am therefore satisfied that the
    proposal would not result in the merging of Thundersley and Hadleigh.
Purpose d) – to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns
28. Thundersley is not a historic town. It is agreed between the parties that the appeal
    site makes no contribution to Purpose (d) of the Green Belt, and I have no reason
    to reach a contrary view.
29. For the reasons stated above, I conclude that the appeal site comprises grey belt
    land.
Tests for development on grey belt land
30. Policy GB7(1)(g) of the Framework requires all of the following to apply: the
    development would utilise grey belt land and would not fundamentally undermine
    the purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the area of the
    plan; there is an evidenced unmet need for the type of development proposed; the
    development would be in a sustainable location, with particular reference to policy
    TR3 of the Framework; and in the case of major development involving the
    provision of housing, the development proposed complies with policy GB8. I
    consider these matters as follows
       Green belt purposes
31. In respect of the remaining purposes of the Green Belt, it is not disputed that the
    proposal would not assist in urban regeneration through the recycling of previously
    developed or other urban land. Rather, the proposal relates to largely undeveloped
    countryside and therefore does not contribute towards Green Belt purpose (e).
32. The appeal site comprises a relatively small part of the extensive Green Belt within
    the borough. Nevertheless, having regard to Green Belt purpose (c), the site forms
    part of the countryside and the proposed development would constitute an
    encroachment into it. Be that as it may, the site is a contained parcel influenced by
    surrounding development and other urbanising features, with views of it largely
    limited to a small number of nearby receptors. Consequently, the site does not
    perform a significant strategic Green Belt function, and its development would not
    materially harm the role, effectiveness or integrity of the wider Green Belt. Taking
    these factors into account, I conclude that, whilst the proposal would result in some
    encroachment into the countryside, it would not fundamentally undermine the
    remaining purposes of the Green Belt or the continued functioning of the wider
    Green Belt in this area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007184


         Evidenced unmet need
33. Footnote 41 of the Framework defines ‘evidenced unmet need’ for housing by
    reference to the absence of a five-year housing land supply or a Housing Delivery
    Test (HDT) score below 75%.
34. The Council acknowledges that it is unable to demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites. A supply of only 0.91 years represents a substantial and
    acute shortfall against identified housing requirements.
35. Alongside the publication of the 2026 Framework, the Government released HDT
    2024 and 2025 measurements. At the time of the Hearing the HDT 2023
    measurement was 54%. Castle Point’s HDT 2024 measurement4 was 29% and the
    latest 2025 measurement is 11%. Therefore, there is an evidenced unmet need for
    the type of development.
36. I return to the absence of a five-year housing land supply later in my decision.
         Sustainable location
37. The revised Framework places increased emphasis on locating development in
    sustainable locations. Policy TR3 of the Framework requires development
    proposals generating significant movement to be located where they support
    sustainable patterns of movement and provide genuine transport choices.
38. There are a range of day-to-day facilities within walking and cycling distance of the
    appeal site, accessible via the existing pedestrian / cycle network. Bus stops from
    which services to and from Southend-on-Sea, Hadleigh and Rayleigh, as well as
    facilities in Thundersley, are within walking distance of the site. As such, there is
    agreement between the parties that the proposed development would be in a
    sustainable location, and I have no reason to conclude otherwise.
         Golden Rules
39. For major development involving the provision of housing, the Framework requires
    compliance with Policy GB8. The main parties agree that the scheme would comply
    with the ‘Golden Rules’ as set out in Policy GB8 of the Framework, including in
    relation to its minimum 50% affordable housing, the provision of new green spaces
    accessible to the public, and improvements to local infrastructure, and I do not
    reach a finding to the contrary. In accordance with the Framework, substantial
    weight is therefore afforded to the proposal's compliance with the Golden Rules.
         Conclusions in respect of Green Belt
40. As the development would utilise Grey Belt land, meet the requirements of Policy
    GB7(1)(g) of the Framework, including the Golden Rules, it would not, by definition,
    be inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Consequently, there is no need to
    further consider harm to openness or very special circumstances.
Ragwood Riding Centre
41. The appeal site has, until recently, been used by Ragwood Riding Centre (riding
    centre) for grazing. It is understood that the lease expired in April 2026 and at the
    time of my site visit no horses were present on the land.

4
    published 17 August 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007184


42. The Council advance that the proposed development would result in the closure of
    the riding centre, resulting in the loss of employment and leisure facilities. Whilst I
    have not been directed to any local plan polices that would specifically protect the
    existing use the Council advances that the proposal would be contrary to the
    Framework insofar as it seeks to support the rural economy and promoting safe
    and healthy communities, with reference to Policies HC6, HC7 and E4 of the
    Framework.
43. The Appellant challenges the assertion that the loss of grazing paddocks would
    necessarily result in the closure of the riding centre. Whilst I do not doubt that the
    loss of grazing land would have implications for animal welfare, and may result in a
    reduction in the numbers of animals able to be kept at the riding centre, I am not
    persuaded that there is a direct causal relationship between the loss of the grazing
    paddocks and the imminent closure of the riding centre. Whilst anecdotal evidence
    was presented at the Hearing regarding the difficulties that the loss of the grazing
    land would be likely to create, there is no substantive evidence before me to
    demonstrate that suitable alternative grazing provision is unavailable within the
    locality, that the riding centre could not continue to operate on a reduced scale
    whilst remaining viable, or that the proposal would inevitably result in the closure of
    the facility. Furthermore, whilst I accept that the horses concerned may have
    differing age, welfare and health requirements, no compelling evidence has been
    provided to show that appropriate alternative accommodation could not be secured
    for them, if necessary.
44. The Council estimates that this would result in the loss of 4.4 full time equivalent
    (FTE) jobs and would have wider implications having regard to supply chains
    associated with the riding centre, including feed providers, farriers etc. The
    Appellant has sought to quantify in more detail5 the economic impacts should the
    riding centre close. It is estimated that this would result in a maximum loss of
    £326,800 in gross value added (GVA) at a regional scale, including £251,400 within
    Castle Point. Whilst the loss of the facility would be regrettable, the scale of the
    economic harm would be modest when considered against the wider local and
    regional economy. Furthermore, this must be weighed against the economic
    benefits of the proposed development, including constructed-related employment,
    associated supply chain expenditure and ongoing expenditure generated by future
    occupiers once the development is completed and occupied.
45. The Council contends that the closure of the riding centre would give rise to
    negative social impacts. Although the facility may contribute social value beyond
    the local area, insufficient evidence has been presented to demonstrate that any
    resulting needs or benefits could not reasonably be accommodated by alternative
    provision elsewhere.
46. It is also contended that, should the proposal be permitted, concerns would arise
    regarding the turning out of horses adjacent to a construction site and, following
    occupation of the dwellings, from activities such as loud music and the use of
    fireworks by residents. It is argued that such noises and disturbances could affect
    the horses, causing them to react unpredictably to unfamiliar sounds, sights, or
    smells, thereby creating potential risks to animal welfare and the safety of staff and
    clients. These concerns are speculative in nature and are not supported by any
    substantive evidence.

5
    TNSEB Tyrley 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007184


47. The site is located within an existing environment where a variety of activities,
    noises, and human interactions already occur. The possibility that future residents
    may generate occasional noise or other disturbances does not, in itself, establish a
    planning reason to withhold permission. Any potential issues relating to noise
    nuisance or anti-social behaviour would be subject to separate legislative controls.
    Consequently, insufficient evidence has been presented to demonstrate that the
    proposed development would result in material harm to the continued operation of
    the equestrian use or create unacceptable risks to horses, staff, or clients.
48. Drawing the above points together, I am not persuaded that the proposal would
    result in the closure of the Ragwood Riding Centre. However, even if the riding
    centre were to cease operations, I consider the degree of harm would be modest
    given the scale of the site.
49. Policy HC7 of the Framework applies to the loss of existing open space, sports and
    recreational buildings and land. However, the appeal site comprises privately
    owned grazing land and does not constitute a public recreation facility, playing field,
    sports ground or other land formally established for recreational purposes. In these
    circumstances, I am not satisfied that the appeal site falls within the scope of Policy
    HC7 and, consequently, it would not conflict with that policy.
50. I have also considered the Council's contention that the site forms part of, or
    contributes to, a facility of community value. However, the Framework distinguishes
    between recreational facilities and 'key community facilities', the latter being defined
    by Policy HC6 as established local services and infrastructure such as shops,
    public houses, places of worship, health facilities, community halls and cultural
    venues. A commercial riding centre is not expressly identified within that definition,
    and no substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that it performs an
    equivalent function as an essential component of local community infrastructure.
    Furthermore, recreational uses are addressed separately under Policy HC7,
    reinforcing the distinction drawn by the Framework. Accordingly, I afford limited
    weight to the Council's suggestion that the appeal site should benefit from
    protection as a key community facility and the proposal does not conflict with Policy
    HC6 of the Framework.
Heritage assets
51. The appeal site is proximate to Nos 96 and 98 Daws Heath Road, a pair of Grade II
    listed buildings. I have therefore borne in mind the statutory requirements placed
    upon decision-makers by section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act, 1990 (the Act).
52. Nos 96 and 98, known as Hillside Cottage, comprises an 18th or early 19th century
    former pair of cottages that retains its original timber doorways on the principal
    elevation. The building is a two-storey, white weatherboarded structure with a red
    pantile roof fronting Daws Heath Road. The weatherboarding conceals the timber-
    framed construction referred to in the listing. Their significance is derived in part
    from their age, surviving historic fabric and their relationship to the evolution of the
    settlement. The Appellant’s Archaeological and Heritage Assessment (AHA)
    acknowledges that the listed cottages once stood in relative isolation, however,
    twentieth century urban development has since enveloped the area. As a result,
    intervening development has removed any intervisibility between the appeal site
    and the listed cottages, along with any historic functional relationship that may


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007184


        previously have existed. Accordingly, I agree with the main parties that the appeal
        site does not contribute to the special interest of the listed buildings as part of its
        setting and the proposal would have no effect on the significance of the listed
        building. The proposal therefore complies with Policy HE6 of the Framework.
53. To the north of the appeal site is No 137 Daws Heath Road, a building regarded as
    a non-designated heritage asset (NDHA). The local listing highlights the building as
    an attractive pair of farm labourer cottages. It comprises a painted white rendered
    (likely brick) building of modest proportions on its principal façade and was likely
    once two cottages, now combined into one. It comprises two storeys and has a
    large central chimney stack with dentiled detailing and a gabled slate roof. Its upper
    floor contains two casement windows on the principal front façade. The building is
    detached and sits within a tall, hedged boundary which serves to largely screen it
    from the road and the Site.
54. I have had regard to the significance of the NDHA and the effect of the proposed
    development upon that significance, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
    the Framework.
55. The Appellant’s AHA identifies its significance is derived in part from its historic and
    architectural interest as an attractive pair of simple farm labourer’s cottages. There
    is no evidence to suggest a direct functional or historic relationship between the
    cottages and the appeal site. Nevertheless, the appeal site remains as a remnant
    of the rural landscape within which the cottages would historically have been
    experienced, and in that respect, it makes a modest contribution to their
    significance. The proposed development would introduce built form into the setting
    of this NDHA, resulting in a limited degree of harm to its significance. A matter that I
    return to later in my decision in accordance with Policy HE7 of the Framework.
Landscape character
56. Policy N2 of the Framework requires consideration of the environmental qualities of
    the land, including landscape character and the natural beauty of the countryside,
    and opportunities to conserve or enhance those qualities. The Landscape, Visual
    and Green Belt Assessment (LVGA) 6 identifies the appeal site as being within the
    Urban Landscapes Landscape Character Type (LCT G), and the South Essex
    Coastal Towns Landscape Character Area (LCA G3).
57. LCT G is characterised by its predominantly urban character, comprising extensive
    twentieth-century residential and commercial development, whilst also containing
    important open spaces that provide recreational opportunities, support biodiversity,
    and function as green infrastructure within the urban environment. LCA G3 is
    characterised by a mixed landscape in which urban development is the dominant
    influence, interspersed with areas of gently undulating farmland, remnant
    hedgerows, and significant woodland, particularly in the Daws Heath, South
    Benfleet and Hockley areas. The Appeal Site exhibits elements of these
    characteristics, forming part of a transitional landscape where open land and
    vegetation sit alongside established urban development. These features give the
    site a generally pleasant character.
58. The Council does not dispute the conclusions of the LVGA insofar as it concludes
    the Appeal Site is of medium landscape quality, value and sensitivity. Whilst not

6
    CSA Environmental Report August 2025 Ref: CSA/6343/04


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              9
Appeal Decision 6007184


     forming a reason for refusal the parties agree that there would be some landscape
     harm.
59. Having regard to the context of the appeal site, influenced by a well-established
    urban context and, when considered alongside its former equestrian use rather
    than agricultural function, its character is more reflective of an edge-of-settlement
    location than open countryside.
60. The introduction of built development into a currently undeveloped parcel of land
    would undoubtedly result in a change of character. Although indicative, the
    supporting plans illustrate that the site could be developed whilst maintaining the
    majority of trees and hedgerows on site and that significant landscape buffers could
    be incorporated into the site layout. While the detailed design would be considered
    at the reserved matters stage, there is no evidence to suggest that the site could
    not be developed in a way that respects and reflects the character of the
    surrounding area.
61. Due to the visual containment afforded to the site by existing landscape features
    and built development the visual impact of development of the site would be largely
    limited and localised. Existing vegetation would filter and break up views.
    Furthermore, as retained and proposed landscaping becomes established, it would
    provide increased screening and help to soften the visual presence of the
    development.
62. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would give rise to some harm to
    landscape character and appearance which draws the proposal into conflict with
    Policy N2 of the Framework. Such harm would be limited in extent and largely
    confined to the site itself and its immediate surroundings. Nevertheless, it is a harm
    to be considered in the Planning Balance later in my decision.
Habitats sites
63. From the evidence before me, the habitats sites affected by the proposal are the
    Benfleet and Southend Marshes Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar site,
    Foulness SPA and Ramsar site, Blackwater Estuary (Mid-Essex Coast Phase 4)
    SPA and Ramsar site and the Essex Estuaries Special Areas of Conservation
    (SAC). These Habitats Sites form part of the internationally important Essex Coast
    estuarine complex, supporting extensive mudflat, saltmarsh, grazing marsh and
    coastal lagoon habitats, together with internationally significant populations of
    wintering and migratory waterbirds. The Essex Estuaries SAC is additionally
    designated for a range of estuarine and saltmarsh habitats of European importance
    that contribute to the ecological integrity of the wider Essex coastline.
64. The appeal site lies within the visitor catchment area from which a significant
    proportion of users of these designated sites are drawn. Consequently, the
    proposed development has the potential to increase visitor numbers and, in turn,
    recreational pressure on these internationally important habitats. Such effects,
    particularly when considered in combination with other plans and projects, could
    adversely affect the integrity of the designated sites. As such, it is necessary for
    me, as the competent authority, to conduct an appropriate assessment (AA) in
    relation to the effect of granting permission on the integrity of the Habitats Sites. I
    have sought further evidence on this matter and Natural England was consulted.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6007184


65. To address this potential impact, the Section 106 Agreement secures a financial
    contribution in accordance with the Essex Coast Recreational Disturbance
    Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (RAMS). This contribution would support a
    package of strategic mitigation measures endorsed by Natural England. Both the
    Council and Natural England, are satisfied that the measures secured through the
    agreement would provide appropriate mitigation and ensure that the integrity of the
    SPA, Ramsar and SAC sites would not be adversely affected. Based on the
    evidence before me, I have no substantive reason to reach a different conclusion. I
    am also satisfied that the planning obligation meets the tests set out in Regulation
    122(2) of the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulations.
66. I therefore conclude that the integrity of the identified Habitats Sites would not be
    harmed by the development. Accordingly, it would be compliant with Policy N6
    1(a)(i) of the Framework that seeks to protect areas of particular importance
    relating to habitats sites. Consequently, there is no clear reason for refusing the
    development proposed in respect of such matters.
Other Matters
67. In respect of matters relating to drainage and flooding, the proposal is accompanied
    by a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) and Drainage Strategy, the principles of which
    have been accepted by the Council. Whilst further details would be required
    through the discharge of conditions, there is no compelling evidence before me to
    indicate that the proposal would exacerbate flood risk on, or off the site.
68. The Highway Authority has not raised any issues in relation to the safety of the
    access itself or the capacity of the surrounding road network to accommodate the
    development, despite suggestions from local residents that it is already a heavily
    congested area at peak times.
69. Concerns were expressed about pressure on local infrastructure and services.
    Nonetheless, the submitted planning obligation would secure appropriate
    contributions towards infrastructure provision, and I am satisfied that the impacts
    arising from the additional population could be appropriately mitigated.
70. Other concerns relate to the design, scale and massing of the proposed
    development and its effect on the character of the area. However, such matters
    would be considered as part of the reserved matters.
71. Some interested parties contend that the proposal should not be re-considered
    given the previous dismissal of an appeal on the site. Whilst the previous appeal
    decision is an important material consideration, it does not prevent the submission
    or consideration of a subsequent application. The current proposal must be
    assessed on its own planning merits, having regard to any differences in the
    scheme, changes in policy, the evidence before the decision-maker, and all other
    material considerations. Accordingly, I have taken the earlier appeal decision into
    account but have reached my conclusions based on the circumstances of the
    present case.
72. The concerns, outlined above, were considered by the Council at the application
    stage and did not form part of the reasons for refusal. Having regard to the
    information before me, including the comments of statutory consultees, and the
    recommended conditions and obligations, there is no compelling evidence before



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6007184


     me that would lead me to come to a different conclusion to the Council on these
     matters.
Planning Obligations
73. The statutory tests for planning obligations are set out in Regulation 122 of the
    Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 (as amended) (CIL). They must
    be necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms, be directly
    related to the development, and be fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind
    to the development. The Council submitted a CIL compliance schedule identifying
    how each suggested obligation is consistent with its adopted policies and the
    requirements of the Regulations.
74. The section 106 provides that 50% of the proposed dwellings would be affordable
    and requires a scheme to be submitted which would, amongst other things, provide
    for a tenure split to subsequently be agreed. For the reasons previously stated, I
    consider the provisions in relation to affordable housing would be reasonable and
    necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms.
75. Obligations relating to Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) would be necessary to ensure
    the delivery of such measures consistent with the provisions of the Framework. I
    am satisfied that the obligation requiring a RAMS contribution is necessary to
    mitigate the recreational impacts arising from the proposed development on the
    identified habitats sites, thereby ensuring compliance with the requirements of the
    Habitats Regulations.
76. Obligations relating to provision, management and maintenance of open space
    including play would be necessary to meet needs of future occupiers. Obligations
    relating to the provision of residential travel information packs and highway works
    would be necessary to ensure appropriate access and to support sustainable travel
    choices in accordance with the Framework.
77. The planning obligation would also provide financial contributions towards
    healthcare, primary education, early years and childcare provision, and library,
    thereby helping to mitigate the additional pressure that the development would
    place on local infrastructure and community services.
78. The obligation would secure a financial contribution towards the expansion and
    installation of electric vehicle charging infrastructure at the existing Chelmsford
    Ambulance Hub. This contribution would help address the increased demand
    generated by the development and support the provision of sustainable emergency
    service infrastructure and I therefore consider this to be reasonable and necessary.
79. Having regard to the scale and complexity of the obligations secured, I am satisfied
    that provisions in respect of monitoring are reasonable and necessary to enable the
    Council to monitor compliance with the Agreement.
80. Having considered each obligation I am satisfied that the S106 Agreement includes
    the provision of infrastructure, which is necessary, directly required and fairly and
    reasonably related in scale to this development. Accordingly, I am satisfied that
    each of these obligations fall within the provisions of the CIL Regulations and the
    Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6007184


Planning and heritage balance
81. The revised Framework introduced a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development for certain proposals outside settlement boundaries through NDMPs
    S3 to S5, replacing the presumption contained within the previous Framework.
    Policy S5(5) states that where development is found not to be inappropriate
    through the application of Policies HC8 and GB7, planning permission should be
    granted unless the benefits are substantially outweighed by any adverse effects
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework and
    applying paragraph 2 of that policy.
82. Having found that the appeal site comprises grey belt land and that the proposal
    satisfies the requirements of Policy GB7, including the Golden Rules, the proposal
    is not inappropriate development in Green Belt terms.
83. I have identified a limited degree of landscape harm and limited harm to the
    significance of a NDHA. Although that harm would be limited, Policy HE7 (2) of the
    Framework states that where a development proposal would harm the significance
    of a non-designated heritage asset, this should be weighed against the benefits of
    the proposal and a balanced judgement made, having regard to the scale of any
    harm or loss and the significance of the non-designated heritage asset.
84. The Appellant advances a number of considerations in favour of the proposal which
    I consider below:
Provision of housing
85. The parties agree that only 0.91 years’ worth of housing land supply can currently
    be provided and that this represents a significant deficit. The HDT results show
    past housing delivery at levels substantially below requirements. The latest
    measurement indicates a figure of 11% which indicates a severe housing shortage,
    with only one Local Planning Authority having a worse HDT measurement than
    Castle Point.
86. Pending the adoption of a new local plan, the Council has indicated that it is
    endeavouring to maximise development on brownfield land. Nevertheless, it is
    difficult to envisage how identified housing needs can be adequately met without
    some release of land from the Green Belt. In any event, this does not affect the
    current five-year housing land supply position. Moreover, there is insufficient
    evidence before me to conclude that the Council’s approach to prioritising
    brownfield development is materially influencing the rate of housing delivery. Based
    on the evidence before me, and in the absence of an up-to-date development plan,
    I have no substantive basis to conclude that housing supply is likely to improve
    significantly in the short to medium term.
87. Accordingly, the provision of 58 dwellings carries substantial weight and would
    align with Policy HO7 of the Framework which reflects the Government objective to
    significantly boost the supply of homes.
Affordable housing
88. The Council does not dispute that the delivery of affordable housing is at
    exceptionally low level. The evidence indicates that in the 11 years since the start
    of the Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) period in 2014/15, the
    Council has delivered an average of just 7 affordable dwellings per annum (or 6%

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6007184


        of total completions), net of Right to Buy. In the year 2024/25 the net increase was
        just 1 affordable dwelling.
89. The latest Local Housing Needs Assessment (LHNA) identifies a need for 86
    affordable dwellings per annum. The Council accepts that there is a substantial
    demand for affordable housing, reflected in the significant number of households on
    the housing register and the extended waiting periods experienced by those
    seeking affordable accommodation7. As with market housing, there is no evidence
    before me that there is likely to be a marked improvement in the delivery of
    affordable housing in the short to medium term.
90. The appeal scheme proposes to deliver 50% affordable units (or up to 29
    affordable units). This exceeds the Council’s Developer Contributions Guidance
    Supplementary Planning Document 2008 which seeks only 35% affordable housing
    provision. The proposed 50% provision accords with the Golden Rules set out at
    the Framework. Accordingly, I concur that the delivery of 50% affordable housing
    should be afforded substantial positive weight, particularly given the Council is
    underperforming against its housing delivery requirements. In this respect the
    proposal would align with Policy H08 of the Framework in respect of providing
    affordable homes.
Open space
91. The appeal scheme includes the provision of public open space within the site,
    including an equipped play area. Although this provision is principally required to
    meet the needs of the development, it would nevertheless represent a public
    benefit of the scheme. The facilities would be available not only to future occupiers
    of the proposed dwellings but also to existing residents and visitors in the locality,
    thereby enhancing opportunities for recreation, informal play and social interaction.
    This would contribute positively to the health and wellbeing of the community and
    weighs in favour of the proposal.
BNG
92. The proposal seeks to deliver BNG of 2.88 habitat units and 1.92 hedgerow units,
    equating to percentage gains of 29.45% for habitats and 21.29% for hedgerows
    respectively. Accordingly, the BNG arising from the scheme would be in excess of
    the adopted policy requirement of 10%; and this is afforded significant weight.
Enhancement to ancient woodland
93. Land to the east and south of the appeal site is ancient woodland. Although
    indicative at this time, the submitted plans incorporate a 30m buffer between the
    residential development area and the ancient woodland, surpassing the minimum
    15m buffer recommended in Natural England and Forestry Commission guidance.
    The submitted Ecological Impact Assessment (EcIA) and Habitat Management and
    Monitoring Plan (HMMP) would set out measures to enhance areas of ancient
    woodland8 to improve its condition.
94. Whilst the Council considers the weight to be attributed to this benefit is reduced on
    the basis that the works proposed would likely be carried out anyway by Essex
    Wildlife Trust (EWT), the evidence indicates that the land is not in their ownership

7
    Data published by MHCLG confirms that on 31 March 2025, there were 748 households on the Housing Register in Castle Point.
8
    Valerie Wells Wood


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 14
Appeal Decision 6007184


        (but rather the same ownership as the appeal site). Consequently, EWT does not
        manage it, or have rights to do so. The Framework recognises that ancient
        woodland is an irreplaceable habitat and I consider the enhancement to the
        condition of such habitat to attract significant weight as a benefit of the proposal.
Utilisation of a suitable and sustainable site to help meet development needs
95. Thundersley is identified to be one of the most sustainable settlements in the
    borough to accommodate growth. It is common ground, and I agree, that the
    appeal site is in a highly accessible location. No technical constraints to
    development have been identified and on this basis the site is considered suitable
    and sustainable for development.
Economic benefits
96. The Appellant identifies a range of economic benefits based on metrics derived
    from national studies as set out in the Technical Note on Economic and Social
    Benefits (TNESB)9. These have not been contested by the Council.
97. In summary, these benefits include 25 direct, indirect and induced net additional
    FTE jobs across the East of England, including an estimated 10 for Castle Point
    residents, during the construction period, and an estimated 65 economically active
    and employed residents. It further indicates the generation of up to £1.3 million
    resident expenditure annually on retail and leisure goods and services, with
    capacity to support 10 jobs in these sectors on an ongoing basis. £1.25 million is
    expected in Council Tax over ten years that would help fund public services in
    Castle Point and Essex. A further £1.3 million could also be generated via CIL
    payments to support investment in local infrastructure and the generation of £3.6
    million Gross Value Added (GVA) contribution across the East of England region,
    including £2.8 million concentrated in Castle Point.
98. In the absence of substantive evidence that there is a causal link between the
    proposal and the closure of Ragwood Riding Centre, even if the centre were to
    close the economic impact of such would be limited in comparison to the benefits
    derived from the appeal proposal as a whole.
Concluding remarks on the benefits
99. Taking the above benefits together, I attribute them substantial positive weight in
    the planning balance, particularly, the provision of market and affordable housing
    and the contribution these would make towards housing supply at a time when the
    Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year housing land supply.
100. The proposal would comply with the Golden Rules and would deliver the
    associated benefits sought by Policy GB8(2) of the Framework. Accordingly, I
    attach substantial weight to this matter in the planning balance.
101. Having had regard to the significance of the NDHA and the limited harm that the
    proposal would cause, I have undertaken the balanced judgement required by
    Policy HE7(2) of the Framework. In doing so, I find that the benefits of the proposal
    outweigh the heritage harm.



9
    Technical Note on Economic and Social Benefits February 2026 - Turley


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 15
Appeal Decision 6007184


102. Taking all of the above matters into account, I conclude that the overall planning
    balance falls clearly in favour of the development.
Conditions
103. Policy DM6 of the Framework states that conditions should only be imposed where
    they are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms,
    relevant to the development and planning considerations generally, sufficiently
    precise to make them capable of being complied with and enforced and reasonable
    in all other respects.
104. A draft list of conditions formed the discussion at the Hearing. I have considered
    those conditions against the tests outlined in the Framework and the advice in the
    PPG. I have made minor amendments, where necessary, to make them more
    concise, precise and enforceable.
105. The schedule includes several pre-commencement conditions that in this instance
    are necessary for the development to prevent harm and disturbance given the site’s
    proximity to surrounding residential properties and its landscape and ecological
    context.
106. In addition to the standard conditions relating to outline schemes and the
    submission of reserved matters (1-3), it is necessary, in order to provide certainty,
    to identify the plans to which the decision relates (4), but only insofar as they relate
    to the matter of access and the parameters of the proposed scheme.
107. Concerns were raised regarding the potential effects of construction activities,
    including noise and disturbance. However, any such impacts would be temporary in
    nature and could be appropriately controlled through a Construction Management
    Plan (CMP) (5) requiring the implementation of suitable construction management
    measures. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the living conditions of nearby occupiers
    would be adequately protected.
108. Conditions in respect of contamination (6-7), including any necessary remediation,
    are required in the interests of human health and the environment. Conditions to
    manage any risks associated with surface water, drainage and off-site flood risk (8-
    10) are necessary to ensure no environmental harm arises.
109. In the interests of highway safety conditions would secure an appropriate access
    and road surface (11 and 20).
110. Interested parties raised concerns regarding the proposal's potential impact on
    wildlife. However, the proposal has been supported by adequate information to
    indicate that the development would secure mitigation and enhancement
    measures. Moreover, no ecological objections have been raised by the relevant
    consultees. Subject to the recommended planning conditions, I am satisfied that
    biodiversity would be protected and enhanced and specifically that protected
    species would not be adversely affected. The proposal would therefore accord with
    the biodiversity duty under section 40 of the Natural Environment and Rural
    Communities Act 2006 (as amended).
111. In this regard, a condition to secure the submission and implementation of a
    Biodiversity Construction Environmental Management Plan (12) is required to
    ensure that the development would not have an adverse impact on local
    biodiversity. At the Hearing the need for a Habitat Management and Monitoring

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
Appeal Decision 6007184


        Plan (13) was discussed with the Appellant taking the view that the condition was
        reasonable and necessary as the provision goes beyond statutory BNG. I concur
        that such a condition is reasonable and necessary to ensure on-site habitat is
        delivered, managed, and monitored for a period of at least 30 years from
        completion of development. A Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy (14) and actions
        required in accordance with Ecological Appraisal (16) are necessary to enhance
        Protected and Priority species/habitats. A wildlife sensitive lighting condition (15) is
        necessary in order to prevent light pollution and protect biodiversity.
112. The evidence before me indicates that the appeal site lies within an area of
    archaeological interest. The Appellant considers the suite of archaeological
    conditions suggested by the Council to be onerous and unnecessary. However, the
    Archaeological and Heritage Assessment10 does not rule out the presence of
    archaeological remains beneath the site. In these circumstances, I consider it
    appropriate to impose a condition requiring an archaeological watching brief during
    development. Such a condition would ensure that any archaeological remains
    encountered are appropriately recorded and investigated. Accordingly, given the
    archaeological potential of the site and the current level of investigation undertaken,
    I am satisfied that this condition (17) is proportionate, reasonable and necessary,
    and therefore meets the relevant tests for planning conditions.
113. In the interests of reducing the need to travel by car and promoting sustainable
    travel conditions requiring residential welcome packs (18) and bus infrastructure
    enhancements (19) are reasonable and necessary.
114. The Council has suggested a condition requiring parking provision. However, the
    layout and associated parking arrangements would be considered, along with
    layout, at the reserved matters stage. I therefore do not consider such a condition
    to be necessary at this stage, and it would therefore fail the tests for planning
    conditions.
115. The Council has suggested a number of informative notes. However, I have not
    attached these to the decision as informatives are advisory in nature, do not form
    part of the operative decision, and are not enforceable. Nevertheless, the Appellant
    may wish to have regard to them in the implementation of the development.
Conclusion
116. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
    planning decisions are made in accordance with the development plan unless
    material considerations indicate otherwise. The Council's case rests on national
    policy considerations rather than any inconsistency with development plan policy. I
    therefore find no conflict with development plan policy.
117. Having regard to Policy GB7 of the Framework, I have concluded that the proposal
    would not constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Furthermore, the
    proposal would comply with the Golden Rules, and in accordance with Policy GB8
    of the Framework, this attracts substantial weight in favour of granting permission. I
    am also not persuaded that the proposal would directly result in the closure of the
    Ragwood Riding Centre.



10
     The Environmental Dimension Partnership Ltd February 2023 ref: edp6171_r001b


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                17
Appeal Decision 6007184


118. Any landscape harm would be limited and localised and therefore attracts limited
    weight against the proposal.
119. Having undertaken an AA, I am satisfied that the proposal would not adversely
    affect the integrity of the relevant Habitats Sites. Similarly, having undertaken a
    balanced judgement I conclude that the limited harm to the significance of the
    NDHA, through development in its setting, would be outweighed by the benefits of
    the scheme. Accordingly, the application of policies relating to habitats sites and
    heritage assets does not provide a clear reason for refusing the development.
120. By contrast, the proposal would deliver substantial benefits, most notably the
    provision of market and affordable housing in an area where there is a severe and
    persistent shortfall in housing land supply. Such contributions align with Policies
    H07 and HO8 of the Framework and should be afforded substantial weight. When
    considered alongside the proposal's other benefits, these considerations clearly
    outweigh the identified adverse effects.
121. Drawing all the matters together, and having regard to the material considerations
    before me, I conclude that the benefits of granting permission would not be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. Accordingly, the
    appeal should succeed.

R Gee
INSPECTOR


                                           Schedule of Conditions

    1. Prior to the commencement of the development, approval of details of the
       appearance, landscaping, layout and scale of the development hereby approved
       (the ’reserved matters’) shall be obtained from the Local Planning Authority. The
       development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details.

    2. Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the Local
       Planning Authority no later than 3 years from the date of this outline permission.

    3. The development hereby permitted shall commence no later than 2 years from
       the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.

    4. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans: Site Location Plan L01, Proposed Site Access 19137
       SK_T_001 P5 and Land Use Parameter Plan 758-P02.

    5. No development shall commence, including any works of demolition, until a
       Construction Management Plan (CMP) has been submitted to and approved in
       writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved CMP shall be adhered to
       throughout the construction period. The Plan shall provide for:
       a) An indicative programme for carrying out the works;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         18
Appeal Decision 6007184


         b) Details of a nominated developer/resident liaison representative with an
            address and contact number to be circulated to those residents consulted on
            the application by the developer’s representatives. This person will act as first
            point of contact for residents who have any problems or questions with the
            ongoing development.
         c) Measures to minimise the emission of dust, dirt and noise (including
            vibration) generated by the construction process, to include hours of work,
            proposed method of piling for foundations, the careful selection of plant and
            machinery and use of noise mitigation barrier(s).
         d) Procedures for managing all construction traffic management and vehicle
            routing, including the times of the day when those deliveries will be permitted
            to take place and how/where materials will be offloaded into the site, and
            measures to ensure these are adhered to.
         e) The arrangements for the parking of site operative vehicles and visitors within
             or around the site during construction, and any external storage of materials
             or plant throughout the construction phase;
         f) Wheel and underbody washing facilities.
         g) Details of any floodlighting, including location, height, type and direction of
             light sources and intensity of illumination
         h) The erection and maintenance of security hoarding including decorative
             displays and facilities for public viewing, where appropriate.
         i) A scheme for recycling/disposing of waste resulting from demolition and
             construction works.
         j) Before and after condition survey to identify defects to highway in the vicinity
            of the access to the site, and where necessary ensure repairs are undertaken
            at the developers’ expense where caused by the developer.
            The approved Construction Management Plan shall be implemented in full for
            the entire construction period.
    6. The development hereby permitted shall not be commenced until the following
       components of a scheme to deal with the risks associated with contamination of
       the site shall have been submitted to and approved, in writing, by the Local
       Planning Authority:
       1) A site investigation, based on the submitted Phase I desk study (JUBB
       Consulting Engineers Ltd. June 2025), to provide information for a detailed
       assessment of the risk to all receptors that may be affected, including those off-
       site. This must include the depth of any Made Ground across the site, confirm
       sulphate concentration of site soils, determine the strata and soil strength profile
       beneath the site, and assess groundwater depth and likelihood of running sands.
       A copy of the site investigation and findings shall be submitted to the Local
       Planning Authority without delay, upon completion;
       2) A remediation method statement (RMS) based on the site investigation results
       and the detailed risk assessment. This should give full details of the remediation
       measures required and how they are to be undertaken. The RMS should also
       include a verification plan to detail the data that will be collected in order to
       demonstrate that the works set out in the RMS are complete and identifying any
       requirements for longer-term monitoring of pollutant linkages, maintenance and
       arrangements for contingency action. No deviation shall be made from this


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   19
Appeal Decision 6007184


         statement without the express written agreement of the Local Planning Authority;
         and
         3) A Closure Report, to be submitted upon completion of the works. The closure
         report shall include full verification details as set out in (2). This should include
         details of any post remediation sampling and analysis, together with
         documentation certifying quantities and source/destination of any material
         brought onto or taken from the site. Any material brought onto the site shall be
         certified as clean.

         Any changes to these components require the express consent of the Local
         Planning Authority. The scheme shall thereafter be implemented as approved.

    7. Prior to the commencement of works, a detailed unexploded ordnance risk
       assessment in accordance with CIRIA Report C681 shall be carried out by a
       specialist contractor and submitted to the Local Planning Authority.

    8. No works shall take place until a detailed surface water drainage scheme for the
       site, based on sustainable drainage principles and an assessment of the
       hydrological and hydro geological context of the development, has been
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
       scheme should include but not be limited to:
       a)      Verification of the suitability of infiltration of surface water for the
       development. This should be based on infiltration tests that have been
       undertaken in accordance with BRE 365 testing procedure and the infiltration
       testing methods found in chapter 25.3 of The CIRIA SuDS Manual C753.
       b) Limiting discharge rates to 12l/s for all storm events up to and including the 1
       in 100 year plus 45% allowance for climate change storm event subject to
       agreement with the relevant third party. All relevant permissions to discharge
       from the site into any outfall should be demonstrated.
       c) Provide sufficient storage to ensure no off-site flooding as a result of the
       development during all storm events up to and including the 1 in 100 year plus
       45% climate change event.
       d) Demonstrate that all storage features can half empty within 24 hours for the 1
       in 30 plus 45% climate change critical storm event.
       e) Final modelling and calculations for all areas of the drainage system.
       f) The appropriate level of treatment for all runoff leaving the site, in line with the
       Simple Index Approach in chapter 26 of the CIRIA SuDS Manual C753.
       g) Detailed engineering drawings of each component of the drainage scheme.
       h) A final drainage plan which details exceedance and conveyance routes, FFL
       and ground levels, and location and sizing of any drainage features.
       i) An updated drainage strategy incorporating all of the above bullet points
       including matters already approved and highlighting any changes to the
       previously approved strategy.
       j) Use of water butts should be considered as the development is in a critical
       drainage area.

         The scheme shall subsequently be implemented prior to first occupation of the
         dwellings and shall be retained in that manner thereafter.

    9. No development shall commence until a scheme to minimise the risk of offsite
       flooding caused by surface water run-off and groundwater during construction


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   20
Appeal Decision 6007184


         works and to prevent pollution has been submitted to, and approved in writing
         by, the Local Planning Authority. The approved scheme shall be adhered to and
         implemented throughout the construction period.

   10 Prior to first occupation of the development, a drainage maintenance plan
      detailing the maintenance arrangements, including who is responsible for
      different elements of the surface water drainage system, including SuDS, and
      the maintenance activities/frequencies, has been submitted to and approved, in
      writing, by the Local Planning Authority. Drainage maintenance shall be carried
      out thereafter in accordance with the approved details.

         Should any part be maintainable by a maintenance company, details of long-
         term funding arrangements should be provided.

    11. Prior to first occupation of the development, the access point at Daws Heath
        Road shall be provided as shown in principle on JUBB drawing SK_T_001 rev
        P5. The vehicular access points shall be constructed at right angles to the
        highway boundary and to the existing carriageway with an appropriate dropped
        kerb vehicular crossing of the footway with clear to ground visibility splay. Such
        vehicular visibility splays of 2.4m x 120m in both directions, shall be provided
        before the road junctions are first used by vehicular traffic and retained free of
        any obstruction at all times thereafter. All redundant access points along the site
        frontage shall be suitably reinstated with full upstand kerb and footway provision.

    12. Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved, a
        Construction Environmental Management Plan (CEMP: Biodiversity) shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The CEMP
        (Biodiversity) shall include the following:
        a)      Risk assessment of potentially damaging construction activities.
        b)      Identification of “biodiversity protection zones”.
        c)      Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working
                practices) to avoid or reduce impacts during construction (may be
                provided as a set of method statements).
        d)      The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
                features.
        e)      The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be
                present on site to oversee works.
        f)      Responsible persons and lines of communication.
        g)      The role and responsibilities on site of an ecological clerk of works
                (ECoW) or similarly competent person.
        h)      Use of protective fences, exclusion barriers and warning signs.

         The approved CEMP shall be adhered to and implemented throughout the
         construction period strictly in accordance with the approved details.

    13. Prior to commencement of the development hereby approved, A Habitat
        Management and Monitoring Plan (HMMP) for significant on-site enhancements,
        prepared in accordance with the approved Biodiversity Gain Plan, shall be
        submitted to, and approved in writing by the local authority, prior to
        commencement of development, including:
        a)      a non-technical summary;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   21
Appeal Decision 6007184


         b)        the roles and responsibilities of the people or organisation(s) delivering
                   the HMMP;
         c)        the planned habitat creation and enhancement works to create or improve
                   habitat to achieve the on-site significant enhancements in accordance
                   with the approved Biodiversity Gain Plan;
         d)        the management measures to maintain habitat in accordance with the
                   approved Biodiversity Gain Plan for a period of 30 years from the
                   completion of development;
         e)        the monitoring methodology in respect of the created or enhanced habitat
                   to be submitted to the local planning authority; and
         f)        details of the content of monitoring reports to be submitted to the Local
                   Planning Authority including details of adaptive management which will be
                   undertaken to ensure the aims and objectives of the Biodiversity Gain
                   Plan are achieved.

    14. Prior to any works above slab level, a Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy for
        biodiversity enhancements for Protected and Priority Species, prepared by a
        suitably qualified ecologist in line with the recommendations of the (Ecological
        Impact Assessment - Tyler Grange Ltd, November 2025) shall be submitted to
        and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The content of the
        Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy shall include the following:

         a) Purpose and conservation objectives for the proposed enhancement
         measures;
         b) Detailed designs or product descriptions to achieve stated objectives;
         c) Locations, orientations and heights of proposed enhancement measures by
         appropriate maps and plans (where relevant);
         d) Persons responsible for implementing the enhancement measures; and
         e) Details of initial aftercare and long-term maintenance (where relevant).

         The works shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details and
         shall be retained in that manner thereafter.

    15. No development shall commence above ground level until a lighting design
        scheme for biodiversity (in accordance with Guidance Note 08/23 Institute of
        Lighting Professionals) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority. The scheme shall:
        a) identify those areas/features on site that are particularly sensitive for bats that
        are likely to cause disturbance in or around their breeding sites and resting
        places or along important routes used to access key areas of their territory, for
        example, for foraging; and
        b) show how and where external lighting will be installed (through provision of
        appropriate lighting contour plans and technical specifications) so that it can be
        clearly demonstrated that areas to be lit will not disturb or prevent the above
        species using their territory or having access to their breeding sites and resting
        places.

         No external lighting shall be installed other than in accordance with the
         specifications and locations set out in the scheme and maintained thereafter in
         accordance with the scheme.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   22
Appeal Decision 6007184


    16. All mitigation measures and/or works shall be carried out in accordance with the
        details contained in the Ecological Impact Assessment (Tyler Grange Ltd,
        November 2025) as submitted with the Outline Application. This will include the
        appointment of an appropriately competent person e.g. an ecological clerk of
        works (ECoW) to provide on-site ecological expertise during construction. The
        appointed person shall undertake all activities, and works shall be carried out, in
        accordance with the approved details.

    17. No development, including any groundworks, shall take place until a Written
        Scheme of Investigation (WSI) for an archaeological watching brief has been
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
        scheme shall include details of the archaeological monitoring to be undertaken,
        together with arrangements for the recording, reporting, publication and
        archiving of any archaeological remains encountered.

         The development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the approved
         WSI. The archaeological watching brief and any post-investigation assessment
         shall be completed in accordance with the approved details, and the resulting
         report shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority within a timescale to be
         agreed as part of the approved WSI.

    18. Prior to occupation of the first dwelling in the development, the Developer shall
        submit to the Local Planning Authority for approval in writing, in consultation with
        Essex County Council, a Residential Welcome Pack which includes details of
        travel plan measures to encourage the use of sustainable modes of transport
        and to include 6-day travel ticket for bus travel from the development site.

         The Residential Welcome Pack as approved should be provided to each
         dwelling upon first occupation.

    19. Prior to occupation of the proposed development, bus infrastructure
        enhancements shall be provided to upgrade the existing two stop facilities on
        Daws Heath Road to the west of the proposed development, to include raised
        and drop kerb sets and Real Time Information, as shown in principle on JUBB
        drawing SK_T_001 rev P5 . Both sets of improvements shall be completed at the
        expense of the developer and to the satisfaction of the Highway Authority.

    20. No unbound material shall be used in the surface treatment of the vehicular
        access within 6 metres of the highway boundary.


                                           ***End of Schedule***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        23
Appeal Decision 6007184


APPEARANCES


FOR THE APPELLANT
Paul Tucker KC               Kings Chambers
Sam Hollingworth             Ceres Property
Will Gardner                 EDP
Grant Stevenson              Rainer Developments & Strategic Land
Stuart Tym                   Knights PLC
Rebecca Taylor               Knights PLC
Isabel Ede                   Cres Property


FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY
Asitha Ranatunga             Cornerstone Barristers
Stephen Garner               Castle Point Borough Council
Michelle Katzler             Castle Point Borough Council


INTERESTED PARTIES
Councillor T Copsey
Councillor L Dixon
Councillor J Knott
Councillor K Knott
Councillor R Lillis


DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED DURING THE HEARING
Speaking note of Councillor T Copsey
Speaking note read by Councillor J Knott on behalf of Castle Point Wildlife Group
Unsigned, updated and agreed version of Section 106 Agreement




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      24
