Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by S Brook BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007438
Meadow Farm, Sandy Way, Holmeswood, Lancashire L40 1UB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q class
     of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended) (GPDO).
•    The appeal is made by Mr R Parker against the decision of West Lancashire Borough Council.
•    The application reference is 2025/0704/PNC.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘Request as to whether prior approval is required for the
     conversion of agricultural buildings to 5 no. residential dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr R Parker against West Lancashire
       Borough Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The application form accompanying this appeal does not include a description of
       the proposed development, instead referring to a cover letter. I have taken the
       description of the development from the cover letter dated 17 November 2025,
       which amended the proposal to 5 dwellings, as this is the basis on which the
       Council made its decision.
4.     Since the appeal was lodged, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) has been published. This has not raised any new matters which are
       determinative to the outcome of this particular appeal.
Background and Main Issues
5.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO, planning
       permission is granted for the change of use of a building and any land within its
       curtilage from a use as an agricultural building to a use falling within use class C3
       (dwellinghouses), together with building operations reasonably necessary to
       convert the building to a dwellinghouse, subject to specified limitations and
       conditions.
6.     Where the development proposed is development under Class Q(a) together with
       development under Class Q(c), paragraph Q.2(1) requires the developer to apply
       to the local planning authority to determine whether the prior approval of the
       authority will be required as to a number of specified matters. These are (a)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007438


       transport and highways impacts of the development, (b) noise impacts of the
       development, (c) contamination risks on the site, (d) flooding risks on the site, (e)
       whether the location or siting of the building makes it otherwise impractical or
       undesirable for the building to change from agricultural use to a use falling within
       Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of Schedule 1 to the Use Classes Order, (f) the design
       or external appearance of the building, and (g) the provision of adequate natural
       light in all habitable rooms of the dwellinghouses.
7.     The Council’s refusal reason raised concerns with the suitability of parking
       provision and private outdoor amenity space for future occupiers, as well as,
       whether future occupiers would be affected by the use of the remaining building on
       the site. While in its Officer Report (OR), the Council considered these concerns
       under prior approval matters (a), (b) and (e), the Council’s appeal statement of
       case refers only to (e).
8.     However, during the course of the appeal, the views of both main parties were also
       sought in relation to whether the building operations proposed were reasonably
       necessary to convert the buildings to dwellinghouses, considering paragraph Q.1
       (j), which states that development is not permitted by Class Q if it would consist of
       building operations other than the installation or replacement of windows, doors,
       roofs, or exterior walls, or water, drainage, electricity, gas or other services, to the
       extent reasonably necessary for the building to function as a dwellinghouse, and
       partial demolition to the extent reasonably necessary to carry out such works.
9.     Therefore, the first main issue in this appeal is whether the proposal would be
       permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO, having
       regard to the extent of building operations proposed.
10. Only if this requirement is met, will it be necessary for me to go on and consider
    the matter in dispute between the main parties, which relates to whether the
    location or siting of the building makes it otherwise impractical or undesirable for
    the building to change from agricultural use to a dwellinghouse.
Reasons
Extent of Building Operations
11. An existing dwelling, known as Meadow Farm, is located to the east of Sandy
    Way. To the rear of this dwelling is a rectangular field, used at the time of my visit
    for the grazing of horses and sheep, and for the keeping of a small number of
    chickens. Beyond this field, further east, there are three larger buildings, as well as
    a smaller building to the southeast corner, all with a shared yard. The appeal site
    comprises these three larger buildings and adjoining parts of the yard.
12. Building 1 as annotated on the existing plans would contain proposed units 1 and
    2 over two floors, while Building 2, which joins Building 1, would contain proposed
    unit 3. Building 3 would contain proposed units 4 and 5.
13. Building 3 appears to be constructed from steel columns, with a roof composed of
    timber members, covered by fibre cement sheeting, which extends to parts of the
    side elevations also, albeit two elevations are fully open. While Drawing No C264-
    2 Revision F is annotated with the wording ‘Building contains a solid concrete
    base, it is unclear which ‘building’ this is referring to. At my site visit, I was unable



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007438


         to see if Building 3 benefitted from a solid floor as this area was covered by
         vegetation.
14. Building 1 also appears to be constructed from steel columns, with a roof of timber
    members, as well as some steel. Fibre cement sheeting exists to the roof and
    partly to the sides, albeit sections of this building are also open. This building has a
    solid concrete floor split over two levels.
15. Building 2 appears to be constructed from concrete columns, with concrete rafters
    and timber purlins comprising the roof, covered by fibre cement sheeting. Between
    the columns, the walls appear to be formed partly by breeze block, with translucent
    sheeting above, albeit the end elevation appears to be clad with corrugated metal
    sheets. This building has a solid concrete floor.
16. While some building works are permitted by Class Q, as set out above, the
    Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) sets out that the right assumes that the
    agricultural building is capable of functioning as a dwelling. The PPG clarifies that
    it is not the intention of the permitted development right to allow rebuilding work
    which would go beyond what is reasonably necessary for the conversion of the
    building to residential use, and that it is only where the existing building is already
    suitable for conversion to residential use that the building would be considered to
    have the permitted development right. It also clarifies that internal works are not
    generally development, and for the building to function as a dwelling it may be
    appropriate to undertake internal structural works, including to allow for a floor, or
    upper floors1.
17. What may constitute ‘reasonably necessary’ is not defined in either the GPDO or
    PPG. Whether the extent of work required would comprise conversion or rebuild is
    therefore a matter of planning judgement.
18. The proposed plans, application form, cover letter and document titled ‘Class Q
    conformity document’ did not provide a detailed written description of any building
    or other operations necessary to make these buildings habitable. While these
    documents suggest that the development would not consist of building operations
    other than those permitted by paragraph Q.1 (j), there is limited substantive
    evidence to support this.
19. In further evidence, the appellant has stated that: (1) the proposals do not require
    the erection of a replacement structural frame or new foundations, (2) the existing
    concrete floors and external walls are to be retained, (3) the proposals will replace
    fibre cement board roofing, (4) existing openings will be finished in matching
    cladding with windows, rooflights and doors inserted, (5) the open elevation to
    Building 3 would be infilled with matching cladding, and (6) the remainder of the
    buildings, including their steel frames and existing cladding, would be retained.
20. It is clear therefore that each building would at least need to be provided with a
    new roof covering. While the appellant suggests that external walls and existing
    cladding would be retained, only Building 2 benefits from external walls to two
    elevations. It is not clear whether these walls are tied into the concrete columns, or
    whether further work in this respect would be necessary. Where cladding exists to
    the external elevations of all three buildings, there is variation in the type of
    materials and their quality, along with the colour finish. Within parts of this

1
    Paragraph: 105 Reference ID: 13-105-20180615


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decision 6007438


       cladding, gapping exists, while there are also signs of deterioration. Consequently,
       and in the absence of evidence to the contrary, I am not convinced that the
       retention of all of this existing cladding would be practical or likely. Further,
       Buildings 1 and 3 would need extensive areas of new cladding to those elevations
       that are presently open. Combined, the extent of these works would comprise the
       replacement of large areas of the external envelope of these buildings.
21. No information has been provided relating to any additional loading that would
    result from these building operations. Nor has a structural assessment of these
    existing buildings been provided. As such, there is no technical evidence relating
    to the standard of construction of the floor, frame or roof structure for each
    building, or its foundations, sufficient to confirm the appellant’s position that
    replacement or reinforcement of these elements would not be necessary to meet
    modern standards, or to accommodate any additional loads. Without evidence to
    the contrary, I am unable to conclude that these works would fall within those
    permitted by paragraph Q.1 (j), or that they would not be substantial, or amount to
    rebuilding, when considered in the context of the other building operations that are
    necessary.
22. I acknowledge that the Council did not raise this as a concern in determining the
    original application. Nevertheless, for the foregoing reasons, I am unable to
    conclude that the appeal buildings are already suitable for conversion to residential
    use, or that no building operations other than those specified by paragraph Q.1 (j)
    would be necessary, or that the extent of building operations would be reasonably
    necessary for conversion of the building, rather than amounting to a rebuild, when
    considered in totality. On this basis, the proposal is not permitted development
    under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO.
23. While detailed submissions have been provided on the disputed prior approval
    matter, given my findings that the proposal is not permitted development, there is
    no need for me to go on and consider this matter as part of my decision.
Other Matters
24. The appellant states that the Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year supply
    of deliverable housing land. While prior approval under Class Q is intended to
    boost housing supply through the conversion of agricultural buildings, the Council’s
    housing land supply position is not relevant to my finding above, that the proposal
    does not constitute permitted development.
Conclusion
25. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal would not constitute permitted
    development, and the appeal should be dismissed.

S Brook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
