Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026 by I Ingledew BSc (Hons)
Decision by T Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007110
181 Lower House Crescent, South Gloucestershire, Filton BS34 7DL
•     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
      Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•     The appeal is made by Mr S Rajput against the decision of South Gloucestershire Council.
•     The application Ref is P25/02898/PNH.
•     The development proposed is Proposed single-storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The appellant submitted an appeal on the adjacent property 179 Lower House
   Crescent1. The appeal has been dealt with a different inspector and, although there
   are similarities, I have dealt with this appeal on the basis of its own merits.
4. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
   (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
   subject to limitations and conditions.
5. Where an application is made for prior approval for development which exceeds the
   limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph
   A.4(3) provides that the local planning authority may refuse the application where it
   considers that the proposed development does not comply, or that the developer
   has provided insufficient information to enable the authority to establish whether the
   proposed development complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that
   are applicable to such permitted development.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the proposed development would be granted planning
   permission by Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.


1
    6006848

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007110


Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal property is a two storey dwellinghouse within a terraced row. To the
   rear elevation, the property hosts a single storey rear projection which the main
   parties are in agreement on being original to the property. The appellant’s
   statement suggested the side elevation of the rear projection had been demolished.
   However, at the time of my site visit, I observed that this rear projection was
   completely whole, with both side elevations intact and no evidence of demolition
   work.
8. There is no dispute between the parties that the proposed extension would comply
   with the limitations and restrictions in paragraph A.1 other than in relation to
   paragraphs A.1(j). From the evidence before me, I see no reason to disagree in
   relation to the undisputed paragraphs. Therefore, my assessment will focus on the
   paragraphs in dispute.
9. The proposal would extend to a depth of approximately 6m and would extend
   across most of the rear elevation of the original dwellinghouse. In doing so, it would
   wrap around the existing rear projection. As set out in Paragraph A.1(j) of the
   GPDO, development is not permitted under Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A if
   the extension projects beyond a wall forming a side elevation and would have a
   width greater than half the width of the original dwellinghouse.
10. The appellant contends that the present tense of the GPDO requires the side wall
    to exist at the time of assessment and that should the side wall be demolished at
    the time of the assessment it therefore cannot form a side elevation for which the
    proposal would be required to adhere to A.1(j). However, from my site visit, and the
    plans before me, both side elevations of the rear projection were intact and existing
    and therefore must be taken into consideration. Furthermore, the proposed
    drawings appear to detail that parts of the wall of the existing extension will be
    retained. Owing to its wrap around form, the proposed extension would project
    beyond the wall that forms the side elevation of the rear projection and would
    extend more than half the width of the original dwellinghouse and would therefore
    would not comply with paragraph A.1(j).
11. The appellant has also drawn my attention to a number of appeals. Four of these
    appeals were dealt with under an earlier iteration of the GPDO and also deal with
    retrospective and/or enforcement cases. These therefore represent a different
    process and legislation and are therefore not applicable to this case. The final
    appeal concerns a property where the rear projection had been completely
    demolished to create a flat, rear elevation prior to the decision. However, this case
    is not comparable as, as established, the side elevation in this case remains
    existing at the time of assessment and parts of the existing rear extension will
    remain, and therefore is subject to the limitations and restrictions of Paragraph
    A.1(j).
12. Although the appellant has provided a number of prior approval decisions from
    other Local Planning Authorities, it is not clear from the information provided if the
    side elevations were in situ or demolished at the time of these decisions and
    therefore I cannot conclude if these are comparable in this instance.
13. For the reasons above, I therefore conclude that the proposal would fail to meet the
    specific requirements outlined in Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, Paragraph A.1(j) of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007110


     the GPDO. Consequently, it would not be development granted planning
     permission by Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
Conclusion and Recommendation
14. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

I Ingledew
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
15. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

T Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
