Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by N Bowden BA(Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007566
20 The Glebe, Watford, Hertfordshire WD25 0LR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Corey Perry against the decision of Watford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00001/FUL.
•    The development proposed is New Drive and Drop Kerb.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a vehicle access and
       hardstanding at 20 The Glebe, Watford, Hertfordshire WD25 0LR in accordance
       with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00001/FUL, and the plans submitted with
       it subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the plan titled “Dropped kerb layout” dated 6 February 2026 except where
              modified by condition 3 of this permission.
     3)       The area of hardstanding for the parking of a vehicle shall have minimum
              dimensions of 2.7 metres by 5 metres.
     4)       The materials to be used in the construction of the driveway surface hereby
              permitted shall bonded/fixed surfacing materials only. The driveway surface
              shall be drained through the use of porous materials or a soakaway such that
              there is no additional surface water run-off to the adjoining highway.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The application form described the development as a “new drive and drop kerb”
       and the Council advertised the development in a similar manner. However, a
       “dropped kerb” is not an act of development and the term “driveway” is ambiguous
       in this context. I have therefore changed the description of development to a
       vehicle access and hardstanding as this is a more accurate description of the
       works proposed. As this is a minor technical change that does not alter the
       development proposed I did not consult the parties on this and I am satisfied that
       this change, which is in the interests of clarity, can be made without prejudice to
       any party.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007566


       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on highway safety.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site comprises a small parcel of land, roughly triangular in shape,
       which is set on the corner of The Glebe and Lych Gate. The Glebe and Lych Gate
       are both cul-de-sacs and lead to around fifty or so properties. Whilst no figures
       were provided by either party; traffic volumes are low and this is due to the roads
       only serving the properties that address them with no through traffic. On-street
       parking, often partly on the pedestrian footway and on and around junctions, is
       common in the local area. This includes the junction near the appeal site.
6.     The proposal seeks to form a vehicle access and hardstanding. This would not
       enter the road at right angles, would be within 10 metres of a junction and would
       not be the requisite 2.7 by 5 metres required by Hertfordshire County Council’s
       Local Transport Plan 2018 (LTP).
7.     However, the introduction of a vehicle access in this location would mean that
       vehicles would have a lesser ability to park on, or very close to, the junction with
       Lych Gate. It would likely further deter vehicles from parking on the footway, albeit
       for only a short section of the road.
8.     Movements into, and out of, the vehicle access would be somewhat convoluted
       due to it not being aligned at right angles with the road. However, as this is an
       access for a single vehicle, such movements would be very low and, in addition,
       would be onto a road with low levels of traffic. The potential for conflicts with other
       vehicles would therefore also be low and the number and type of movements
       comparable to a vehicle parking on-street.
9.     The size of the area for the parking of a vehicle is slightly below that which is
       required by the LTP. However, the appellant has advised that there is sufficient
       space for the size of the area to be increased. As this is an increase in
       hardstanding area that can be measured in centimetres, such an increase can be
       secured by way of condition.
10. Policy TR4 1. c. i. of the Framework sets out that proposals should minimise the
    scope for conflict between pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles. I am unable to
    conclude that this proposal would create conflict and there would not be an
    adverse impact on the transport network.
11. Therefore, overall, I conclude that whilst the proposed vehicle access and
    hardstanding does not fully accord with the requirements of the LTP, it would not
    result in harm to highway safety. Indeed, there would be a small improvement to
    visibility and access to the footway for pedestrians, and whilst this is of very minor
    weight in terms of benefits, it does weigh in favour of the scheme.
12. Therefore, I find that the proposal would not undermine safety or interfere with the
    free and safe functioning of the junction or surrounding highway. The proposal
    therefore complies with policy ST11.6 of the Watford Local Plan and Framework.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007566


Conditions
13. The Council did not provide a schedule of conditions in the event that the appeal
    were to be allowed. I have therefore applied the conditions I feel are most
    appropriate to the case having regard to policy DM6 of the Framework.
14. Condition 1 is a general time limit condition to accord with the provisions of the
    Act. Condition 2 ensures the development is carried out in accordance with the
    approved plans for certainty. Condition 3 modifies the size of the parking space to
    accord with LTP requirements. Finally, condition 4 ensures that the materials used
    in the construction do not result in material being discharged onto the highway or
    result in surface water run-off.
Conclusion
15. The proposed development would accord with the development plan and the
    material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be made other than
    in accordance with it. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.



N Bowden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
