Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026 by S Jamieson BA(Hons) MPlan MRTPI
Decision by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007464
20 Park Hill, Harpenden, Hertfordshire AL5 3AT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Professor Toulson against the decision of St Albans City Council.
•   The application Ref is 5/25/2003.
•   The development proposed is energy efficiency improvements to the existing house; demolition of
    existing garage and conservatory; erection of a two-storey side extension and a one-storey
    outbuilding in the rear garden.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of
   the main issues in the appeal. Since the main parties would not therefore be
   prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
4. At the time of my site visit foundation works were being undertaken in the rear
   garden of the appeal site. For the avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeal
   based on the plans considered by the Council.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
          •    protected species, namely bats; and
          •    the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Bats
6. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended)
   requires a decision maker to understand the effect of a proposed development on
   protected species, including bats. The Council’s ecologist finds that the proposed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007464


     works would include roof modifications which, given the setting of the appeal site
     close to mature trees and semi-natural habitat, along with evidence of bats
     inhabiting nearby houses, may result in the disturbance of bats. As such, under the
     Habitat Regulations, it is necessary for the Appellant to demonstrate whether or not
     bats would be affected by the proposal through a Preliminary Roost Assessment
     (PRA).
7. I note that the Appellant was not made aware of the requirement for a PRA during
   the Council’s consideration of a previous planning application at the appeal site.
   Nevertheless, with the limited information before me, I am unable to establish
   whether protected species may be present, and if they are, the extent to which they
   may be affected by this proposal. While the appellant is content to address this
   matter by condition, and notwithstanding whether such a condition was used for a
   development at No 15 Park Hill, national guidance states that planning conditions
   requiring relevant ecological surveys to establish, amongst other matters, whether
   species are present, should only be imposed in exceptional circumstances. No
   compelling evidence has been advanced that exceptional circumstances exist in
   this case.
8. In light of the above, there is insufficient information to establish the effect of the
   proposed development on protected species, namely bats. In this regard the
   proposal would be contrary to Policy 106 of the City and District of St Albans
   District Local Plan Review (1994) (LPR) which requires, amongst other things, that
   proposals do not have an adverse effect on species protected by the Wildlife and
   Countryside Act 1981. It would also be inconsistent with the aims and objectives of
   the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) in relation to conserving
   and enhancing the natural environment.
Character and appearance
9. The appeal relates to a semi-detached dwelling. It is situated on a residential street
   comprising a mix of detached, semi-detached and terraced dwellings of varying
   ages and architectural designs. Properties tend to be two storeys, often displaying
   single or two-storey projecting gables, and brick and render facing materials. Roofs
   are generally tiled however roof forms vary. Many properties, including the attached
   dwelling at 19 Park Hill (No 19), have also been altered and extended over time.
   Consequently, the street scene is not characterised by a single, unifying design.
   The road does however have a verdant character, largely owing to the dense
   vegetation which lines the opposite side of the street to the appeal dwelling.
10. The Council considers that the proposed outbuilding would have an acceptable
    effect on the character and appearance of the area. Due to its modest scale, simple
    form and discreet position to the rear of the appeal site, I agree with that
    assessment. For the same reasons, I also agree that the proposed solar panels
    would not harm the appearance of the appeal property or wider area.
11. With regard to the proposed extension, this would be set back from the shared
    boundary with the neighbouring property, in accordance with LPR Policy 72.
    Furthermore, its projection to both the front and rear would be broadly comparable
    to that of the side extension at No 19. Although the roof form of the proposed
    extension would not replicate that of No 19, the semi-detached pair are not
    currently symmetrical, differing in scale and roof design. In this context, the
    variation in roof form would not appear incongruous. Rather, the increased scale of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007464


     the appeal dwelling, combined with the use of roof tiles and render, would create a
     more balanced and coherent relationship between the two properties. Taking this
     into account, together with the variety of roof forms present in the surrounding area,
     the proposal would represent a sympathetic addition to the appeal dwelling, its
     attached neighbour and the wider street scene.
12. Consequently, the proposed development would have an acceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the area. In that regard it would accord with Policy 69
    and Policy 72 of the LPR which, amongst other things, require that all development
    has an adequately high standard of design and that residential extensions relate to
    the domestic scale, character and appearance of the street.
13. The proposed development would also comply with Policies ESD1 and ESD2 of the
    Harpenden Neighbourhood Plan 2018-2033 (2018) (HNP) which require, amongst
    other things, that all developments are visually attractive, designed to a high quality
    and maintain or enhance the character of the area; and that the height, scale and
    design of all development must be considerate of and make a positive contribution
    to local character. For the same reasons, it would comply with the good design
    objectives of the Framework.
Other Matters
14. I acknowledge the appellant’s desire to improve the living accommodation at the
    property and note the energy efficiency credentials of the proposed development,
    which would provide benefits in terms of the building’s environmental performance
    and the comfort of its occupiers. I also note the appellant’s concerns regarding an
    apparent lack of communication from the Council during the application process
    and the time and money that has been spent preparing and submitting applications
    and subsequent appeals. However, whilst I have had regard to these
    considerations, they do not justify or outweigh my findings on the first main issue.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. The proposed development would have an acceptable effect on the character and
    appearance of the area. However, it has not been demonstrated that the proposal
    would not adversely affect bats. Therefore, for the reasons given above and having
    had regard to all other matters raised, I recommend that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Jamieson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
