Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by K Stephens BSc (Hons) MTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007668
Upper Farm, Shut Lane Head, Newcastle Under Lyme, Staffordshire ST5 4DS
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for outline
     planning permission
    The appeal is made by Mr Robin Humble against Newcastle-under-Lyme Borough Council.
    The application Ref is 26/00082/OUT.
    The development proposed is development of one serviced plot for self-build and custom
     housebuilding [sic] (all matters reserved except access and scale).

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for development of one serviced
      plot for self-build and custom housebuilding (all matters reserved except access
      and scale) is refused.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The appeal results from the Council’s failure to reach a decision on the application
      submitted by the appellant within the prescribed period. Within its appeal
      statement the Council has set out its putative reasons, were it to have made a
      decision. In summary these are the suitability of the site’s location with regard to
      access to facilities and transport; that the site represents inappropriate
      development in the Green Belt; the proposal would create an isolated and
      incongruous urban feature in the rural area, and would likely cause substandard
      living conditions from noise and odour from surrounding agricultural uses. These
      form the basis of my main issues below.
3.    The application was submitted in outline, with only access to be considered at this
      stage. Appearance, landscaping, layout and scale would be subject to separate
      reserved matters applications should outline planning permission be granted. I
      have determined the appeal on that basis.
4.    Apart from the plan showing the new access and track, I regard the other
      submitted plans including floor plans and photographic artist impressions of the
      dwelling as illustrative only. Nonetheless, they provide a useful guide as to how the
      appellant envisages the site could be developed with a contemporary-looking
      dwelling.
5.    During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
      Framework) was issued on 17 August 2026 and replaces the previous NPPF
      published in December 2024, and all other iterations. The main parties have had
      the opportunity to comment on the relevance of any new Framework policies on


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007668


       the appeal scheme. In reaching my decision I have had regard to these and the
       new Framework where relevant.
6.    During the course of the appeal the Council adopted its new Newcastle-under-
      Lyme Local Plan 2020-2040 (the Local Plan) in July 2026, which was referred to
      as an emerging draft in appeal submissions. It replaces the Newcastle-under-
      Lyme and Stoke-on-Trent Core Spatial Strategy (2009) and the Newcastle-under-
      Lyme Local Plan (2003). The main parties have been given the opportunity to
      comment on the implications of the new Local Plan for the appeal, which I have
      taken into account in coming to my decision.
Main Issues
7.    In light of the above the main issues in this appeal are:
          Whether the appeal site would be a suitable location for housing with regard to
           national and local policies and access to services and facilities;
          Whether the appeal development would be inappropriate development in the
           Green Belt, having regard to the Framework and the development plan, and
           the effect of the appeal development on the openness of the Green Belt and
           purposes of including land within it;
          The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
           the surrounding area;

          Whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for future
           occupiers with regard to noise and odour from surrounding agricultural
           practices; and

          If the development constitutes inappropriate development in the Green Belt,
           would the harm, by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm, be clearly
           outweighed by other considerations so as to amount to the very special
           circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether a suitable location for housing
8.    The appeal site forms part of a larger field within a wider agricultural landscape,
      beyond the end of Shut Lane Head. There are the remains of a single storey brick
      building on part of the site. There are a number of dwellings along Shut Lane
      Head, including at the former Upper Farm some of whose buildings have been
      converted to dwellings, but there is no settlement.
9.    Access to the appeal site would be via a new track that would be formed across
      the field from the buildings at the former Upper Farm, and which would run close to
      the existing mature hedge along the eastern boundary and existing farm track.
10. Local Plan policies PDS1, PSD2, PSD3 and PSD4 provide a suite of policies that
    set out the overall development strategy to promote sustainable patterns of
    development that includes a settlement hierarchy and the distribution of housing
    throughout. Newcastle-under-Lyme will be the primary focus for development due
    to it having the widest range of services, facilities and transport infrastructure.
    Kidsgrove, as an urban centre, will perform a secondary but complementary role to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007668


       Newcastle-under Lyme. Next there are identified ‘Rural Centres’ which have a
       number of essential services and facilities to meet the day-to-day needs of
       residents, whilst recognising that rural centres differ in size and the range of
       services, so that the scale of proposed development should be relative to its role.
       In the final hierarchy tier is ‘Other Settlements and Rural Areas’, which also
       includes the open countryside and areas of Green Belt, where development is
       restricted.
11. This is also generally consistent with Framework policy TR3 that seeks to locate
    development where it can support sustainable patterns of development, enable
    good accessibility for different users, and make the most of existing and proposed
    transport infrastructure. In rural areas, opportunities should be taken to improve
    walking, cycling and public transport, and enhance the connectivity of the area
    where they exist and can be supported by the development.
12. Local Plan policy PSD4 lists the types of development that will be supported in the
    open countryside and whereby all proposals should not harm the character,
    appearance, historic and environmental quality of the countryside, as an asset that
    contributes to the Borough’s identity. Of most relevance in this case is criteria j) for
    Self-Build and Custom Dwellings, provided the proposal meets the criteria set out in
    Local Plan policy HOU6. Policy HOU6 goes on to state that the Council will view
    applications for Self-Build and Custom-Build Dwellings favourably, subject to them
    being in accessible and sustainable locations and compliant with other relevant
    Local Plan policies.
13. There are no services or facilities available to existing or future residents along
    Shut Head Lane. The Council states that the nearest centre is Clayton, some
    2.6kms away. Future residents would need to walk along a track, which would be
    laid from the new dwelling to meet the top of Shut Head Lane, then they would
    need to walk along the lane to the bus stops on the main A53, which according to
    the Council would be an overall distance of about 860 metres.
14. I saw that Shut Head Lane was a largely single-width road with no pavements or
    lighting. However, being a no-through road, traffic would most likely be light and for
    local residents and visitors, and with farm traffic or occasional delivery vehicles. As
    such walking or cycling along the lane would not be unduly difficult or unsafe.
    However, having walked some 800 metres and on reaching the A53 there is no
    footpath and nowhere to walk, cycle or wheel to. The A53 is a main road, but with a
    lack of dedicated walking or cycling routes, or even a pavement, it would not be
    conducive to encourage future residents to walk, cycle or wheel. The proposal does
    not propose any improvements or provision.
15. In terms of the bus, I am led to understand a new contractor has taken over the
    No.64 bus service between Newcastle-under-Lyme/Hanley and Shrewsbury. The
    timetable that has been submitted shows there are 6 services a day Monday to
    Saturday at about 2 hourly intervals. Future residents would be able to travel to
    Newcastle-under-Lyme or Hanley before 9am and catch a bus home before 1800
    hours, with the last bus leaving Newcastle Town Centre at 1746 hours. However,
    there is no service on a Sunday or bank holidays. Anyone working shifts or wanting
    to access other services, such as leisure, in the evenings, on Sundays or bank
    holidays would not be able to do so.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007668


16. I acknowledge that there are differences in transport infrastructure and frequency
    of bus services in urban and rural areas. Furthermore, not all settlements and
    centres can offer a whole range of services, such that residents will need to travel
    to access higher order services and facilities, such as supermarkets, health and
    leisure and retail in other centres. However, the Council’s recently adopted
    development strategy and settlement hierarchy has been designed to reflect this.
17. My attention has been drawn to a number of Council and appeal decisions where
    the No.64 bus service was deemed a suitable service for various housing
    proposals. For example, both parties cite an appeal1 that was allowed for 20
    dwellings at Baldwins Gate Farm on the edge of Baldwins Gate, an identified
    ‘Rural Centre’. The decision describes the settlement as having a primary school,
    petrol filling station, shop, village hall, doctor’s surgery and a public house. This
    provided an acceptable level of services for meeting the majority of day-to-day
    needs without having to travel or use the bus all the time. The No.64 bus service
    was acknowledged as being able to provide an opportunity to access the larger
    settlements of Newcastle-under-Lyme and Market Drayton for employment,
    shopping and leisure. Hence, in that case the No.64 bus service was one of a
    number of services/facilities the settlement had access to – the bus was not the
    only facility, as is the case in the appeal before me.
18. Some of the other examples involved the conversion or change of use of existing
    buildings and hence were assessed under different policies; some schemes were
    part of a larger site that already had an extant permission, or were located
    in/adjacent other settlements, including those identified as Rural Centres. They
    were for different locations with different facts and site specific contexts, and some
    were for different scales of development with one for some 200 dwellings, and
    some decisions are over 10 years old. Whilst other decisions are capable of being
    a material consideration, I find the various submitted examples are not directly
    comparable to the appeal before me. Irrespective of any similarities and
    differences, I must nonetheless consider the appeal proposal before me on its own
    merits and against the current policy context, which includes a new Framework and
    a newly adopted Local Plan.
19. To conclude on this main issue, the site is in open countryside. Even with a bus
    stop just over 800 metres away, it would not offer a frequent enough service to
    provide for the day-to-day needs of residents. Moreover, the presence of a bus stop
    at the bottom of the lane does not, of itself, make the location suitable or
    sustainable. The surrounding roads would not be conducive to walking, cycling or
    wheeling and there are no other connections to such routes, or any proposed, and
    there are no nearby services/facilities to walk, cycle or wheel to, even for basic day-
    to-day needs. Consequently, future residents would be heavily reliant on the private
    car, even to access basic day-to-day services and/or facilities. I understand that the
    Highway Authority reached a similar conclusion but nevertheless raised no
    objection. While I have had regard to that opinion, in my view the appeal site is in
    an unsustainable location which would not support sustainable patterns of
    movement or enable good accessibility for different users.
20. Accordingly, for the reasons above, I conclude that the proposal would not be in a
    suitable location for housing with regard to national and local policies and access to
    services and facilities. Hence, the proposal would be contrary to Local Plan policies

1
    APP/P3420/W/23/3314808 dated 12 July 2023


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
Appeal Decision 6007668


     PSD1, PSD2, PSD3, PSD4 and HOU6 and also contrary to Policy TR3 of the
     Framework, whose aims are outlined above.
Whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
21. The government attaches great importance to Green Belts, the essential features of
    which are their openness and permanence. The objective of national Green Belt
    policy, as set out in the Framework, is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land
    permanently open. The five purposes of Green Belts are listed in Framework policy
    GB2.
22. Framework policy GB6 states that ‘inappropriate development’ is, by definition,
    harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special
    circumstances. The policy confirms that development in the Green Belt is
    inappropriate, unless it falls within one of the listed categories a) to h) in policy
    GB7.
23. Local Plan policy PSD5 states that within the Green Belt planning permission will
    not be granted for inappropriate development except in very special circumstances;
    that new buildings will be considered inappropriate unless they meet the exceptions
    in the Framework, and other forms of development may be considered appropriate
    if they preserve openness and align with the purposes of the Green Belt as outlined
    in the Framework. Whilst there are some differences in wording, the policy is
    broadly consistent with the Framework.
24. In Framework policy GB7, the category of development most relevant in this case is
    g) where development must meet all of the criteria i. to iv. namely that the
    development would utilise grey belt land; there is an evidenced unmet need for the
    type of development, and the development would be in a sustainable location with
    particular reference to Framework policy TR3. Criterion iv) and the ‘Golden Rules’
    do not apply in this instance as the proposal is not for major housing development,
    but for a single dwelling.
25. The appellant has submitted evidence that would seem to suggest a shortfall in the
    delivery of Self-Build Dwellings, although the submitted information appears
    incomplete and there is no specified self-build shortfall. That said, Self-Build
    Dwellings are one type of housing and there is no substantive evidence before me
    to suggest that the Council is unable to demonstrate a five year housing land
    supply.
26. Nonetheless, I have already found that the appeal site and proposed development
    would not be in a sustainable location and hence would not meet criterion iii.
    Consequently, even if the Council cannot demonstrate a five-year housing land
    supply, including Self-Build Dwellings, the proposal would not meet all of the criteria
    of Framework policy GB:7.g and hence would constitute inappropriate development
    in the Green Belt.
27. Finding the development would be inappropriate development, I now turn to the
    effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt. There is no definition of
    openness in the Framework or the Local Plan, but the courts have established that
    openness has both a spatial and a visual aspect. However, assessment of
    openness remains a matter of planning judgement based on the specific facts of
    the case.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007668


28. The submitted plan showing the access indicates that the proposed new dwelling,
    outlined in red, would likely be sited on a part of the site not occupied by the
    remains of the existing brick building. According to the submitted illustrative
    images, the dwelling would have a rectangular footprint that would measure about
    17.9 metres x 9.75 metres. Looking at the plans, this would give the new dwelling a
    footprint about three times that of the existing brick building. Even if the existing
    brick building was demolished and removed from the site, and some compensatory
    calculations made, the proposal would still appear much larger and would occupy
    more space on the ground. The erection of a larger building would also have more
    volume and mass than the existing partially ruined structure. As a result there
    would be a significant degradation and reduction in the visual and spatial openness
    of the Green Belt.
29. The proposal would also result in the physical encroachment of new built form in an
    open field and hence further into the countryside. This would be contrary to one of
    the purposes of the Green Belt.
30. To conclude on Green Belt issues, the site and proposal do not meet all of the
    necessary criteria in Framework policy GB:7.1.g and hence do not fall within the
    Green Belt exceptions in Framework policy GB7. Consequently, the proposal
    constitutes inappropriate development in the Green Belt for the purposes of the
    Framework and would have a significantly harmful effect on openness. The
    proposal would also be an encroachment into the countryside, which would conflict
    with one of the purposes of the Green Belt. It would also be contrary to Local Plan
    policy PSD5.

31. Policy S5 of the Framework deals with the principle of development outside of
    settlements. However, as the proposal is in the Green Belt and I have found it to be
    inappropriate development, sub-paragraph 5 states policy S5 does not apply.
32. As inappropriate development is harmful to the Green Belt and should not be
    approved except in very special circumstances, I shall consider whether these exist
    later in the decision.
Character and appearance
33. The appeal site is in the corner of a field and occupies a slightly elevated position
    that affords commanding views across the undulating countryside and network of
    fields as part of a wider agricultural landscape, broken up with clumps of trees and
    hedgerows. I saw few buildings. Views eastwards towards Stoke were partially
    obscured by the existing hedgerow along the existing adjacent farm track. The
    appeal site positively contributes to the rural character and appearance of the area.
34. The exact layout, size and scale of the dwelling as well as its design and
    appearance would be determined later at reserved matters stage if outline planning
    permission is granted. Nonetheless, the submitted plans provide a useful guide as
    to the type of dwelling the appellant envisages building on the site. This is shown
    as a single storey, flat-roofed building of a contemporary design with many ‘walls’
    as full-height glazing.
35. A flat-roofed, single storey design would be less intrusive in the landscape than a
    more traditional pitched roof house design. However, the erection of an overtly
    residential building would be read as a stand-alone dwelling in this location, as it is
    sited a considerable distance away from other buildings, including the former farm

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007668


     complex of buildings, now converted to dwellings. There would likely be a
     domestication of part of this agricultural field with associated domestic
     paraphernalia, garden landscaping, driveways and parked cars. This would lead to
     an urbanisation of this rural field in the open countryside. Furthermore, with no
     existing boundary features to the west and south, the creation of a domestic plot
     would be arbitrary and result in an encroachment of built form into the field and the
     wider countryside.
36. In terms of design, the use of glazing can help create a lighter-weight structure
    allowing views through the building of the surrounding landscape, thus reducing
    solid mass. The appellant advises that non-reflective glazing could be used. This
    would help reduce sun glint and glare, which I saw was clearly happening with the
    rooflights on the nearby barn conversion properties on the day of my visit, as the
    sun was shining.
37. However, there would need to be lights on inside the property at some stage. As a
    result, light would emanate out from the large, full-height, glazed openings that
    would face out of the site towards the open countryside, particularly at night.
    Unless light emission is prevented by all curtains or blinds being drawn, which
    would not be possible to condition, there would be significant light spillage from the
    glazing and large windows designed to take advantage of the views, even if the
    final design had less glazing. It would be somewhat like a beacon of light, at odds
    with the general darkness of an agricultural rural landscape. This would exacerbate
    the visual intrusion and harm to the character and appearance of this undeveloped
    rural area.
38. Even if the site boundaries were planted up as part of a landscaping scheme, they
    would take time to grow and mature before it was able to provide any effective
    screening. However, it would not disguise the urbanisation of an open field with an
    isolated dwelling. The proposal would be an incongruous and urbanising form of
    development in a field that would be an inappropriate encroachment into the
    countryside that would harm the character and appearance of the surrounding
    area.
39. Accordingly, the proposal would be contrary to Local Plan policies PSD4, PSD7
    and SE10. It would also be contrary to policy DC2 of the Chapel and Hill Chorlton,
    Maer and Aston, and Whitmore Neighbourhood Development Plan, which whilst old
    is not out of date as this design policy is broadly in accordance with the Framework
    and is therefore still relevant. Together these seek, amongst other things, to ensure
    development responds and contributes positively to an area’s character and does
    not harm the character and appearance and quality of the countryside and avoids
    the appearance of over urbanisation.
Noise and Odour
40. The Council does not elaborate what particular noise and odour it is concerned with
    and the source of the noise and odour, apart from stating that the site is surrounded
    by agricultural fields on all sides, and there would be agricultural activities
    associated with agricultural use such as the keeping of livestock and/or the
    movement of large agricultural vehicles. The appellant offers up no counter
    commentary on this nor offers up any explanation of the current agricultural
    activities that are carried out in the vicinity of the appeal site and their likely impact.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007668


41. From the evidence before me and my own observations, the nearest agricultural
    buildings of Upper Farm now appear to be residential dwellings, approved by the
    Council, such that proximate agricultural activities would appear to have reduced. I
    did not see a working farmyard or sheds for dairy or livestock, or nearby slurry
    pools for example, which could be a source of odour. Nor could I smell any
    offensive odours during my visit. However, I did encounter a large tractor as I
    walked along the existing track that runs close to the appeal site. Despite this brief
    interruption and some noisy building works being carried out at one of the
    residential barns, the area was generally peaceful, albeit a snap shot in time.
42. Being sited within an agricultural landscape future residents would have to expect
    some sights, sounds and smells of the countryside and expect to see farm vehicles
    accessing adjacent and surrounding fields for general farming activities such as
    ploughing, sowing, spraying, harvesting and tending any cattle and sheep in fields.
43. In the absence of substantive evidence to the contrary, I find there would be no
    significant conflict of use that would cause unacceptable or unusual living
    conditions for future occupiers with regard to noise and odour from surrounding
    agricultural practices, when living in the rural countryside. Accordingly, there would
    be no conflict with Local Plan policy SE12, which seeks amongst other things, to
    ensure that development proposals will not result in unacceptable harm to the
    amenities of existing or future residents, business or sensitive uses and that
    existing business must not have unreasonable restrictions placed on them as a
    result of new development.
Other Matters
44. The appellant has submitted a draft planning obligation in the form of a Unilateral
    Undertaking (the UU) to secure the development as a Self-Build Dwelling. There
    are a number of shortcomings with the UU, such as being undated and unsigned,
    which means there is not a duly executed deed. Furthermore, the UU refers to ‘two
    dwellings’ where only one is proposed. However, as the proposal is unacceptable
    and the appeal is being dismissed for other substantive issues, it is not necessary
    for me to consider this any further.
Other Considerations and Green Belt Balance
45. The proposed development represents inappropriate development in the Green
    Belt. Inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and
    Framework policy GB6:2 requires that substantial weight is given to any harm that
    would be caused and states that inappropriate development should not be
    approved except in very special circumstances, which will not exist unless the harm
    to the Green Belt, by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm is clearly
    outweighed by other considerations.
46. In addition to there being harm to the Green Belt, I have also found the proposal
    would be in an unsuitable and unsustainable location for housing, which would
    undermine the Council’s development strategy for promoting sustainable patterns
    of development. The development would also harm the character and appearance
    of the surrounding area.
47. There are a number of ‘other considerations’ in favour of the development. There
    would be some associated short-term economic benefits from jobs during
    construction, including the supply chain, and some longer-term spend by future

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007668


     occupiers, at least some of which would be spent in the wider local area. It would
     also contribute to the borough’s housing supply, although given I have no means of
     ensuring that the proposal would be delivered as a Self-Build Dwelling, benefits in
     that respect would be limited. However, as the proposal would be for a single
     dwelling these benefits would, taken together, be modest, even if the dwelling could
     be secured as a Self-Build Dwelling.
48. I therefore find that the ‘other considerations’, alone or in combination, do not
    clearly outweigh the totality of the harm to the Green Belt and the other harms I
    have identified. Consequently, the very special circumstances necessary to justify
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt do not exist.
Planning Balance
49. The Council has an up-to-date development plan that was adopted a few months
    ago. I have found the proposal would not accord with the development plan as a
    whole and there are no material considerations, including the Framework, sufficient
    to outweigh this conflict.
Conclusion
50. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

K Stephens
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
