Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 June 2026 by E Clifford BA (Hons) MA
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007744
Crossways, Wignall Street, Lawford, Essex CO11 2JL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Timothy Bichara against the decision of Tendring District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00170/FULHH.
•   The development proposed is the erection of a 2.4m acoustic garden fence.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. It includes changes in regard to heritage matters with specific regard
   to the degrees of harm. That said, and in regard to the main issue of the appeal,
   the actions of finding harm to a designated heritage asset is not materially different
   from the previous iteration of the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can
   proceed without further consultation with the main parties since, with the above in
   mind, their respective cases would not be prejudiced.
Applications for costs
4. A costs application has been submitted by the appellant. This is the subject of a
   separate recommendation.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance
   the character or appearance of the Lawford Conservation Area (CA) and the setting
   of the nearby Grade II Listed ‘The Kings Arms’.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The Lawford Conservation Area was first designated in 1969 and derives much of
   its special interest from the historic core at the western end of the village, Lawford
   Hall and park and the Parish Church. Along Wignall Street, where the appeal site is
   located, there is a concentration of surviving historic buildings where the origins of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007744


     the settlement are thought to have begun. Here the generous spacing between the
     residential plots and regular roadside position of some of the dwellings conveys a
     semi-rural character as the road leads out of Lawford. Whilst there are a variety of
     boundary treatments in this part of the CA where fencing sits close to and parallel
     with the street, it is generally low level, such as the existing picket fencing at the
     appeal site.
7. Located on the opposite side of the road to the appeal site is The Kings Arms, a
   Grade II listed former public house which has been converted into a residential
   dwelling. The Kings Arms is listed for its special architectural and historic interest to
   which its timber-frame, painted brick facades and clay tile roof all contribute. As a
   roadside building, it is visually prominent in the street, and its distinctive pink
   rendering is similar to that on the appeal dwelling. This is appreciable in long views
   along Wignall Street. Together with the appeal site’s generous proportions, mature
   hedging, and the discreet design of fencing at the roadside, the spacing and
   verdancy at this point makes a positive contribution to the CA and the setting of
   The Kings Arms.
8. The existing fence, which sits in the position of the proposed acoustic fence is of a
   height often seen within a residential context. Whilst the existing hedge ensures it
   has a discreet presence; it is nevertheless visible from the street where gaps in the
   hedging exist.
9. Whilst the hedging would also filter views of the proposed fence, the gaps in the
   hedge both on Wignall Street and Hungerdown Lane would reveal its substantial
   height and solidarity to the extent that it would be even more notable from the street
   than the existing situation appearing significantly at odds with the domestic scale of
   other fencing in the area. Moreover, even if the height of the fence would be lower
   than the height of the existing hedge level, in the event that the hedge was to be
   removed, reduced in height or was to die this would only further increase the
   acoustic fence’s incongruous presence within the street.
10. Consequently, the proposed development would be in stark contrast to the
    overriding low-level presence of fencing and spacious character of the CA,
    regardless of its position set back from the boundary with the highway and the
    layered arrangement of boundary treatments at the site. This would detract from
    the spacious and semi-rural characteristics of the CA and would also be present in
    views within the setting of The Kings Arms.
11. The appellant has suggested that the retention and maintenance of the existing
    hedge could be controlled through condition, a Unilateral Undertaking (UU) or a
    Hedge Maintenance and Management Plan. I am in agreement with the Council,
    and the findings in appeal ref APP/P1560/D/25/3368714 (the previous appeal), that
    a condition would likely be difficult to monitor and enforce in the long term and thus
    would not adequately mitigate the identified harm. Furthermore, there is no UU or
    management plan before me in order to assess whether it would be sufficiently
    precise to provide sufficient mitigation in the long term.
12. Under Sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
    Areas) Act 1991, I have a duty to have special regard to the desirability of
    preserving a listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest and to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of a Conservation Area. Given the above, I find that the proposed


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007744


     development would result in harm to the significance of the CA and the setting of
     The Kings Arms. The harm should be weighed against any public benefits resulting
     from the proposal in line with Policy HE6 of the Framework. This is a matter I return
     to below.
13. The proposed development would fail to preserve the character or appearance of
    the CA and the setting of the nearby Grade II listed ‘The Kings Arms’. In that
    regard, it would be contrary to Policies SP7 and SPL3 of the Tendring District Local
    Plan 2013-2033 and Beyond Section 1- North Essex Authorities Shared Strategic
    Section 1 Plan (2021) and Policies PPL8 and PPL9 of the Tendring District Local
    Plan 2011-2033 and Beyond Section 2 (2022) which collectively require all new
    development to protect and enhance assets of historical value and the special
    character and appearance of conservation areas, and respond positively to local
    character and context.
14. It would also be contrary to the requirements in Policies HE4, and HE9 of the
    Framework to avoid harm to the significance of heritage assets and to consider a
    Conservation Area’s special architectural or historic interest in the design of
    development.
Other Considerations
15. The Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) set out under S149 of the Equality Act
    2010 which requires me to consider the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination,
    to advance equality of opportunity and foster good relations between people who
    share a protected characteristic and people who do not share it. I have also had
    regard to the provisions of the Human Rights Act 1998 and recognise that the
    dismissal of the appeal would interfere with some of the appellants’ rights under
    Article 8 of the First Protocol. Article 8(1) states that everyone has a right to respect
    for their private and family life, their home and their correspondence.
16. I agree with the Inspector for the previous appeal that a quiet garden is desirable
    and would be likely to be of significant benefit for an occupier of the appeal site with
    sensory sensitivities and neurodivergent needs. However, no detailed information
    has been provided with the appeal in terms of the specifics of any such personal
    circumstances in this case. Furthermore, the noise assessment before me (Sound
    Acoustics – 27 January 2026) only details noise levels recorded at the site. There is
    no detailed specification on the fence or estimated noise levels following installation
    to suggest it would achieve a notable reduction in noise levels when compared with
    the existing situation.
17. In the circumstances, there is no evidence to suggest that the proposed fence
    would provide the desired benefits for a member of the household with sensory
    needs, even if the alternatives considered by the appellant would also not achieve
    the desired functional outcome. These factors somewhat dimmish the weight that I
    afford to the personal circumstances put forward.
Planning Balance, Conclusion and Recommendation
18. I have found that the proposal would fail to preserve the character or appearance of
    the CA and the setting of the Grade II listed ‘The Kings Arms’. Given my findings
    above on personal circumstances, there would not be public benefits of sufficient
    weight to outweigh the harm identified under the main issue, bearing in mind the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007744


     considerable importance and weight I must attach to the harm and the substantial
     weight I must give to the conservation of the identified heritage assets.
19. Therefore, in weighing the personal circumstances in the balance, a refusal of
    planning permission is a proportionate and necessary approach to preserve the
    significance of the CA and the setting of ‘The Kings Arms’. For the same reasons,
    and even accounting for the site’s location within a settlement, the adverse effects
    identified substantially outweigh any benefits derived from the development.
20. Therefore, I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed and the protection of
    the public interest cannot be achieved by means that are less interfering of the
    appellant and the specified household member’s human rights.

E Clifford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
21. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
