Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 June 2026
by Andrew Fulford BSc Ma MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007662
Hazley, Holme Road, Ramsey St Mary's, Cambridgeshire PE26 2SU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Dr Guido Monterzino against the decision of Huntingdonshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01320/FUL.
•    The development is a proposed extension to existing barn forming workshop and storage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The appeal was submitted with new information which included two sworn
       statements, various historic maps, and other evidence related to the site history.
       The parties in the appeal have had an opportunity to comment on this information
       through the appeal process. Consideration of it would therefore not give rise to any
       procedural unfairness, and I have therefore taken it into account where relevant in
       my decision.
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
       appeal have not been significantly amended. As a result, I have not sought further
       submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the Framework where relevant
       in this appeal.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the surrounding area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site is located in open countryside within rural Cambridgeshire. A small
       number of dwellings are located to the west. The surrounding area consists of flat
       open fields interspersed with isolated dwellings and agricultural buildings. There
       are a limited number of examples of large agricultural buildings immediately
       adjacent to dwellings, although these were typically in a farmyard setting.
6.     The appeal site consists of a double fronted detached dwelling with several
       outbuildings including a barn located to the east. The barn is positioned side on to
       Holme Road with its main openings facing towards the side elevation of the
       dwelling. There is an area of hardstanding to the front and eastern side of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007662


       dwelling with a rear garden directly behind the property. There is a further grassed
       area to the east of the dwelling and barn that extends up to the River Nene.
7.     The appeal scheme proposes a substantial extension to the rear of the existing
       barn. Whilst the extension would have the appearance of a typical agricultural
       building, it is notably larger than the existing barn in terms of both of its scale and
       massing and consequently would completely overwhelm the existing barn.
8.     The extension would be of such a scale that it would also have a footprint larger
       than the existing dwelling and would be almost as tall as its eaves level. By virtue
       of its excessive scale and massing the proposal would overly dominate the
       existing dwelling and despite being setback would appear as an incongruous and
       discordant addition within the street scene.
9.     While there are trees located at the front of the site which would limit views for
       roads users heading west along Holme Road, the proposal would be highly visible
       to anyone stood directly in front of the property. In any regard, even if the
       extension would be partially screened, this would not avoid the need to achieve
       good design. The Framework sets out that to achieve well-designed places,
       development proposals should respond to their context, so that they integrate with
       and enhance their surroundings.
10. While there may have been other large structures on this site in the past, these do
    not form part of the present day character and appearance of the site or
    surrounding area and would not provide justification for the identified harm.
11. There are sustainability benefits arising from the retention of the existing barn.
    However, these would not provide justification for the identified harm.
    Furthermore, the same sustainability benefits would be applicable to a smaller,
    more proportionate extension.
12. Examples of other large rural buildings in the local area have also been referred to.
    However, full details of each, such as planning approvals, plans and the location in
    relation to the appeal site have not been provided. This inhibits a full comparison
    with the appeal proposal. Nevertheless, none of these examples provided appear
    to be large extensions to existing outbuildings that are directly comparable to the
    appeal scheme, and some sit in an entirely different context. Ultimately, this does
    not lead me to a different conclusion on the main issue.
13. I conclude that the proposal would detract from the character and appearance of
    the area. It would be contrary to Policies LP10(b), LP11 and LP12 of
    Huntingdonshire’s Local Plan to 2036. Amongst other matters, these policies
    require developments to recognise the intrinsic character and beauty of the
    countryside, respond positively to its context and draw inspiration from the key
    characteristics of its surroundings and help create distinctive, high quality and well-
    designed places.
Other Matters
14. There is a dispute between the parties as to whether the proposed development
    falls within the residential curtilage of the property. Whilst the appellant always has
    the option to apply for a Certificate under S191 of the Town and Country Planning
    Act 1990, no such certificate exists at present and it is not my role, in the context
    of a S78 appeal, to make a determination on the lawful use of the parcel of land in


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007662


       question. However, given the harm arising to the character and appearance of the
       area the specific use of the land would not have been determinative in this case.
Planning Balance
15. The extension would provide the appellant with additional space to undertake his
    hobbies. However, the evidence does not demonstrate that the development is
    essential in the location proposed. I recognise that there would be sustainability
    benefits arising from the appellant being able to undertake his hobbies on the
    appeal site. However, the additional vehicular movements of utilising a building
    elsewhere are unlikely to be significantly greater and therefore would provide only
    a limited benefit.
16. The appeal scheme would deliver a biodiversity net gain of at least 10% on site.
    However, given that this is a statutory duty this would not weigh significantly in
    favour of the proposal.
17. I have found the proposal would materially harm character and appearance of the
    area. This is a major shortcoming of the appeal scheme, and I attach significant
    weight to this harm.
18. Taking all matters into account, the adverse impacts of the proposal would
    significantly outweigh the benefits.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore,
    the appeal is dismissed.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
