Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by K Allen MEng (Hons) MArch PGCert ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007932
Former EON Energy Site, Caxton Road, Bedford MK41 0HT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Paloma Capital against the decision of Bedford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02529/M73.
•    The application sought planning permission for the demolition of existing buildings and structures to
     provide buildings within a flexible B2/B8 Use Class, together with B8 Use Class open storage,
     alongside associated landscaping, parking and servicing, and other infrastructure without complying
     with conditions attached to planning permission Ref 25/00763/MAF, dated 24 October 2025.
•    The conditions in dispute are Nos 1, 8, 12 and 13 which state that: The development hereby
     approved shall be carried out in accordance with the plans and documents listed on this notice,
     unless required otherwise by a separate planning condition of this permission; The proposed
     development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved Tree Protection Plan (LPA
     Red:V018B), Arboricultural Assessment (LPA Ref: V33B), and Planting Plan (LPA Ref:V60); The
     development shall be carried out in full accordance with the approved BWB Biodiversity Net Gain
     Plan (CRB-BWB-ZZ-XX-T-EE-0003_Biodiversity Gain Plan September 2025) (LPA Ref: V036B); and
     The proposed development shall be carried out in accordance with the recommendations set out in
     the approved Ecological Study (LPA Ref: V35) and the Bats Survey (LPA Ref: V48 and V49).
•    The reasons given for the conditions are: To provide certainty on what is being authorised by this
     permission; To ensure trees are properly considered and protected in accordance with Policies
     38,39,40 and 70 of the Bedford Borough Local Plan 2030 and Paragraphs 135(b) and 136 of the
     NPPF (2024); To ensure compliance with Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
     (inserted by the Environment Act 2021); and To ensure protected species are properly considered in
     accordance with Policy 42 of the Bedford Borough Local Plan 2030 and paragraph 187(d) and 193 of
     the NPPF (2024).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The revised Framework has
       introduced significant changes to its structure and presentation, including the
       incorporation of development management policies. However, having carefully
       considered the revised framework, I am satisfied that, insofar as the issues
       determinative of this case are concerned, the relevant policy approach has not
       fundamentally changed. The matters on which my conclusions are based remain
       materially the same and the outcome of my assessment is unaffected. In these
       circumstances, I have not considered it necessary to invite further representations
       from the parties. I am satisfied that no party has been prejudiced by this course of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007932


       action, as the changes do not give rise to any new issues of relevance to the
       determination of the appeal.
3.     During the course of the appeal, the Council stated that the proposal falls within
       the scope of Section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and accords
       with Planning Practice Guidance relating to variations of conditions and I agree. As
       such, they are no longer seeking to defend the third reason for refusal, and it does
       not form a main issue in this appeal.
Background and Main Issues
4.     Planning permission was granted for buildings within a flexible B2/B8 Use, with
       open storage in B8 Use which retained a group of protected trees along the south
       boundary of the site, adjacent Goldington Road. The appellant is now seeking to
       provide additional floorspace which would require amendments to the landscaping
       scheme, including the group of protected trees.
5.     Consequently, the main issue is the effect of the proposed amendments on the
       character and appearance of the area, with particular regard to protected trees and
       the provision of landscaping.
Reasons
 6. The appeal site is on the edge of the Elm Farm Industrial Estate between Caxton
    Road and Goldington Road. The Estate is suburban, characterised by midscale
    commercial and industrial units with scattered trees and low shrub planting. The
    appeal site comprises a vacant office building with associated open storage and
    parking. It is in an elevated position with the land generally falling towards
    Goldington Road. The site is bound by a deep band of trees, covered by a Tree
    Protection Order (TPO) in the south.
 7.    According to the appellant’s most recent Tree Survey, the group of trees
       comprises predominantly Category C trees, with the appellant agreeing with the
       Council that a collective retention span of between 20-40 years is appropriate.
       The appellant contends that the existing band of trees is in decline and will not
       develop significantly over coming years and that it does not form a defining
       feature of the local landscape. Nevertheless, the group has a substantial life
       expectancy, and it forms a considerable canopy visible from Goldington Road. As
       such, whilst not typical of planting in the locality, the group makes an important
       contribution to the character and appearance of the area, by providing a
       substantial verdant break in the otherwise continuous row of development along
       Goldington Road.
8. The proposed amendments would see the creation of an additional unit, unit 170,
   and the expansion of the previously approved Unit 220, increasing the employment
   floorspace by approximately 917 m2. This would considerably extend the previously
   approved built development towards Goldington Road with only a small portion of
   the band of trees retained.
9. The height of the proposal would be commensurate with some of the other units
   within the estate and lower than the existing office building on site. It would also be
   in line with the southern elevation of the adjacent car dealership. However, it would
   be taller than the neighbouring buildings and maintain its full height across its entire
   footprint. Despite the use of lighter cladding colours on the upper area of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007932


     facades, due to the raised ground level, total height and position adjacent the road,
     the proposal would appear disproportionate in relation to the adjacent units when
     viewed from Goldington Road.
10. The proposed landscaping scheme comprises the retention of the southern hedge
    and plum trees combined with new planting which includes a diverse range of trees
    and plants. The proposed scheme would provide an immediate visual presence
    and soften the effects of the proposal. Nevertheless, despite the higher density of
    planting in the west, the proposal would considerably compromise the existing
    verdant break in development. Whilst I acknowledge that views of the site would
    predominantly be fleeting, the proposal would harmfully diminish the contribution
    that the band of trees makes to the area, resulting in built development dominating
    this portion of Goldington Road.
11. It is likely that views of the proposal would be further filtered and softened in the
    medium to long term, however this does not reduce the immediate harm of the
    proposal as set out above. Whilst the Landscape and Visual Appraisal suggests
    that the proposed trees would exceed the height of the existing trees between 15-
    30 years as, this is an estimate and the future longevity and growth of the trees
    cannot be relied upon. Moreover, even if the trees reached their stated full
    potential, the overall depth and canopy cover would be substantially less than the
    existing group, with a notable loss in greenery over the lifetime of the development.
12. As such, I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of
    the area, with particular regard to protected trees and the provision of landscaping.
    In these respects, it would conflict with policies 28S, 29, 30, 38 and 39 of the
    Bedford Borough Council Local Plan 2030 (January 2020) (LP) where amongst
    other things they collectively seek to ensure that development is of a high quality
    and respects its context, including incorporating existing landscape features such
    as trees of high amenity value.
13. There would also be conflict with the Framework where it requires that
    development is well-designed, responds to its context, so that it integrates with and
    enhances its surroundings and conserves and enhances existing natural features
    of visual conservation value.
14. For the avoidance of doubt, the proposal would accord with LP Policy 40 which
    requires that hedgerows are retained.
Other Matters
15. The proposal would incorporate a variety of sustainability measures with a high
    level of energy efficiency and a materials palette that is in keeping with the area. It
    would make better use of a currently vacant site and support local business
    growth, providing industrial and logistics floorspace to meet an identified need. The
    units would vary in size to accommodate differing market demands. The proposal
    would be accessible and would benefit from sufficient levels of parking. It would
    also provide a net-gain in biodiversity. However, the previously approved scheme
    would provide the same benefits, albeit to a slightly lesser degree in some
    instances.
16. The appellant suggests that the proposal would allow for the removal of the
    unmanaged tree bund, improving safety for the public. However, I have no
    substantiated evidence before me that the tree bund is causing harm to public

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007932


       safety, nor that it could not be effectively managed via other means than the
       appeal proposal.
17. My attention has been drawn to a recently approved scheme for the development
    of circa 21,500 m2 of employment floorspace within B use classes fronting the
    A4280 where the maximum height of the units is 13.5m. Nevertheless, this
    scheme benefits from a substantial landscaping buffer adjacent Goldington Road
    and is south of the road, on land that is lower. As such, it does not alter my
    findings as set out above.
18. I note the history of the site and the TPO and acknowledge the appellants
    frustrations. However, I have considered the appeal on its merits, and this
    information does not lead me to an alternative conclusion.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above, when assessed against the national decision-making
    policies in the Framework, the benefits of the proposal are substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal
    would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are no material
    considerations, including the provisions of the Framework and the benefits of the
    proposal, that would outweigh that conflict. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



K Allen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
