 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 21 September 2026
 by J D Westbrook BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:29 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6007384
 Footpath outside Urbanest Kings Cross Student Accommodation, Canal Reach, London,
 N1C 4BD
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne (BT Group PLC) against the decision of the Council of
      the London Borough of Camden.
 •    The application Ref is 2025/5848/P
 •    The development proposed is the installation of a BT Street Hub Unit.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Documents relating to the application and the appeal give the property name as
   ‘Urbanist’. From my site visit, it would appear that the property name is ‘Urbanest’
   and this is the name used in my description above.
3. I have no information relating to any appeal on an accompanying application
   regarding approval for the display of advertisements on the proposed hub. I have
   therefore dealt solely with the proposal to install a Street Hub Unit.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the proposed Street Hub Unit on:
     •   The character and appearance of the area around Canal Reach, and
     •   Pedestrian safety along Canal Reach.
Reasons
5. Canal Reach runs south-west from its junction with York Way, some 700-800
   metres north of Kings Cross station and St Pancras stations. The appeal site is
   close to the junction with York Way, outside the Urbanest student accommodation
   building which is a tall, modern multi-storey block. There is a mix of large
   commercial and residential blocks along the street in the vicinity of the appeal site.
   The proposed hub would be some 1.25 metres wide, 0.35 metres deep and almost
   3 metres high. It would be dark in coloration, and would be designed with the
   potential to accommodate large advertising displays within each of the wide faces.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6007384


6. The Council contends that the hub would add harmful visual clutter and detract
   from the character and appearance of the street scene; would reduce the amount
   of useable, unobstructed footway; would fail to reduce opportunities for crime and
   antisocial behaviour: and in the absence of a legal agreement to secure a
   maintenance plan for the hub, would be detrimental to the quality of the public
   realm.
7. Policy D1 of the Camden Local Plan (LP) indicates that the Council will require that
   development respects local context and character; integrates well with the
   surrounding streets, improving movement through the site and wider area and
   contributing positively to the street frontage; is secure and designed to minimise
   crime and antisocial behaviour; and preserves local views.
8. Policy C5 of the LP notes that the Council will require developments to demonstrate
   that they have incorporated design principles which contribute to community safety
   and security. Policy T1 requires that, in order to promote walking and improve the
   pedestrian environment, the Council will seek to ensure that developments are
   easy and safe to walk through; and provide high quality footpaths and pavements
   that are wide enough for the number of people expected to use them.
9. The appellants contend that the hub is of modern, clean design appropriate to the
   area; that it has been sited in a manner that would not obstruct the pavement; that
   it would not be harmful to the visual amenity of the area; and that it would provide a
   beneficial modern service to the Council and the local community.
Character and appearance
10. The buildings in the vicinity of the appeal site are modern, utilising a range of
    materials and designs. The hub would have a clean modern design that would, in
    this respect, be sympathetic to its surroundings. However, the dark colouring would
    appear somewhat harsh against the light context provided by the pavement
    materials on which it would be set, and this effect would be exacerbated by its
    scale and its prominence in the street scene, very close to the junction.
11. There are semi mature trees set within the pavement, close to the kerb. There is
    little in the way of street furniture in the immediate vicinity other than a street lamp
    and a litter bin which is sited between two of the pavement trees. The proposed
    hub, by reason of its location and its scale, with the wide faces pointing up and
    down the street, would be a highly prominent feature, and would block much of the
    otherwise relatively clear view along the street beneath the tree crowns, adding a
    degree of apparent clutter. On this basis, it would not contribute positively to the
    street frontage or respect local context and character.
Pedestrian safety
12. The hub would be positioned 0.5 metres from the kerb and extend from there to a
    point level with the trunks of the pavement trees. Beyond this point there would be
    a 3 metre gap to one of the pillars supporting the upper floors of the Urbanest
    building. This 3 metre gap would, therefore, remain unobscured for pedestrian flow
    and would appear to meet the requirements for Footway Zones in the TfL
    Streetscape Guidance Document, and Footway Widths in Volume 3 of the
    Council’s Streetscape Design Manual (Footway Details). In addition, there is further
    pedestrian access for students between the supporting pillars and the ground floor
    front elevation of the Urbanest building, which would likely be used by many of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
 Appeal Decision 6007384


     students leaving and entering the set back entrance to the building a few metres
     further to the west.
13. At the time of my visit (late afternoon/early evening) there was very little pedestrian
    movement along Canal Reach at a time when York Way was relatively busy. I do
    not consider it likely that Canal Reach would have significant concentrated footfall
    at any time and the proposed hub would not, therefore, represent an unacceptable
    obstacle to pedestrian flows.
Other Matters
14. Although the appellants planning statement indicates that a kiosk would be
    replaced as a result of this proposal, I have no information to corroborate that
    assertion. In any case there is no kiosk within the vicinity of the appeal site and
    there would, therefore, be no benefit of this type resulting from the proposal.
15. The Council contends that there is no maintenance plan submitted by the
    appellants and that its absence would be detrimental to the quality of the public
    realm. I acknowledge this point, but if any proposal for a hub were to have been
    allowed, this matter could have been controlled by condition.
16. The Metropolitan Police express concern that the hub could lead to opportunist
    mobile phone theft from students based in Urbanest as they leave the building, and
    that its size could result in opportunity for possible concealment of thieves and
    others. Again, I acknowledge these points, but in this case the proximity of the hub
    to the main entrance of Urbanfest, coupled with the additional space available for
    movement beyond the support pillars and away from the hub, would mitigate
    against these concerns.
17. With regard to provision of a modern, high-tech facility for use by students,
    passers-by and occupiers of nearby buildings, as well as the wider community, I do
    not consider in this location that the hub would provide a significant benefit due to
    the modern nature of the surrounding buildings. In the light of this, it would seem
    highly likely that residents and occupiers would, in any case, have such facilities
    available within the properties, while there would appear to be relatively few
    passers-by along this part of the street.
Conclusion
18. In conclusion, I find that the proposed hub would not reduce the amount of useable,
    unobstructed footway, and would not, therefore, be harmful to pedestrian safety.
    On this basis, it would not conflict with Policies D1 and T1 of the LP. However, by
    reason of its scale, location and colouring, it would not respect local context or
    character; would not integrate well with its surroundings or contribute positively to
    the street frontage; would represent a degree of clutter; and would not preserve
    local views. On this basis, it would be harmful to the character and appearance of
    the area around Canal Reach and would conflict with Policy D1 of the LP.
    Accordingly, I dismiss this appeal.



J D Westbrook
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
