Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by H Nicholls MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007396
Emmanuel Ranch, Windmill Road, Towersey, Thame OX9 3QH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval to details required by a condition of a planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Darren Smith against the decision of South Oxfordshire District Council.
•    The application Ref P25/S3791/DIS sought approval of details pursuant to condition Nos 6, 7 and 8
     of a planning permission ref APP/Q2115/C/3346856, granted on 1 August 2025.
•    The application was refused by notice dated 19 March 2026.
•    The details for which approval is sought are: conditions 6 (Site Development Scheme), 7
     (Biodiversity Compensation Scheme) & 8 (Contamination Risk Assessment) of deemed planning
     permission P24/S2018/DA (The material change of use of the land from the keeping of horses to a
     mixed use comprising (1) the keeping of horses and (2) a caravan site).

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to details submitted pursuant to
      condition Nos 6 and 7 attached to planning permission ref APP/Q2115/C/3346856,
      granted on 1 August 2025. The appeal is allowed, and details submitted pursuant
      to condition No 8 attached to planning permission ref APP/Q2115/C/3346856,
      granted on 1 August 2025, are approved in accordance with the application dated
      P25/S3791/DIS.
Preliminary Matters
2.    Site features noted at the time of the previous appeal site visit, including the
      ornamental gate pillars and pole-mounted lighting columns, were still present at
      the time of my site visit.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue is whether the details submitted are acceptable to satisfy the
      requirements of conditions 6, 7 and 8 of planning permission reference
      P24/S2018/DA (APP/Q2115/C/3346856).
Reasons
Condition 6 – Site Development Scheme (SDS)
4.    The Council’s decision letter confirms that the SDS was considered acceptable in
      respect of the internal layout of the site in so far as it shows the full extent of the
      residential pitches; the location of the mobile homes; touring caravans; vehicle
      parking and manoeuvring areas; cycle parking facilities; bin stores; outdoor
      amenity areas; buildings; hardstanding; boundary treatments; and, internal means
      of enclosure. One of the static caravans is sited differently to that shown on the
      submitted SDS plan and there is additional hardstanding in the south-eastern part


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007396


      of the site. Otherwise, the SDS is broadly satisfactory in respect of the other
      matters.
5.    The Council’s refusal of the SDS focusses on issues with soft landscaping;
      external lighting; vision splays and foul and surface water drainage.
6.    In respect of soft landscaping, the submitted timetable indicates that the planting of
      new hedgerows and trees is to be carried out within the first planting season
      following approval of the landscaping scheme. I do not find any particular issue
      with the tree and hedge planting scheme. However, the SDS and Habitat
      Management and Monitoring Plan (HMMP) indicate that an area of grass would be
      retained to the southeast of the site. This area is surfaced with a loose bound
      hardcore material. There is no indication as to whether or when the material shall
      be removed and the grassed area reestablished.
7.    In respect of the external lighting, the details indicate that there would be a low
      level of light. This would be a clear improvement over the existing pole-mounted
      lights which should be removed.
8.    The visibility splays shown on the plans are of the required measurements and
      there did not appear to be any plants or notable structures above 900mm in height
      at the access at the time of my visit.
9.    The details indicate the foul water drainage scheme has been implemented
      already with two septic tanks installed with relevant drainage fields, the size of
      which was allegedly calculated based on measurements, including a percolation
      value. This value has not been provided.
10. The surface water drainage scheme appears to indicate that the now tarmacked
    driveway will be replaced with permeable block paviours and that the same
    paviours would also cover the areas of the pitches. These works are excessive
    and a scheme should be devised to provide a means of drainage for the
    impermeable tarmac area which it is presumed is to be retained. The pitches may
    have some ability to allow surface water to infiltrate, however, details of percolation
    tests for the pitches should be provided to qualify that infiltration to ground is an
    appropriate means of surface water management. Reliance should not be placed
    on details for sites elsewhere.
11. In view of the above, the SDS is still unsatisfactory in relation to the soft
    landscaping scheme and foul/surface water drainage details given some
    inconsistencies between the submitted documents and with what exists on the
    ground.
Condition 7 – Biodiversity Compensation Scheme
12. The HMMP refers to a 34.01% net loss for area-based habitat units and a 22.27%
    net loss for linear-based habitat units. It is proposed to purchase credits offsite to
    the value of 1.21 units of other neutral grassland and 0.67 units of native
    hedgerow with trees (medium distinctiveness habitat) to offset the losses within 6
    months of the approval of the details for condition 7.
13. However, the HMMP also refers to the retention of a 0.422 hectare area of neutral
    grassland to the north and east of the site. Part of this area (to the southeast) is
    not grassed and therefore has not been retained as such. Should the area not be
    returned to grass, the net loss of area-based habitat units would likely be greater

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007396


      than detailed in the HMMP. The HMMP does not specify a timeframe for these
      additional works or provide an accurate calculation on the basis of this area being
      retained as hardsurfaced.
Condition 8 – Contamination Risk Assessment
14. The contamination reports are acceptable and it does not appear that land
    contamination will present a risk to human health.
Conclusion
15. For the foregoing reasons, details submitted pursuant to condition 8 are
    satisfactory but those in relation to conditions 6 and 7 are not. It is therefore
    necessary to issue a split decision to separate the acceptable aspects from those
    that remain unacceptable.



H Nicholls
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
