Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 03 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007231
Land Opposite Kingdom Hall Of Jehovah's Witnesses, Chorley Road, Burntwood
WS7 2PF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr A Bennett against the decision of Lichfield District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01496/FUL.
•    The development proposed is formation of vehicular access.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The application was made on a partially retrospective basis as some of the work
       required to form the vehicular access has been carried out. The Council assessed
       the application as retrospective and I have done the same. Nevertheless, I have
       removed the reference to the development being retrospective from the description
       as this is not required to describe the proposal. Moreover, the retrospective nature
       of the appeal has no bearing on my decision.
3.     As part of the appeal submission the appellant has provided a revised site plan
       and a revised visibility splay plan (drawing 13.26 04A). Although these constitute
       new and revised plans and represent a change to what was considered by the
       Council at the application stage, they were available to the Council at the appeal
       and they had an opportunity to provide comments on the revised plans.
       Consequently, no party would be prejudiced if I were to take the amended plans
       into account in my decision.
4.     Following discussions between the main parties, the Council has confirmed that it
       is no longer seeking to defend the third reason for refusal which concerned flood
       risk. I have, therefore, dealt with this in Other Matters rather than as a main issue.
5.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the revised Framework) came into
       force on the 17 August 2026. It is a material consideration which should be taken
       into account from the day of publication. Although the revised Framework is
       significantly different from the previous versions the wording of the details most
       pertinent to this appeal are not substantially changed. Having considered the
       revisions, and in light of the principles of natural justice, in this instance it is not
       necessary to invite any submissions from the parties on the revised Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007231


Main Issues
6.     Given the above, the main issues are the effect of the proposed access on
       highway safety and biodiversity.
Reasons
Highway safety
7.     The appeal site comprises a parcel of land on Chorley Road on the edge of an
       agricultural field in which the appellant has planning permission to construct an
       agricultural building. Chorley Road is, in the immediate area, a classified ‘C’ road
       with a 30mph speed limit. The Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and the
       vehicular access to its car park, is situated on the opposite side of Chorley Road
       from the appeal site. In the wider area there are residential dwellings and a school
       on the same side as the Jehovah’s Witnesses hall and agricultural fields,
       equestrian fields, and an industrial use on the same side as the appeal site. The
       area is, therefore, mixed residential and other uses but with an open and
       countryside feel.
8.     The proposal is for a new vehicular access to serve the agricultural building. The
       appellant has confirmed that their equestrian and dog training facilities would
       continue to be served by a separate access, near to the industrial use. Although
       the agricultural building is small, I have no compelling evidence that the level of
       traffic movements, or the size of the vehicles to use the proposed access, would
       be limited or small. Even though it is not a large scale agricultural operation there
       would still be the potential for large agricultural vehicles to use the access,
       including those towing trailers or agricultural machinery, especially for the
       transportation of hay and livestock. Moreover, I have no details of the predicted
       level of vehicle movements.
9.     The revised visibility splay plan indicates splays of 2.4m by 43m which, for a
       30mph speed limit road, would be appropriate visibility. Although I acknowledge
       the concerns of the Highway Authority regarding vehicle speeds on the road, I also
       have no compelling evidence that the 85th percentile vehicle speeds exceed the
       speed limit to warrant greater visibility splays.
10. The setting back of the gate six metres from the road and the tarmacking of the
    same section would be appropriate for an access only used by cars and small
    vehicles. However, and notwithstanding the appellant’s comments, I do not have
    compelling evidence that this would provide sufficient space for a large agricultural
    vehicle, with or without a trailer, to wait off the highway when the gate is closed.
    The position of the gate would result in the risk of large vehicles waiting in the
    highway, overhanging the kerb, or reversing onto the road which would be
    significantly harmful to highway safety.
11. Moreover, the proposal is for a dropped kerb rather than a kerbed radii as
    recommended by the Council. The turning of vehicles across a dropped kerb,
    especially agricultural vehicles, would be likely to damage the dropped kerb and
    result in highway safety implications.
12. The length of the tarmacked section would also not prevent the loose material
    proposed within the site from being transported onto the highway which would also
    cause harm to highway safety. The lack of drainage and gradient details for the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007231


       access would also risk surface water flooding onto the highway. Nevertheless, the
       matters of surfacing, drainage and gradient would be capable of being resolved
       through appropriately worded conditions, if I were minded to allow the appeal.
13. Overall, the position of the gate and the use of a dropped kerb would not provide
    an appropriate access. Nevertheless, given the size of the approved agricultural
    building, the space within the site for the building, and that the access is not
    proposed to be used for the dog training facility, I find that it is not necessary for
    the access to be wide enough for two vehicles to pass.
14. A condition could ensure that the proposed access is not used in association with
    the dog training facility, either for vehicles or pedestrians, thereby removing any
    need for pedestrian crossing facilities over Chorley Road. However, it would not be
    possible to enforce a condition to only use the access for the proposed building as
    this would prevent its use associated with the appellant’s other land. It would also
    not be enforceable to restrict the use of the access for agricultural purposes only,
    as this would not provide sufficient restrictions on it being used in association with
    other land. Such conditions would, therefore, not overcome the harm to highway
    safety.
15. For the above reasons, the proposed dropped kerb access and the position of the
    proposed gate would adversely affect highway safety. It would, therefore, be
    contrary to the requirements of Core Policy 5 and Policy ST1 of the Lichfield
    District Local Plan Strategy 2008-2029 (the LPS) which, taken together, seek to
    ensure that development proposals will make appropriate provisions for improving
    road safety, only permitting traffic generating development where it is, or can be
    made, compatible with the transport infrastructure in the area and takes account of
    the number and nature of additional traffic movements, access and egress to the
    public highway and highway safety.
Biodiversity
16. Established hedgerows, which include sections of bramble and fern, form the
    boundaries between the open fields and Chorley Road along the same side as the
    appeal proposal. Although there are few hedges on the opposite side of the road
    the green boundary along the one side is a prominent feature in the street scene
    and comprises habitat for biodiversity.
17. The appeal proposal has resulted in the removal of a section of this green habitat
    and further removal would be required to achieve the proposed access. I have no
    compelling evidence to support the appellant's contention that this was not
    hedgerow. Nevertheless, even as brambles and ferns the section removed would
    have formed a suitable habitat for biodiversity.
18. The revised plans submitted with the appeal now indicate the planting of new
    hawthorn hedgerow along the inside of the access splays. Subject to conditions,
    this would be capable of securing replacement hedgerows of greater length than
    the section removed. This would, in turn, secure biodiversity enhancements to
    comply with the requirements of Core Policy 13 and Policy NR3 of the LPS. Taken
    together, these policies require development to safeguard the ecological networks,
    including the restoration and creation of new habitats, prevent habitat losses,
    protect, enhance, restore, and implement appropriate conservation management
    of the biodiversity value of the land, and deliver net gain for biodiversity.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007231


Other Matters
19. The third reason for refusal on the Council’s decision notice relates to the failure of
    the appellant to provide sufficient information to confirm that the development
    would not be adversely affected by flooding. The Council has since confirmed that
    it is no longer seeking to defend this reason for refusal as the appeal proposal is
    within Flood Zone 1, not Flood Zone 2 as advised in the officer report. I have no
    compelling evidence to disagree with this. Consequently, the appeal proposal
    would not be contrary to Core Policy 2, Core Policy 3 or Policy BE1 of the LPS.
20. From the evidence before me the previous planning permission granted consent
    for an agricultural building to be accessed from the existing drive that serves the
    agricultural land and the appellant’s equestrian and dog training facilities.
    Consequently, the lack of a direct access off the road is not sufficient justification
    to outweigh the harm to highway safety.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
