Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by Paul Martinson BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007478
Park House, Park Road, Leeds LS15 9AJ
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Lucy Dean-Smith against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/06104/LI.
•      The works proposed are replacement of windows to existing openings.

Appeal B Ref: 6007479
Park House, Park Road, Leeds LS15 9AJ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Lucy Dean-Smith against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/06103/FU.
•      The development proposed is replacement of windows to existing openings, on a single dwelling.

Decisions
1.       Appeal A: The appeal is dismissed.
2.       Appeal B: The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.       The property is Grade II listed1. I have therefore had special regard to sections
         16(2) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
         1990 (the Act). As the site also lies within the Colton Conservation Area (the CA), I
         have also had regard to Section 72(1) of the Act.
4.       The two appeals concern the same scheme under different, complementary
         legislation. I have dealt with both appeals together in my reasoning.
5.       I have taken into account the national decision-making policies contained within
         the new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework), as published on 17
         August 2026. Any reference to the Framework below is therefore a reference to
         this new version.
Main Issues
6.       The main issues are therefore whether the proposed replacement windows would
         preserve the Grade II listed building of Park House, and whether the proposal
         would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA (Appeals A and
         B).

1
    List Entry Number: 1375409.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007478 and 6007479


Reasons
Special Interest and Significance
7.     Park House is a detached two storey brick-built house located perpendicular to
       Park Road. It has been extended to the rear with a matching two storey dual
       pitched wing, presenting a pair of gables to the roadside. The building dates to the
       early part of the nineteenth century.
8.     There is little information before me with regard to the significance of the listed
       building. Nonetheless, I find the special interest and significance to primarily be
       associated with its architectural and historic interest as an example of an early
       nineteenth century house that has developed over time in the context of a rural
       village. Important contributors in these regards, which are pertinent to the appeal,
       are the composition of the front elevation, the surviving historic fabric and the
       traditional materials and construction techniques that are typical of the local
       vernacular, including the arched window openings and use of brick.
9.     The listed building’s fenestration is a key feature of its architectural style and
       composition. The windows in the gables comprise of ‘2 over 2’ vertical sliding
       sashes with beading details to the edges and painted heads and cills. Those on
       the front and rear elevations are predominantly multipaned Yorkshire sliding sash
       windows, sliding horizontally and set within arched openings. This is a window
       style that is present at a number of historic properties along Park Road. The
       windows sit almost flush within the opening, only recessed very slightly from the
       external face of the brickwork.
10. The appellant has provided an undated colour photograph that is purported to be
    from the time of listing in 1976 showing three light casements to the front
    elevation. Whilst undated, it is reasonably convincing evidence that the windows
    present, at least on the front elevation, have been installed within the last 50 years.
    Furthermore, the Council asserts that some of the windows were replaced through
    a listed building consent granted in 2001, although it also states that 5 of the oldest
    windows were not replaced.
11. However, I am not provided with confirmation of which windows were replaced or
    whether the 2001 consent was implemented in full. Furthermore, it is unclear if the
    sliding sash windows in the gables were included in this consent. Nonetheless, the
    Yorkshire sliding sash and vertical sliding sash windows are of reasonably
    authentic proportions, glazing and style with similarly authentic opening
    mechanisms and fittings. They are also constructed of traditional materials and
    there is consistency between the thickness of the glazing bars and the frames,
    contributing to a well-balanced appearance.
12. I am not provided with any evidence of the style or appearance of the historic
    windows that pre-dated the relatively modern looking casements in the
    photograph. I have no information as to the windows in the rear and side
    elevations at this time. Nonetheless, the proportions of the openings to the front
    and rear would appear to indicate that they could have accommodated Yorkshire
    sliding sash windows, similar to those which now exist, particularly given the
    presence of similar windows locally. On this basis the windows, whilst not historic,
    have a degree of authenticity and, based on the evidence before me, are reflective
    of the character and age of the existing building. In this regard they are important


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6007478 and 6007479


       components of the building which, although of no historic value, contribute in a
       positive way to the listed building’s architectural merit.
13. The CA extends over the south of the village, centred around Park Road and
    Meynell Road. The area has a rural character, comprising of predominantly
    detached dwellings and former farmsteads in large plots interspersed by green
    space. Buildings are typically brick with slate or stone slate roofs. Yorkshire sliding
    sash windows are prevalent and are characteristic features of older properties,
    whilst casement windows tend to be located on more recently constructed houses.
14. I am provided with little information with regard to the special interest or
    significance of the CA, however, based on my own impressions, these derive from
    the rural character, the prevalence of traditional materials and the distinctive
    window style of the houses here. As a brick house dating to the nineteenth
    century, incorporating Yorkshire sliding sash windows that are publicly visible over
    the garden hedge and from the road, the appeal property reinforces the special
    interest and significance of the CA.
Proposal and Effects
15. The proposal would involve the removal of the existing windows and their
    replacement with timber framed, double-glazed units. The double-glazed units
    proposed would be of reasonably standard thickness measuring between 24mm
    and 28mm thick.
16. There are no detailed existing drawings provided as part of the appeal, which limits
    the ability to undertake a meaningful comparison between the existing windows
    and those proposed. Furthermore, the individual proposed window drawings do
    not show the arched section of timber beneath the brick arch and the top frame of
    the windows, and it is unclear how the windows would relate to this or whether it
    would be retained or replaced. Similarly, there are no drawings or other supporting
    information indicating the position of the existing or proposed windows in the
    opening.
17. However, based on my impressions on site, the proposed window frames would
    be noticeably thicker than the existing timber frames, particularly those frames
    incorporating opening casements which would be substantially thicker than the
    glazing bars of the rest of the window. These individual casements would stand
    out in views of the elevation of the building and would erode the consistency in the
    appearance of the windows, to the detriment of the architectural composition of the
    building and its special interest and significance.
18. The proportions of the proposed windows with their thicker frames, the spacer
    strips in the position of the glazing bars, and the substantial thickness of the glass
    would ensure that the windows would be easily identifiable as modern windows
    with double glazed units, adversely affecting the authenticity of the building.
19. The wholesale removal of the Yorkshire sliding sash design from the building or
    their replacement with casement windows has not been supported by any detailed
    heritage analysis justifying such a change. This limits my ability to make a
    meaningful assessment in relation to the effect on the authenticity of the building.
    Moreover, the loss of the Yorkshire sliding sashes and their replacement with what
    would be highly evident as modern windows of a different style, without supporting



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6007478 and 6007479


       evidence, would erode the authenticity of the listed building and diminish its
       architectural merit.
20. I appreciate that the proposed windows are timber replacements, rather than a
    modern material such as UPVC. Nonetheless, for the reasons set out above, the
    changes to the appearance of the listed building as a result of the proposal would
    weaken its architectural integrity and detrimentally undermine its heritage merit. As
    such, the proposal would not conserve this designated heritage asset in a manner
    appropriate to its significance.
21. The loss of the horizontal sliding sash windows in the appeal property and their
    replacement with modern style casements would also inevitably diminish the
    contribution of the appeal property to the character and appearance of the CA.
    This would be detrimental to its special interest and significance.
22. For the above reasons, the proposed windows would fail to preserve the Grade II
    listed building of Park House or any features of special architectural or historic
    interest which it possesses. The proposal would also fail to preserve the character
    or appearance of the CA. This would be contrary to the requirements of sections
    16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Act. For the same reasons the proposal would cause
    harm to the significance of these designated heritage assets.
Public Benefits and Balance
23. When considering the impact of a proposed development on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, the Framework sets out that great weight should be
    given to the asset’s conservation. It makes clear that the more important the asset,
    the greater the weight should be. This is irrespective of whether any potential harm
    amounts to substantial harm, total loss or less than substantial harm to its
    significance. Having regard to my above reasoning, collectively I consider the
    harm to designated heritage assets to be a moderate to high level of ‘less than
    substantial’ harm as set out in the Framework.
24. Framework DM Policy HE6 sets out that where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and
    its significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. Important public benefits can include enabling energy efficiency
    measures to be employed.
25. The proposal, through introducing double glazing, would likely represent improved
    thermal efficiency over the existing single glazed windows. However, to my mind, it
    has not been demonstrated that the window style proposed would be the only
    means of achieving those benefits or that such benefits would not arise from a
    more authentic design that would be less harmful to the significance of the
    designated heritage asset. This limits the weight I can attribute to these benefits.
26. Moreover, it has not been demonstrated that similar efficiency benefits could not
    be achieved through less harmful means such as through secondary glazing or
    through slimmer double glazed units.
27. The proposal may result in security benefits through modern locking systems,
    although there is little evidence that the existing windows represent a particular
    security risk. Any public benefit from contributing towards a reduction in the risk of
    crime is therefore limited.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6007478 and 6007479


28. The limited weight that the sum of public benefits carries in favour of the appeal
    scheme is not sufficient to outweigh the considerable importance and weight I
    attach to the identified harm to the significance of the designated heritage assets.
29. The proposed windows would fail to preserve the Grade II listed building of Park
    House or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it
    possesses. The proposal would also fail to preserve the character or appearance
    of the CA. This would be contrary to the requirements of sections 16(2), 66(1) and
    72(1) of the Act.
30. The proposal would conflict with Policies P10 and P11 of the Leeds Core Strategy
    (2014) and saved Policies N14, N17 and N20 of the Unitary Development Plan
    Review (2006) which together seek to ensure proposals constitute high quality
    design that amongst other things conserves heritage assets.
Conclusion
31. Appeal A: For the above reasons and having regard to all matters raised I
    conclude that Appeal A should be dismissed.
32. Appeal B: The proposed development would conflict with the statutory duties
    contained within the Act, the development plan and the Framework. There are no
    material considerations of sufficient weight that would lead me to conclude
    otherwise. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal B should be
    dismissed.

Paul Martinson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
