Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by C Shearing BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007698
1C Wickenden Road, Sevenoaks TN13 3PJ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
       Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
       which a previous planning permission was granted.
•      The appeal is made by Neil Gordon against the decision of Sevenoaks District Council.
•      The application ref is 25/03503/CONVAR.
•      The application sought planning permission for ‘Demolition of garage and one chimney. Part single/
       part two storey side extension, part single/ part two storey rear extension, single storey front
       extension and repositioning of front door, internal alterations and new permeable resin driveway.
       Addition of rear high retaining wall and associated hard landscaping. Alterations to fenestration and
       installation of roof lights’ without complying with a condition attached to planning permission ref
       25/01916/HOUSE, dated 29 September 2025.
•      The condition in dispute is no.3 which states that:
       The development hereby permitted shall be constructed entirely of the materials as detailed in the
       planning application form and as shown on the approved plans.
•      The reason given for the condition is:
       To ensure a satisfactory appearance in the interests of the visual amenities and character of the
       locality in accordance with Policies EN1 of the Sevenoaks Allocations and Development
       Management Plan, SP1 of the Sevenoaks Core Strategy and C4 of the Sevenoaks Town
       Neighbourhood Plan.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       On 29 September 2025 the Council granted planning permission for development
         described as ‘Demolition of garage and one chimney. Part single/ part two storey
         side extension, part single / part two storey rear extension, single storey front
         extension and repositioning of front door, internal alterations and new permeable
         resin driveway. Addition of rear high retaining wall and associated hard
         landscaping. Alterations to fenestration and installation of rooflights’ (the original
         permission)1.
3.       Condition 3 of that permission states that the development permitted shall be
         constructed entirely of the materials detailed in the planning application form and
         as shown on the approved plans. Those plans annotated the extended roof form to
         have roof tiles matching the existing and the application form referred to a ‘tiled/
         flat roof’. The appellant sought to vary that condition in order to amend the roofing
         materials to comprise smooth grey concrete tiles with smooth grey half-round


1
    Council’s reference 25/01916/HOUSE

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007698


       concrete ridge tiles. It is the Council’s refusal to vary the condition which is the
       subject of this appeal.
4.     There is dispute between the main parties surrounding the scope of the proposal
       and whether it can include alterations to the materials across the remaining parts
       of the existing roof. The appellant describes their intention to provide a single
       uniform finish across the property as a whole. However, based on the description
       of development above, the original permission included demolition of a chimney
       and extensions to the main roof, but it did not otherwise include alterations to, or
       replacement of it.
5.     Case law has established that an application under Section 73 may not be used to
       obtain a permission that would require a variation to the terms of the operative part
       of the planning permission, which would include the description of the
       development for which the original permission was granted. Only the conditions
       can be varied. On this basis, to alter the roof materials across the entirety of the
       roof is beyond the powers of S73 since it is not included in the original description
       of development. Neither is it within the scope of this appeal to establish whether or
       not those works would require planning permission.
6.     On this basis the appeal considers only the variation of condition 3 insofar as it
       relates to the works that were approved by the original planning permission.
7.     A new National Planning Policy Framework 2026 was published during the course
       of the appeal (the Framework). Both main parties were invited to comment on this
       change and the responses received have been taken into account.
Main Issue
8.     The main issue is the effect that varying the roof materials of the approved
       extensions would have on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
9.     The site lies in an area of mid-twentieth century housing generally comprising
       properties of traditional character set behind modest front gardens. Wickenden
       Road falls within Character Area C08 as defined by the Sevenoaks Residential
       Character Area Assessment 2012 (the RCAA). This describes brown or red roof
       tiles as being among a harmonious range of limited materials which contribute to
       the area’s local distinctiveness. No.1C shares this characteristic, having textured
       red roof tiles, similar to those on the attached, neighbouring and opposite
       properties. There is some variation in the tones of the tile colours and their
       condition around Wickenden Road, as to be expected over time. Overall the
       consistency in this roofing material forms a component part of the cohesive and
       distinctive character of this area as described by the RCAA.
10. When introduced to only the approved extensions, the proposed roof tiles would
    be heavily at odds with those of the existing property and create a mismatched
    and visually jarring roof. However, their introduction would also be in stark contrast
    with the prevailing roof materials in the area, heavily diluting its cohesive and
    distinctive character.
11. There are examples of grey roof tiles in the wider area as evidenced by the
    appellant including further along Wickenden Road. However, these are sporadic
    examples and not in the immediate context of the appeal site within which the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007698


         proposed roof materials would be seen. I also observed that those grey roof tiles
         maintained a textured appearance similar to those around them, rather than being
         smooth and the Council note they have not been granted planning permission.
         Together those other properties have different visual effects and circumstances,
         and do not provide justification for the harmful effects arising from this proposal.
12. The variation of condition 3 to alter the roof materials as proposed would cause
    unacceptable harm to the character and appearance of the area. The proposal
    would conflict with Policy EN1 of the Sevenoaks Allocations and Development
    Management Plan 2015 and SP1 of the Core Strategy 2011 which together require
    high quality design which responds to distinctive local character. It would also
    conflict with Policy C4 of the Sevenoaks Town Neighbourhood Plan 2023 insofar
    as it requires new development to take account of the RCAA.
Other Matters
13. The appellant describes that the existing roof is in poor condition and with
    insulation deficiencies. However it remains that the alterations to the existing roof
    cannot fall within the considerations of this appeal for the reasons given. Similarly,
    the provisions of other case law cited2 which relate to when alterations amount to
    development, do not alter this judgement. Development referred to at Bradbourne
    Vale Road is some way from the appeal site and is part of a different context of
    varied building styles set along a busy road. The use of similar roofing materials at
    that site therefore presents different visual effects. This is similarly the case for
    other sites referenced at St John’s Hill and Carlton Works, which relate to buildings
    of very different character.
14. While the Framework states that innovation or change should not be precluded in
    design terms, this is read among the context of a policy which requires
    development to respond to context so that it integrates with and enhances its
    surroundings, which would not be the case here. As the proposal would fail to
    respond to its context or adhere to a local design standard, it would fail to comply
    with Policy DP3(1) and in turn DP3(3) which is one of the national decision-making
    policies which state that development proposals should be refused. Having regard
    to Policy S4, the benefits of approving the development, which are limited to
    private benefits to the appellant, are substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects. The Framework does not, therefore, provide support in favour of the
    development and there are not material considerations of sufficient weight to make
    a decision other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given, the appeal is dismissed.

C Shearing
INSPECTOR




2
    Burroughs Day v Bristol City Council [1996]


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
