Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 26 June 2026
by M Cryan BA(Hons) DipTP MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026

Appeal A Ref: 6007796
Old Street, opposite No 142, London EC1V 9BS (Easting 532479,
Northing 182424)
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application reference is P2025/3510/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the removal of an existing Kiosk, and the deployment of a replacement
     Street Hub 3 unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6007794
Old Street, opposite No 142, London EC1V 9BS (Easting 532479, Northing 182424)
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application reference is P2025/3511/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is two digital 75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
     Street Hub unit.

Decisions
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the removal of an
       existing Kiosk, and the deployment of a replacement Street Hub 3 unit at Old
       Street, opposite No 142, London EC1V 9BS (Easting 532479, Northing 182424) in
       accordance with the terms of the application, reference P2025/3510/FUL, subject
       to the conditions in the attached Schedule.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of two digital
       75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit, at Old
       Street, opposite No 142, London EC1V 9BS (Easting 532479, Northing 182424) in
       accordance with the terms of the application, reference P2025/3511/ADV. The
       consent is for five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five
       standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations, and the
       additional conditions in the attached Schedule
Preliminary and Procedural Matters
3.     I have been appointed to determine two appeals at the same site, relating to a
       proposal for a new BT Street Hub to replace an existing telephone kiosk. Appeal A
       relates to an application for planning permission for the hub itself, while Appeal B

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007796 and 6007794


       relates to an application for advertisement consent for the integrated digital
       displays.
4.     The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England)
       Regulations 2007 (“the Regulations”) set out that powers shall be exercised only in
       the interests of amenity and public safety, taking into account the provisions of the
       development plan, so far as they are material; and any other relevant factors.
       While I have had regard to relevant policies of the 2023 Islington Local Plan
       Strategic and Development Management Policies (“the SDMP”) and the London
       Plan 2021 which were brought to my attention, they have not been determinative
       in Appeal B.
Main Issue
5.     Both applications were refused for the same reason, relating to the design, siting,
       scale and appearance of the proposed development, and its impact on the
       streetscene. I have therefore dealt with them as a single main issue here, which is
       the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance, or visual amenity, of
       the area.
Reasons
6.     The appeals relate to the site of an existing BT telephone kiosk within the adopted
       public highway, on the footway on the north side of Old Street. It is in a busy part
       of central London, predominantly comprising modern buildings. There is a mix of
       commercial and residential uses nearby; north of the site are the four-storey blocks
       of flats making up the Redbrick Estate, while on the south side of this part of Old
       Street are commercial (or, at least, commercial-looking) buildings of five or more
       storeys. The footway on the north side of Old Street is very wide, with three mature
       trees set in a line near the kerb edge close to the site. As well as the kiosk on the
       appeal site, there is other intermittent street furniture nearby, including lighting
       columns, litter bins, slim posts with traffic signs, and various equipment cabinets.
       40m or so east of the site is another operator’s telephone kiosk with a single digital
       display screen, while a roughly similar distance to the west is a bus stop, with a
       shelter incorporating a double-sided digital advertising display.
7.     The proposed development is the removal of the existing telephone kiosk and the
       installation of a BT Street Hub 3 unit. The unit would be set approximately 0.5m
       from, and perpendicular to, the edge of the footway, the same as the existing
       kiosk. It would be a freestanding structure, approximately 3.0m high, 1.2m wide
       and 0.4m deep, clad in powder-coated aluminium panels in a dark grey finish. The
       hub would provide free Wi-Fi and telephone calls, among other services. There
       would be two digital screens, one on each side of the unit, which would be of
       tempered and toughened laminated glass; these would display advertisements.
8.     The new hub unit would be taller and broader than the existing kiosk it would
       replace, though its slim profile would moderate its visual impact. The modern
       design and dark finish mean that the hub unit would not in itself be an unduly
       prominent or intrusive feature in the streetscape. The footway is very broad on this
       part of the northern side of Old Street, and the trees and street furniture would go
       some way to breaking up medium and long views of the installation, so that it
       would not visually dominate its surroundings.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6007796 and 6007794


9.     The appeal scheme would introduce additional illuminated displays to the area,
       given that the existing kiosk to be replaced does not carry advertisements of that
       type. However, the screens would be alongside a busy main road in a central
       London location with a commercial character. In this context, two digital screens
       carrying advertisements would not be an unexpected or otherwise incongruous
       element. Importantly, while there are already similar displays nearby, there would
       not be such a concentration of advertisements within this stretch of Old Street that
       it would lead to a harmful cumulative impact.
10. The Council drew my attention to two previous dismissed appeals, both relating to
    the proposed installation of a telephone call box opposite this appeal site outside
    No 140 Old Street1. In the first of those cases, the Inspector noted that, because of
    a lack of street furniture in the vicinity, a call box in that location would be very
    visible both ways along Old Street; in both appeals my predecessors concluded
    that a new telephone kiosk would be unacceptably visually intrusive and harmful. I
    saw during my site visit that the footway is much more open on that southern side
    of Old Street opposite this appeal site. Because of the street trees and furniture on
    the north side which I have described above, I consider that the visual impact of
    this appeal proposal would be considerably lower than would have been the case
    with the other schemes. I also note that this appeal relates to the replacement of
    an existing kiosk, while these two earlier proposals would have seen entirely new
    installations added to the streetscene. Given these significant differences, I am
    satisfied that different decisions are justified here.
11. Taking these points together, I conclude that the proposed installation would not
    cause unacceptable harm to the character and appearance, or visual amenity, of
    the area. There would therefore be no conflict with Policies PLAN1, DH6, ST3 or
    T4 of the SDMP, nor with Policies D3, D4 or T2 of the London Plan 2021. Among
    other things, these policies seek to ensure that development is well-designed and
    appropriate for its context, including in respect of the public realm, and that
    advertisements and telecommunications installations are not visually or physically
    intrusive. These policies are material to Appeal B insofar as they seek to protect
    amenity.
Other Matters
12. The Council did not raise any significant concerns about public safety, nor on
    effects on amenity insofar as it relates to neighbours’ living conditions. Based on
    all the evidence before me, I see no reason to take a different view on these
    matters.
13. The submitted Design and Access Statement suggested that as part of the
    proposal two existing BT telephone kiosks would be removed, and that the
    scheme would therefore represent “a 2-for-1 swap on street furniture” which would
    assist in decluttering the street. One of the “sacrificial kiosks”, as the appellant put
    it, is that currently on the appeal site; the appeal scheme going ahead would
    necessarily be dependent on the removal of that kiosk. The second is outside
    Kestrel House off City Road, several hundred metres – and not visible – from the
    appeal site. Any decluttering benefit which might arise from the removal of that
    kiosk would not be felt in the vicinity of the appeal site, and thus it is not a factor
    weighing significantly in my decision. Nevertheless, for the reasons I have set out
1
 PINS Refs: APP/V5570/W/18/3211745 (decision date 13 August 2019) and APP/V5570/W/19/3231250 (decision date
6 November 2019)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decisions 6007796 and 6007794


       above I am satisfied that the installation of a Street Hub unit here would not
       amount to causing harmful cluttering of the street.
Conditions
14. The Council proposed a number of conditions in the event of my allowing the
    appeals, which I have considered in the light of the tests set out in the National
    Planning Policy Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. The appellant did
    not comment on the Council’s suggestions, though they had already proposed
    their own conditions in their planning statement. Where necessary in the interests
    of effectiveness, I have made changes to the wording or ordering of conditions.
15. For Appeal A, as well as the standard time limit condition (1), in the interests of
    certainty it is appropriate that there is a condition requiring that the development is
    carried out in accordance with the approved drawings and documents (2). I have
    incorporated into Condition 2 references to the anti-social behaviour management
    plan and other supporting documents submitted as part of the application – a
    separate condition addressing this matter as proposed by the Council is not
    therefore necessary. Conditions relating to materials (3) and to the reinstatement
    of pavements (4) are necessary to protect the quality of the public realm, and the
    character and appearance of the area.
16. A condition requiring the removal of the existing telephone kiosk on the appeal site
    before any development takes place, suggested by the Council, is not necessary;
    the proposed siting of the new hub unit means that the existing kiosk must in any
    event be removed for the development to go ahead.
17. For Appeal B, the appellant suggested in the Planning, Design and Access
    Statement that a 10-year advertisement consent should be granted. However, the
    arguments put forward for this did not, in my view, amount to a substantive
    justification for a departure from the five-year period set out in the standard
    conditions. I have imposed conditions relating to the overnight brightness of the
    display screens (1) and to the control of images and suchlike (2, 3 and 4) in the
    interests of amenity. A condition prohibiting the use of images resembling road
    traffic signs and signals (5) is imposed in the interest of highway safety.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that both appeals should be allowed.



M Cryan
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6007796 and 6007794


Schedule of Conditions – Appeal A
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be installed in accordance with the
              following approved plans:
              • Site Location Plan (Dwg: 25005458_PLN_LOC_1.1, 1 December 2025)
              • Proposed Site Plan (Dwg: 25005458_PLN_SI_2.1, 1 December 2025)
              • Elevation Plan (Dwg: 25005458_PLN_EL_3.1, 1 December 2025)
              • Proposed BT Streethub 3 Unit (Dimensions drawing, 21 March 2025)
              Except where otherwise required by these conditions, the Street Hub 3 unit
              shall be installed, operated and maintained in full compliance with the
              following approved documents for the lifetime of the installation:
              • Planning, Design and Access Statement (Dalcour Maclaren, Ref: ISL-28)
              • Institute of Lighting Professionals Professional Lighting Guide 05/23 The
                  brightness of illuminated advertisements including digital displays
              • BT Street Hubs Beyond Connection v2.2 November 2025
              • BT Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan Version 3
              • BT Street Hub Noise Management Plan v2.1 February 2025
     3)       The development shall be constructed in accordance with the schedule of
              materials noted on the plans and within the Design and Access Statement.
              The development shall be carried out strictly in accordance with the details
              so approved and shall be maintained as such thereafter.
     4)       Pavements surrounding the installation hereby permitted shall be made good
              to the same condition as, and in new or replacement surface materials
              matching as closely as possible, the adjacent land.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6007796 and 6007794


Schedule of Conditions – Appeal B
     1)       The intensity of the illumination of the two digital display screens shall not
              exceed 600 candelas per square metre (cd/m2) between dusk and dawn in
              line with the maximum permitted recommended luminance as set out in The
              Institute of Lighting Professionals Professional Lighting Guide 05/23 The
              brightness of illuminated advertisements including digital displays
     2)       The digital display screens shall not display any moving, or apparently
              moving, images (including animation, flashing, scrolling, three-dimensional,
              intermittent or video elements).
     3)       The minimum display time for each piece of content on the digital display
              screens shall be 10 seconds.
     4)       The interval between each piece of content on the digital display screens
              shall take place over a period no greater than one second; the complete
              screen shall change with no visual effects (including swiping or other
              animated transition methods) between displays and the display will include a
              mechanism to freeze the image in the event of a malfunction.
     5)       No content on the digital display screens shall resemble traffic signs, as
              defined in section 64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
