Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 June 2026
by N Unwin BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007475
27 Anson Road, Islington, London N7 0RB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Ruhul Chowdhury against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/3129/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as: conversion of 7 self-contained flats (6x Studios and
     1x1bed) into a single dwelling house with a single rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on housing stock and whether it would
   optimise the site for housing delivery.
Reasons
3. Policy H1 of the Islington Local Plan Strategic and Development Management
   Policies (2023) (the DMP) requires proposals which include housing to make the
   most efficient use of land to ensure that the optimal amount of housing is delivered.
   Policy H2 of the DMP supports this in requiring proposals involving new housing to
   demonstrate that use of the building/site is optimised. Policy H2 permits the loss of
   existing housing, but where the housing is replaced by at least equivalent floorspace
   and does not involve the net loss of more than one unit.
4. The appeal property comprises six studio flats and one one-bedroom flat. All of the
   studio flats are notably below the minimum gross internal floor areas set out within
   the Technical housing standards – nationally described space standard (2015) (the
   NDSS). Furthermore, one of these studios does not contain a bathroom.
5. The proposal would add a single storey extension and convert the appeal property
   into a five-bedroom dwelling. Policy H2 of the DMP does not stipulate that the units
   being lost should be compliant with NDSS standards, and therefore even if the flat
   without a bathroom is excluded, the proposal would result in the net loss of 5
   dwellings.
6. Table 3.2 of the DMP sets out housing size mix priorities, with market studio
   dwellings denoted as having ‘none’ priority and one-bedroom market flats as ‘low
   priority’. Four-bedroom market housing is defined as ‘low’ priority with no data for
   five-bedroom dwellings. Two-bedroom market housing is defined within Table 3.2 as
   having ‘high’ priority.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007475


7. I note that any dwelling with two-bedrooms or more is defined as a family home
   within the DMP. As such, the proposed single dwelling would be considered a family
   home. It would also meet the relevant NDSS minimum gross internal floor area
   standard. I accept this would replace a number of flats below NDSS minimum
   floorspace standards which the appellant considers to have inadequate natural
   daylight and outlook and poor acoustic and fire separation between units.
8. However, the proposal would provide no smaller units defined within Table 3.2 of
   the DMP as having a ‘high’ or ‘medium’ priority. It has not been demonstrated as to
   why such units could not be provided. Based on the evidence before me, I am not
   satisfied it has been demonstrated that the use of the building would be optimised,
   or that the proposal represents the most efficient use of the building that would
   deliver the optimal amount of housing.
9. For the above reasons, the proposal would have an unacceptable effect on the
   housing stock and would not optimise the site for housing delivery. As such it would
   conflict with Policy H1 of the London Plan: The Spatial Development Strategy for
   Greater London (2021), and Policies H1, H2 and PLAN1 of the DMP which, when
   read together require development to make the most efficient use of land and
   deliver the optimal amount of housing.
Other Matters
10.The appeal property is located within the Tufnell Park Conservation Area (the CA).
   Insofar as is relevant to this case, its significance derives from the architectural
   detailing and layout of the traditional buildings with it. The physical works would be
   relatively minor in nature and not widely visible from the public realm. The reduction
   in intensity of the use of the building would be difficult to perceive in relation to the
   character of the area. Therefore, the proposal would have a neutral effect on the
   character, appearance, and significance of the CA. It therefore weighs neither for
   nor against the proposal.
11.The reduction in intensity of the building’s use may result in an improvement to the
   living conditions of neighbouring residents. The appellant additionally contends that
   the proposal would be sustainably designed and energy efficient. Nevertheless,
   given the scale and use of the existing building, these benefits would be limited, and
   these matters or any others raised would be insufficient to outweigh the harm I have
   identified above.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
