Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 31 July 2026
by J Smith MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6007348
Home Farm, Main Road, Bevercotes, Nottinghamshire NG22 0PS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by R Pickering against the decision of Bassetlaw District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01203/FUL.
•    The development proposed is demolition of existing barns, and their replacement with 3 no. dwellings
     with new point of access.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs has been made by R Pickering, the appellant, against
       Bassetlaw District Council. This matter is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The appeal site lies within the Beavercotes Conservation Area. Section 72(1) of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires special
       attention to be paid to preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of
       conservation areas. I have had due regard to this duty within my decision.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework ('the Framework') was
       published on 17 August 2026. There have been significant amendments to it. I
       have therefore sought comment from the parties on its implications for this appeal.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
       •   the effect of the proposal upon the landscape character of the area; and,
       •   whether the proposed development would be sited in an appropriate location.
Reasons
Landscape character
6.     The appeal site lies within the Mid-Nottinghamshire Farmlands Policy Zone 11:
       Tuxford Character Area, as identified in the Bassetlaw Landscape Character
       Assessment. The assessment describes the area as comprising predominantly
       open arable farmland, punctuated by small traditional settlements dispersed
       throughout the landscape. These settlements are characterised by dwellings and
       farmsteads constructed primarily of red brick. The assessment also acknowledges

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007348


       that the wider landscape is fragmented by significant infrastructure, including the
       A1, the railway line, and extensive warehousing development.
7.     In respect of built development, the assessment seeks to conserve and reinforce
       the area's sparsely settled character by directing appropriately designed and
       scaled new development towards existing settlements. It further emphasises the
       importance of conserving the local red-brick vernacular and ensuring that new
       development positively reflects and reinforces these established characteristics.
8.     The Council contends that the siting of two of the dwellings towards the front of the
       appeal site would result in a form of development that departs from the established
       settlement grain. In particular, it is argued that the prevailing character of the area
       is defined by more generous building setbacks and a looser, less intensive pattern
       of development. During my site visit, I observed that the settlement pattern of
       Beavercotes does indeed include several properties that are set well back from the
       road, often accessed via notably long driveways.
9.     However, I also observed that this pattern is not consistently reflected throughout
       Beavercotes. When approaching the appeal site from the east, I noted that the
       farmhouse associated with Lound Hall Farm is positioned relatively close to the
       highway, with a setback broadly comparable to that proposed for the appeal
       development. This is not an isolated example. Immediately beyond Lound Hall
       Farm, Beverell House also displays a close relationship with the road frontage.
       Both properties are substantial in scale and are prominent buildings which are
       close to the appeal site.
10. Consequently, the settlement exhibits a varied pattern of development in terms of
    building setbacks and plot arrangement. In light of these examples, I am not
    persuaded that the proposed layout would represent a departure from the
    established settlement grain. Rather, the proposal would reflect an existing
    characteristic of the settlement, whereby both deeply set-back and more closely
    positioned buildings coexist within Beavercotes.
11. Furthermore, the appeal site contains a cluster of agricultural buildings of
    blockwork construction that are situated in close proximity to the highway, with little
    or no landscaping present. As acknowledged by the appellant, the site is currently
    in a run-down and somewhat unattractive condition. While agricultural buildings
    can possess a certain visual simplicity and rural character, I agree with the
    appellant's assessment of the site's existing appearance. In this context, the
    proposed development would represent a general visual improvement over the
    current situation.
12. Whilst I recognise that the Bassetlaw Landscape Character Assessment states that
    the sparsely settled character of the area should be conserved and reinforced, this
    guidance is expressed at a broad strategic level in relation to the Mid-
    Nottinghamshire Farmlands Policy Zone 11: Tuxford Character Area as a whole. It
    does not account for the variations in character that exist at specific locations within
    the wider character area.
13. The proposed use of materials, particularly the incorporation of rural red brick,
    would be sympathetic to the prevailing palette of materials found within
    Beavercotes and would reflect the local vernacular identified in the Bassetlaw
    Landscape Character Assessment. The proposed dwellings would therefore
    integrate appropriately with their surroundings in visual terms.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007348


14. Furthermore, whilst the dwellings would inevitably appear as modern buildings,
    their design, scale and form, including the treatment of the roofscapes, appear to
    have been informed by the agricultural buildings characteristic of the surrounding
    area. As such, they would possess a distinctly rural character that would respond
    positively to the site's existing agricultural context. Consequently, I am satisfied that
    the proposed development would respect and reinforce local distinctiveness, whilst
    remaining commensurate with the established character of the site and its
    surroundings.
15. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the proposal would not harm the character or
    appearance of the Mid-Nottinghamshire Farmlands Policy Zone 11: Tuxford
    Character Area. Rather, the defining qualities of the character area would remain
    safeguarded and its overall landscape character would be preserved. In having
    regard to my duty as set out at Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I am satisfied that the proposed development would
    preserve the character or appearance of the Beavercotes Conservation Area, for
    the reasons outlined above.
16. To conclude, the proposed development would not conflict with Policy ST35 of the
    Bassetlaw Local Plan 2024 (LP). This policy is concerned with the landscape
    character. It notes that proposals should protect the distinctive qualities of the
    relevant landscape character zone, amongst other things.
Location
17. Policy ST1 of the LP sets out the spatial strategy for Bassetlaw over the plan
    period. It sets out how many dwellings shall be accommodated within the main
    towns, large and small rural settlements within Bassetlaw and which these are.
    Beavercotes is not identified in the settlements listed in these areas. As such, it is
    considered to be a countryside location, according to Policy ST1.
18. Policy ST2 of the LP sets out housing growth within the rural areas of Bassetlaw.
    Part 2 of this policy notes that in those cases where there is no development
    boundary, a set criterion must be met. The evidence before me suggests that the
    appeal site does sit beyond any defined development settlement boundary due to
    its location within a countryside location. But, it is clear to me that its location is
    within the built form of the Beavercotes due to its position between other buildings
    which make up this location.
19. The proposed development would not result in significant harm to the existing built
    character of this part of Beavercotes, for the reasons set out under the first main
    issue of this appeal. It would therefore comply with point (a) of Policy ST2. Given
    its location within Beavercotes, adjacent to existing residential properties, together
    with the removal of substantial agricultural buildings currently occupying the site,
    the proposal would not cause significant harm to the openness or distinctive
    character of the surrounding countryside. It would therefore also not be in conflict
    with part (b) of Policy ST2 of the LP.
20. Furthermore, as the development would be situated within an established built-up
    area with existing development on either side, rather than extending along the
    edges of Beavercotes. It would therefore maintain the physical separation to other
    settlements, as required by point (c) of Policy ST2. Point (d) seeks to prioritise the
    redevelopment of previously developed land or underused land. It is critical here to
    identify that the Framework definition of previously developed land expressly

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007348


       excludes land that is or was last occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings.
       However, during my site visit, it appeared to me that this site was underused due to
       the absence of any clear evidence of an agricultural use for a period of time.
       Therefore, it would meet the requirement found at point (d) of Policy ST2 of the LP
       for this reason. For the reasons outlined in the first main issue of this appeal, the
       proposal would accord with the requirements of Policy ST33 of the LP. Namely, it
       would preserve the landscape features and respect the local context. I am
       therefore of the view that it would meet the requirements of point (e) of Policy ST2.
21. Point (f) of Part 2 of Policy ST2 requires development proposals to provide safe
    and convenient access for all users, including connections to, and improvements
    of, existing infrastructure that promote walking, cycling, and the use of public
    transport. The proposed access arrangement would provide good visibility in both
    directions for vehicles exiting the site, ensuring safe access to the highway
    network. Upon entering the development, drivers would travel along a lightly
    trafficked road where vehicle movements are limited. The manoeuvres required to
    enter and exit the site would be straightforward and typical of those routinely
    undertaken by drivers. Accordingly, the proposal would provide a safe and
    convenient means of access which would not impede traffic flow along the
    highway.
22. Turning to the second element of Point (f) of Part 2 of Policy ST2, the appellant
    identifies several services and facilities which they contend contribute to the
    sustainability of the appeal site's location within Bevercotes. In their appeal
    statement, Springvale Fishing Lakes is referenced as providing a small shop and
    café. However, the appeal evidence further describes the shop as a gift and fishing
    tackle outlet, with the appellant themselves emphasising its limited scale. In these
    circumstances, I am not persuaded that the facility would provide even the most
    basic day-to-day necessities for future occupants of the proposed development.
23. The appellant also submits that the appeal site benefits from proximity to the
    employment allocation at the former Bevercotes Colliery site, located
    approximately 1km away. However, the evidence provided in support of this
    assertion is limited. In particular, there is no indication that the allocated land has
    been developed, nor is there any information regarding the nature or extent of
    employment uses that may have been established on the site.
24. Markham Moor Services is located approximately 2km from the appeal site,
    adjacent to the A1. During my site visit, I observed that the services comprise a
    KFC, Starbucks, McDonald's, a shop and a petrol filling station. Whilst these
    facilities provide a degree of convenience, I am not persuaded that they offer a
    sufficient range of services to meet the day-to-day needs of future residents. The
    provision is largely limited to convenience retail and food and drink uses, with no
    healthcare facilities, educational establishments, or other key community services
    available.
25. The appellant has also referred to public houses, restaurants, village halls and
    sports facilities within the wider network of surrounding villages. However, these
    facilities are located beyond Bevercotes by notable distances. As such, the future
    occupiers of the proposed development would need to travel beyond the village to
    access them.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007348


26. Whilst the presence of these facilities may indicate that some services are
    available in the wider area, they remain very limited in scope to support sustainable
    day-to-day living, and are critically located outside Beavercotes. Furthermore, it is
    evident that to access a broader range of essential services, including main food
    shopping, healthcare provision and other educational establishments would require
    the future occupants to travel notable distances.
27. I have therefore considered the accessibility of these destinations by sustainable
    modes of transport available to future occupiers. During my site visit, I observed
    that the roads leading into and out of Beavercotes have little or no footway
    provision. The first continuous footway which I identified was along Main Street in
    Milton, located to the south of Markham Moor Services. A similar situation exists in
    the direction of Walesby, where footway provision only begins upon entering the
    settlement itself.
28. As a result, journeys on foot to the facilities identified by the appellant would
    require future occupiers to travel along roads without dedicated pedestrian
    infrastructure and, for much of the route, without street lighting. Furthermore, the
    open and rural character of these roads enables vehicles to travel at relatively high
    speeds. Consequently, the pedestrian environment is neither safe, attractive nor
    particularly convenient access to encouraging sustainable modes of transport as a
    realistic alternative to the private car for accessing day-to-day services and
    facilities. It would not be reasonable to expect young primary aged children to
    access Walesby Primary School, as identified by the appellant approximately 3km
    away, given these highway conditions.
29. I have also had regard to the possible availability of public transport in this location.
    However, there is insufficient evidence before me to demonstrate that local bus
    services operate at a frequency or level of convenience that would encourage their
    regular and sustained use by future occupiers. In respect of cycling, I return to the
    considerations outlined above regarding pedestrian accessibility. The surrounding
    road network is largely unlit and comprises open rural roads where vehicles are
    able to travel at relatively high speeds. In these circumstances, cycling is unlikely to
    represent an attractive or realistic alternative to the private car for many day-to-day
    journeys.
30. I have also taken account of the level of off-street parking proposed as part of the
    development. Given the accessibility constraints identified, together with the readily
    availability of private parking at each dwelling, future occupiers are likely to rely
    heavily on private vehicles to meet their daily needs. Even if the range of nearby
    services and facilities were considered sufficient to support everyday essentials,
    the most convenient and attractive means of accessing them would, in practice, be
    by car.
31. Consequently, by reason of its location and the design of the surrounding highway
    network, the proposed development would fail to provide safe and convenient
    access to existing infrastructure to promote walking, cycling and the use of public
    transport. As such, it would conflict with the objectives of Point (f) of Part 2 of Policy
    ST2, which seeks to encourage development patterns that support walking, cycling
    and the use of public transport. Consequently, the proposal would be highly
    dependent on private vehicle use and would not effectively promote travel by
    sustainable modes of transport. As all of the points listed in part 2 of Policy ST2 are
    required to be met, I must therefore conclude that there is conflict with Policy ST2.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007348


32. At this stage of this decision, it is important to recognise the submission of
    evidence by the appellant through a previous appeal decision1, which shall hereby
    referred to as the ‘Manor Cottage appeal’. It is contended that this decision is
    particularly relevant, as the Inspector ultimately did not find that the location of it
    was inherently unsustainable. Critically, I note that Clayworth is identified as a
    small rural settlement within Policy ST2, which is identified for growth, albeit small
    in the context of the wider Bassetlaw area. Therefore, some growth is expected in
    this location.
33. During my site visit, I also noted that Clayworth is host to a church and two public
    houses. Whilst these are limited services that do not provide the essentials to every
    day living, they are certainly greater in number than the absence of any meaningful
    provision within Bevercotes. It is also important to recognise that, whilst
    consistency in decision-making is a significant consideration, each appeal must be
    determined on its own merits. In this regard, there are clear locational distinctions
    between the site considered in the Manor Cottage appeal and the appeal site
    before me. The two sites are situated a considerable distance apart and do not
    share the same locational characteristics, accessibility, or relationship to local
    services and facilities.
34. Similarly, a further appeal decision2 has also been provided, which shall hereby
    referred to as the ‘Misterton appeal’. The appellant contends that this decision is
    relevant to the assessment of the proposal against Part 2 of Policy ST2. Whilst I
    acknowledge that the Inspector in that case undertook an assessment against the
    relevant criteria of Policy ST2, I note that they concluded the proposal would
    provide well-designed, safe and convenient access for all users, including
    opportunities to promote walking, cycling and the use of public transport. That
    conclusion differs materially from my findings in the appeal before me.
35. Furthermore, it is important to recognise that the Misterton appeal related to a site
    within Misterton, which is identified in Policy ST2 as a Large Rural Settlement
    where a minimum of 195 dwellings is expected to be delivered over the plan
    period. As such, the settlement occupies a significantly different position within the
    spatial strategy to Bevercotes. Moreover, Misterton benefits from a substantially
    wider range of services and facilities than those available within Bevercotes. As
    with the Manor Cottage appeal, whilst consistency in decision-making is an
    important consideration, each case must be assessed on its own particular
    circumstances.
36. There are clear locational and contextual differences between the site considered
    in the Misterton appeal and the appeal site before me. The sites are situated a
    considerable distance apart and do not share the same characteristics in terms of
    settlement hierarchy, accessibility, or the availability of local services and facilities.
    I shall return to the Misterton appeal later in my decision.
37. I now turn to Part 3 of Policy ST2. The appeal site is not located within an area
    covered by an adopted neighbourhood plan and, therefore, cannot benefit from
    support under that element of the policy. Furthermore, whilst the proposal would
    involve the removal of existing agricultural buildings, it would not constitute the
    replacement of an existing dwelling, nor would it involve the conversion of a
    redundant or disused non-residential building that is structurally capable of
1
    Appeal Decision APP/A3010/W/25/3363095
2
    Appeal Decision APP/A3010/W/25/3371669


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     6
Appeal Decision 6007348


       conversion. As such, the proposal does not fall within these categories of
       development envisaged by Part 3 of Policy ST2.
38. National decision-making policy TR3 of the Framework also sets out that
    development is to be located where it can support sustainable patterns of
    movement, enable good accessibility for different users and make the most of
    existing and proposed transport infrastructure. Part 1, point (a) of these principles
    notes that the location of development should limit the need to travel, particularly
    by private car and offer a genuine choice of transportation modes for residents and
    users. Point (b) seeks for opportunities to be taken to utilise existing transport
    infrastructure, especially where this can support walking, wheeling, cycling and
    public transport use. For the reasons outlined above, the proposal would not reflect
    these principles of National decision-making policy TR3 of the Framework.
39. Policy TR3 also notes at Part 2 that the Government Connectivity Tool should be
    used in assessing the connectivity of locations for proposed development. In
    utilising the Government Connectivity Tool, the appeal site would score 13/100,
    thus providing further illustration of the poor connectivity of the appeal site to the
    wider area.
40. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would conflict with
    Policy ST2 of the LP, namely as it would fail to be located in a location which would
    provide a development that supports safe and continent access to walking, cycling
    and the use of public transport. It would also not meet the requirements set out in
    Part 3 of Policy ST2 either. Finally, it would conflict with National decision-making
    policy TR3, which seeks to support sustainable patterns of movement.
Other Matters
41. Representations have been submitted by several interested parties in relation to
    this appeal. The appellant has suggested that a pattern exists within these
    submissions, noting that all letters of support were received from residents of
    Bevercotes, whereas letters of objection originated from addresses outside the
    village. However, my review of the representations indicates that this assertion is
    not entirely accurate. Letters of support were also received from individuals
    residing in Milton, Mansfield and Newark. In any event, I do not consider the
    geographical origin of the representations to be of particular significance in my
    assessment of the appeal. Rather, it is the substance and planning merits of the
    comments made that are important. Accordingly, I have had regard to the content
    of all representations received, irrespective of the location of the respondent.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
42. The Council noted in their planning officer report that they were unable to
    demonstrate a five-year housing land supply and therefore, the ‘tilted balance’
    found at paragraph 11(d) ii, as it was in the previous Framework, was engaged.
    The Council noted that this followed from the conclusions of the Misterton appeal,
    where the Inspector determined that the Council had not demonstrated that it did
    have an updated housing land supply position, due to the significant period which
    had elapsed since a housing land supply position statement was prepared at that
    time.
43. In the Misterton appeal, the Inspector emphasised the need for a robust and up-to-
    date assessment of the deliverability of available housing sites in order to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007348


       substantiate a five-year housing land supply. Importantly, the decision also records
       that the Council accepted the Inspector's position on this matter during the hearing,
       acknowledging that it was unable to demonstrate a sufficiently current housing land
       supply position at that time. As a result, the Inspector concluded that the relevant
       policies for the supply of housing should be regarded as out of date and that the
       tilted balance was engaged, as required by the previous Framework.
44. What is noteworthy when reading the Misterton appeal, is that prior to the hearing
    in that case, the Council indicated that it wished to submit new evidence which
    related to their five-year housing land supply position. In the interests of procedural
    fairness, that Inspector declined to accept this evidence, as it had not been seen
    by the appellant or members of the public. It follows that at the hearing of that
    case, the Council confirmed that while it was working on reviewing its housing land
    supply position, it had nonetheless not shared any of its findings with the public
    and no changes had been formally considered or approved by the Council as a
    public document.
45. The Misterton appeal was approved on 6th March 2026. During the appeal before
    me, the Council stated that there has been a material change in circumstance of its
    5-YHLS position since the determination of the application. It states that it has
    since published its Five-Year Housing Land Supply Position Statement (1 April
    2025 – 31 March 2030), which now demonstrates that a 5.31 years’ worth of supply
    can now be demonstrated. This statement was published on the 5th March 2026.
46. The appellant contends that several of the sites underpinning the Council’s Five-
    Year Housing Land Supply Position Statement (1 April 2025 to 31 March 2030)
    may not be as deliverable as assumed, and cites the evidence presented by the
    appellant in the Misterton appeal in this claim. However, a degree of uncertainty is
    inherent in any assessment of future housing delivery, and it is inevitable that
    actual delivery rates may differ from that forecast. Moreover, the Position
    Statement was published in March 2026, and circumstances may have evolved
    since that time and the evidence relied on from the Misterton appeal. For example,
    sites identified as not having commenced at the date of publication may now have
    progressed.
47. Nevertheless, I must determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence before me.
    The Council's published position is that it can demonstrate a deliverable five-year
    housing land supply equivalent to 5.31 years. Whilst the appellant raises concerns
    regarding the deliverability of certain sites, no substantive or compelling evidence
    has been provided to demonstrate the extent to which the Council's supply figure
    should be reduced, that any such reduction would result in the supply falling below
    the required five-year threshold or a definitive picture of what the supply position
    actually is currently. In the absence of persuasive evidence to the contrary, I have
    no adequate basis to depart from the Council's published position. I therefore
    conclude that the Council is able to demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing land.
48. During the course of the appeal, a revised version of the Framework was
    published, and the parties were asked for their comment on this matter. Policy S3
    of the revised Framework addresses the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Importantly, it makes reference to situations where a development is
    either located in, or outside of a settlement, where either Policies S4 or S5 would
    apply. It is therefore imperative to determine whether the appeal is located within,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007348


       or outside of a settlement. As noted earlier in this decision, Policy ST1 of the LP
       sets out that Beavercotes is not identified in the list of settlements. As such, it is
       considered to be a countryside location, and therefore outside of a settlement
       according to Policy ST1. Therefore, Policy S5 of the Framework is engaged in this
       instance.
49. Policy S5 of the Framework sets out that only certain forms of development should
    be approved outside of settlements. Critically, it notes that certain forms of
    development should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    National decision-making policies within the Framework. The parties have
    discussed and identified points (d), (j) and (e) of Policy S5 in response to the
    revised publication of the Framework.
50. Point (d) of Policy S5 of the Framework states that, outside of settlement
    boundaries, the redevelopment of previously developed land should be supported.
    However, as noted earlier in this decision, the Framework's definition of previously
    developed land specifically excludes land that is, or was last occupied by,
    agricultural or forestry buildings. As the appeal site contains such buildings, point
    (d) is not applicable in this instance.
51. Following its assessment of point (d), the Council subsequently referred to Policy
    L3 of the Framework, which seeks to achieve appropriate development densities.
    The Council notes that residential developments located within reasonable walking
    distance of a well-connected railway station should achieve a minimum density of
    35 dwellings per hectare, of which it is contended this proposal would not meet.
    However, the appellant suggests that reliance on Policy L3 is misplaced, as the
    density requirement applies only where a site is within reasonable walking distance
    of a well-connected station. Crucially, this appeal site is not within reasonable
    walking distance of a well-connected station, and thus, this clarification made by
    the appellant further highlights the poor accessibility of this location.
52. Point (j) of Policy S5 of the Framework is concerned with situations where the
    provision of a development would address an unmet need, including the provision
    of housing where the local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five-year
    supply of deliverable housing sites, or scores below 75% in the most recent
    Housing Delivery Test. As previously noted, in the absence of persuasive evidence
    to the contrary, I have no adequate basis to depart from the Council's published
    position of 5.31 years of supply. I therefore conclude that the Council is able to
    demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing land and therefore, the
    development would not address an unmet need.
53. Point (e) of Policy S5 of the Framework notes that limited infilling within groups of
    houses is also a form of development which should be approved outside of
    settlements. As previously stated, the development would be situated within an
    established built-up area, with existing development located on either side of it.
    These properties located to the side are houses and therefore, point (e) is
    applicable in this case. The question now rests on whether this would constitute as
    limited infilling. There is no numerical definition to what may constitute as a limited
    number. Owing to the small number of dwellings proposed, when compared to the
    number of buildings located within the appeal site, I am of the view that this
    development would indeed be limited in its scale.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007348


54. However, the appeal site is located in an area that is highly dependent on private
    car use to access services, facilities and meet day-to-day needs. This is
    assessment is highlighted further by the results of the Government Connectivity
    Tool, which indicate that the site performs poorly in terms of accessibility and
    connectivity to the wider area. Consequently, I attach substantial weight to the
    harm arising from the site's reliance on private vehicle travel. The site's poor
    connectivity to essential services and facilities therefore results in conflict with
    Policy ST2 of the Local Plan and crucially, National decision-making policy TR3.
55. In my exploration of the benefits associated with this case which have been put
    forward by the appellant, I note that whilst the development would not address an
    unmet housing supply need, it is important to recognise that there is no upper limit
    to the provision of new housing. In the context of ongoing national pressure to
    boost housing delivery, the proposal would make a contribution to the housing
    supply within Bassetlaw through the delivery of three additional dwellings of
    different sizes.
56. The proposal would also give rise to economic benefits during the construction
    phase through the creation of temporary employment opportunities and
    expenditure associated with the procurement of materials, services and labour.
    Following completion, future occupants of the dwellings would contribute to the
    local economy through their expenditure on goods and services, primarily within
    the wider area, given the limited range of facilities available within Bevercoates
    itself.
57. In addition, the proposal would make use of land currently occupied by agricultural
    buildings. Given my findings elsewhere in this decision that the development would
    not result in harm to the character or appearance of the surrounding landscape, the
    replacement of the existing buildings with the proposed dwellings would provide a
    visual enhancement to the site and its contribution to the street scene. It would also
    promote social interaction between the existing occupants of Bevercotes and new
    residents, where there are currently none within the appeal site. As such, these
    matters weigh in favour of the proposal.
58. However, having considered the proposal overall, I find that the identified benefits
    do not outweigh the adverse effects arising from the appeal site's inherently poor
    accessibility and highly isolated location. Whilst I recognise that it would meet the
    stipulation of Policy S5 (e) of the Framework, the proposal does not attract
    sufficient weight under this policy when balanced against its conflict with National
    decision-making policy TR3 of the Framework. Accordingly, the overall planning
    balance weighs against the development in this case.
59. For the reasons above, the appeal should be dismissed.



J Smith
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
