Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 July 2026
by Claire Coles MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007410
50 Nutfield Road, Merstham, Surrey RH1 3EP
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Mr Morris of Woodcote Estates Ltd against the decision of Reigate and
    Banstead Borough Council.
   The application Ref is 25/01684/CU.
   The development proposed is change of use to Use Class E (Commercial), replacement shopfront
    and new stepped and ramped access to front.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use to Use
   Class E (Commercial), replacement shopfront and new stepped and ramped
   access to front at 50 Nutfield Road, Merstham, Surrey RH1 3EP in accordance with
   the terms of the application, Ref 25/01684/CU subject to the conditions in the
   attached schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
   August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
   2024, and all other iterations. This decision was based on the Framework issued on
   the 17 August 2026. I have sought comments from the main parties on the
   implications for this appeal and taken these into account in making my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in determining this appeal is:
          Whether the proposed development would comply with development plan
           policy, specifically policy INF2 of the Reigate & Banstead Local Plan
           Development Management Plan September 2019 (DMP).
Reasons
4. The appeal site forms the ground floor of a two-storey building on the west side of
   the local centre of Nutfield Road. The surrounding properties on the west side of
   the local centre have been converted from commercial premises to residential use
   through prior approval. The appeal site is the only remaining commercial property
   and its lawful use is as a launderette.
5. Policy HC6(1) of the Framework states development proposals should not result in
   the loss of key community facilities and public service infrastructure unless:

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007410


     (a) it can be demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of the use being
         retained, either due to there being insufficient community support for the service
         it provides, or because it is no longer viable or feasible to operate (in the case of
         shops and public houses where commercial viability is an issue, evidence
         should be provided that reasonable steps have been taken to market the
         property for its existing use without success, for a period of at least 12 months);
         or
     (b) the loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by an
         equivalent or better provision, in a location which offers comparable or improved
         accessibility for the community it serves; or
     (c) the decision-maker is satisfied that there is sufficient alternative provision of the
         type of use concerned in the local area, such that its loss will not diminish
         access to key community facilities and public service infrastructure.
6. For the purpose of Policy HC6, key community facilities and public service
   infrastructure means established services that are used (or have been used) on a
   frequent basis in a local area such as local shops, public houses, places of
   worship, local health facilities, community halls and cultural venues.
7. Both the appellant and the Council refer to Policy HC6 of the Framework and cite
   support from the policy to their approach. The Council contends that the premises
   have not been marketed for 12 months and therefore does not comply with policy in
   this respect. The Appellant suggests it is common ground the premises have been
   marketed for 12 months, however I have not been provided with evidence this is
   common ground. Despite this, the 12-month marketing period only applies to shops
   (Use Class E) and public houses. A launderette is a sui generis use and therefore
   does not fall into either category. Indeed, this appeal is for the change of use of the
   premises into a Class E use. I also accept that the premises have been marketed
   overall for a period of 12 months (I will discuss this further below).
8. Reigate and Banstead Local Plan Development Management Plan (DMP) Policy
   INF2 1 states that the loss or change of use of existing community facilities will be
   resisted unless it can be demonstrated that the proposed use would not have an
   adverse impact on the vitality, viability, balance of services and/or evening
   economy of the surrounding community and:
     a. where reasonable attempts have been made, without success, for at least six
        months to let or sell the premises for its existing community use or for another
        community facility that meets the needs of the community (see Annex 3 for
        details on what will be required to demonstrate this); or
     b. The loss of the community facility would not result in a shortfall of local provision
        of this type, or equivalent or improved provision in terms of quantity and quality,
        or some wider community benefits, will be made in a suitable location.
9. Policy INF2 of the DMP is not materially inconsistent with the Framework as the
   aim of the policy is to resist the loss of community facilities unless certain
   circumstances exist. If the requirements of Policy INF2 1a are met, I do not need to
   go on to consider the requirements of Policy INF2 1b. Policy INF2 requires
   reference to Annex 3 of the DMP for details of what is required in order to
   demonstrate reasonable attempts have been made to let or sell the premises for its


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007410


     existing community use. Annex 3 should be read alongside the Framework as a
     material consideration.
10. The proposal is for the change of use of the premises to a commercial use. A
    commercial use on this site would not have an adverse impact on the vitality of the
    surrounding community, would bring an empty premise back into use and could
    enhance the balance of services offered.
11. The appellant has submitted a marketing report with the application which the
    Council accepted demonstrated the premises had been marketed for a sufficient
    period of time (over 6 months) and included sufficient streams of advertising as well
    as reasons why enquiries were not pursued by interested parties.
12. The Council consider the proposal does not comply with Policy INF2 1.a. of the
    DMP as the marketing of the premises overall is insufficient due to the use of ‘Price
    on Application’ (POA) instead of advertising a suggested rental figure, the
    suggested rental figure being on the higher side and based on only one valuation
    and a lack of evidence of incentives. The appellant has subsequently provided an
    update on the marketing campaign including a justification for the use of POA, a
    reduced rental figure and details of incentives used to attract potential occupiers.
13. Annex 3 of the DMP requires the marketing to include basic information such as
    rent but does not specifically reference the use of POA. It is acknowledged that by
    using POA, the rental figure is not included as part of the basic information used to
    market the premises, but I am not convinced its use would deter serious enquiries.
    The appellant has also provided evidence of the use of POA elsewhere
    demonstrating it is an established practice.
14. Annex 3 also requires the premises to be advertised at a reasonable price for a
    continuous period of at least 6 months. I accept the appeal evidence detailing the
    basis of the rental value as sufficient to demonstrate a realistic figure for the
    marketing of the premises and that this confirms changes to the wider rental market
    over the past 18 months. The appellant reduced the rental figure in February 2026
    and in a statement dated the 4th September 2026, the Council accepted that the
    premises have been marketed for a period of 6 months at a reduced rental,
    although I acknowledge no evidence has been provided from the letting agent that
    there has been no interest over the six-month period as required by Annexe 3 of
    the DMP.
15. Whilst the landlord could offer incentives such as rent free or capital contribution as
    part of the negotiation (along with lowering the asking rent), I have not been
    provided with substantive evidence that negotiations between the landlord and
    potential occupiers have reached beyond the initial inquiry stage and that the
    landlord has not been willing to negotiate in order to let the premises. I have been
    advised that a tenant break clause has been offered as an incentive.
16. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the premises have been marketed overall for a
    period of 12 months (6 months at a reduced rental) which has not been successful
    in securing a new tenant for the site. I am satisfied that the use of POA would not
    have deterred serious prospective tenants and that the current rental figure reflects
    the market value. Whilst I have not been provided with substantive evidence the
    landlord has offered significant incentives, I have been provided with evidence of
    an incentive in the form of a break clause for the tenant and I have not been
    provided with evidence the landlord would not negotiate further. As far as the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007410


     landlord contributing towards the fit out of the premises as a launderette goes, this
     would go beyond what could be considered reasonable steps to market the
     property. As a result, I have found the proposal would comply with Policy INF2 1.a
     of the DMP and HC6 of the Framework and would not result in the unjustified loss
     of the community facility.
Other Matters
17. I have taken into account the representation regarding the loss of the launderette
    facility, however, I have been provided with sufficient evidence to demonstrate the
    appeal site would no longer be viable for this purpose and therefore I have no
    policy reason for refusal.
Conditions
18. I have had regard to the list of suggested conditions provided by the Council and
    have considered these in light of the Framework and the Planning Practice
    Guidance.
19. I have imposed conditions relating to the time limit for carrying out the proposal and
    the plans in the interest of certainty.
20. In the interest of promoting sustainable transport to and from the site, I have
    imposed a condition relating to the provision of a secure cycle facility and the
    provision of a charging point for e-bikes.
21. The Council suggested conditions relating to the submission of a Travel Information
    Pack, however this would appear more appropriate to occupants of a residential
    scheme and therefore I do not consider this condition to be necessary.
22. Conditions have been imposed relating to a remediation validation report for the
    site and unexpected ground contamination as it is necessary to undertake external
    work to the site as well as where unexpected contamination could be found.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.



Claire Coles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007410


                                               Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
              Location plan            WC9-117-50-2025-0002   30/09/2025
              Floor Plan               WC9-117-50-2025-0302   18/09/2025
              Floor Plan               WC9-117-50-2025-0201   18/09/2025
              Elevation Plan           WC9-117-50-2025-0702   18/09/2025
              Elevation Plan           WC9-117-50-2025-0601   18/09/2025
     3)       The development hereby approved shall not be first occupied unless and
              until facilities for the secure, covered parking of bicycles and the provision of
              a charging point for e-bikes with a timer by said facilities have been provided
              within the development site in accordance with a scheme to be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and thereafter the
              said approved facilities shall be provided, retained and maintained to the
              satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority.
     4)       Prior to occupation, a remediation validation report for the site shall be
              submitted to the Local Planning Authority in writing. The report shall detail
              evidence of the remediation, the effectiveness of the remediation carried out
              and the results of post remediation works, in accordance with the approved
              remediation method statement and any addenda thereto, so as to enable
              future interested parties, including regulators, to have a single record of the
              remediation undertaken at the site. Should specific ground gas mitigation
              measures be required to be incorporated into a development the testing and
              verification of such systems should have regard to CIRIA C735 guidance
              document entitled 'Good practice on the testing and verification of protection
              systems for buildings against hazardous ground gases' and British Standard
              BS 8285 Code of practice for the design of protective measures for methane
              and carbon dioxide ground gases for new buildings.
     5)       Contamination not previously identified by the site investigation, but
              subsequently found to be present at the site shall be reported to the Local
              Planning Authority as soon as is practicable. If deemed necessary
              development shall cease on site until an addendum to the remediation
              method statement, detailing how the unsuspected contamination is to be
              dealt with, has been submitted in writing to the Local Planning Authority. The
              remediation method statement is subject to the written approval of the Local
              Planning Authority and any additional requirements that it may specify.
              Should no further contamination be identified then a brief comment to this
              effect shall be required to discharge this condition.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        5
