Appeal Decision
Site visits made 11 August 2026
by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007161
20 Crichel Road, Winton, Bournemouth BH9 1JG
•          The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•          The appeal is made by Anthony Wright against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and
           Poole Council.
•          The application Ref is P/26/00262/FUL.
•          The development proposed is described as “Construction of one dwelling with associated
           parking to the rear of 20 Crichel Road”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A S106 Legal Agreement in the form of a Unilateral Undertaking, dated 27 March
   2026, has been submitted in support of the appeal. This secures the payment of the
   Heathlands and the New Forest SAMMs Contributions to aim to mitigate the
   adverse effects of development on the Heathlands Special Area of Protection (SPA)
   and the New Forest SPA. The Agreement ensures that the sums would be paid
   prior to the commencement of development.
3. The appellant has recently provided a habitat survey to aim to address reason for
   refusal 5. However, this was submitted at a point that was too late to be taken into
   account and was therefore returned as it did not accord with the Planning
   Inspectorate’s procedural guide with respect to the timing of evidence submission.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
      •     The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
            the area,
      •     The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers,
            with particular regard to privacy and outlook,
      •     The effect on the integrity of the Dorset Heathlands SPA, Ramsar site and
            Dorset Heaths Special Area of Conservation (SAC),
      •     The effect on the New Forest SAC, SPA and Ramsar site, and
      •     The effect of the proposal on Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007161


Reasons
Character and appearance
5. Crichel Road is a residential street in an urban area, on a hill. Housing consists of
   detached properties in a regimented pattern, many sharing architectural features
   such as hipped roofs, two storey bay windows and brick and render walls. Housing
   is set close to the footpath with small front gardens, largely enclosed by walls.
   Considering the pattern of development, development occupies most of the width of
   the plots, with plots lengths being relatively generous. Save for modest outbuildings,
   rear gardens are generally open creating a strong sense of spaciousness in contrast
   to the relatively hard urban edge seen along frontages. The rear garden of the
   appeal site is generally flat, with minimal vegetation and therefore contributes
   positively to the sense of openness noted to the rear of development along Crichel
   Road.
6. The proposed development would place a bungalow within the rear garden of the
   host property; it would therefore amount to ‘back-land’ development. However, such
   development is not inherently unacceptable and the suitability of such requires a
   careful assessment of a site’s context. The appeal site is part of a large
   development block, enclosed by Crichel Road, Bemister Road, Green Road and
   Markham Road. The pattern of development forms a strong perimeter block
   development with housing around the edge and private rear gardens in the middle.
7. The proposed dwelling would occupy a large part of the site in combination with its
   associated hardstanding and would be visible from the street as an anomalous
   addition to the area. Despite the presence of several outbuildings within nearby rear
   gardens, the proposal would be a relatively tall and bulky feature within the currently
   open gardens that feature in the area and evident within the perimeter block
   development. Consequently, due to its position and overall scale, the proposal
   would fundamentally erode the sense of spaciousness, and contrast with the
   existing pattern of development.
8. This openness would be further eroded by the introduction of an access driveway
   and parking for three vehicles that would present new views of the site from the
   highway interrupting the existing close-knit pattern of the frontage development.
9. The appellant’s design and access statement has identified local examples of
   approved back-land development. These refer to locally approved sites at
   32 Somersley Road and 26/27 Somersley Road. The site of 26/27 Somersley Road
   was a corner plot, where infill development has addressed the highway in a manner
   comparable to neighbouring development. As such, this is not a back-land site that
   could be realistically compared to the proposal. Whereas the approved scheme at
   32 Somersley Road is behind existing development. However, this scheme is within
   a plot that seems comparable in scale to neighbouring development, is close to a
   corner and seems to have replaced a garage court. Consequently, this scheme is
   materially different in context to the proposed scheme.
10. Furthermore appendix 1, of the appellant’s Design and Access Statement, only
    highlights sites on a large-scale plan, providing only moderate scope to make direct
    comparisons. Accordingly, the examples highlighted allow only limited weight to be
    given to the identified local infill sites and these therefore do not provide material
    support for the proposal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007161


11. Consequently, the proposal would be out of character with the surrounding area.
    Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with policy CS41 of the Bournemouth Local
    Plan Core Strategy (CS) [2012] and saved policy 6.8 of the Bournemouth District
    Wide Local Plan (LP) [2002], regarding effect on character and appearance. These
    seek, among other matters, for development through its scale and siting to respect
    the site and its surroundings and to complement and respect the character of
    neighbouring development.
Living conditions - existing
12. The existing dwelling and a small rear garden would be retained with the appeal site
    created to its side and rear. The site is relatively flat to the rear boundary, whilst
    rising beyond to the houses of Bemister Road. The site is enclosed by fence and
    block wall boundaries of around 1.8 metres. The proposed development would be
    close to its plot’s side and rear boundaries, especially the rear boundaries of
    residential plots of Bemister Road and the side of 22 Crichel Road (No 22).
13. The rear garden of No 22 is comparatively narrow and the existing dwelling projects
    into its rear garden further than the host dwelling. Therefore, in consideration of the
    narrow plot of No 22 and the proximity of the dwelling to the proposal, the proposed
    development would be a sizeable and obtrusive feature as seen by neighbouring
    occupiers, resulting in a strong sense of enclosure. This effect would occur despite
    the proposed retention of the boundary block wall, which is around 1.9 meters high.
    The overt effect would occur due to the overall height and scale of the proposal
    which would be much greater than that potentially caused by any noted existing
    outbuildings in the area, despite the appellant’s assertions.
14. Furthermore, the retained garden of No 20 would be small and its use would be
    partly compromised by the proximity of the proposed dwelling. Accordingly, the
    proposal would cause considerable harm to the living conditions, of occupiers of
    No’s 20 and 22, with regard to outlook. In terms of privacy, the proposal includes
    windows to its rear and front. Whilst rear windows could be obscurely glazed to
    prevent overlooking, the front windows would provide views toward the side
    boundary of 18 Crichel Road (No 18) over a short distance. These front facing
    windows would serve habitable rooms and would overlook the existing boundary
    fence, providing views towards the garden and rear windows of No 18. I am
    unconvinced that raising the boundary to two metres would materially address this
    effect.
15. Occupiers of neighbouring plots are also adjacent the site, such as 18 Crichel Road
    and those of Bemister Road. However, the effects on the occupiers of these
    dwellings in terms of outlook would be moderated by distance and changes in
    topography and in places due to some vegetive screening, causing minimal harm to
    outlook.
16. Consequently, due to the adverse effect on the living conditions of occupiers of No’s
    20 and 22 in terms of outlook, and No 18 with respect to a loss of privacy the
    proposal would conflict with CS policy CS41 regarding effect on living conditions.
    This includes the requirement for development to enhance the amenities of
    neighbouring residents and that development that would be detrimental to the
    amenity of an area will not be permitted.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007161


The Dorset Heathlands and the New Forest habitat sites
17. The appeal site is in the zone of influence of the Dorset Heathlands SPA, Dorset
    Heaths SAC and Ramsar site and the New Forest SPA, SAC and Ramsar site.
    Regulation 63 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017
    (Habitat Regulations) require an appropriate assessment to be undertaken to
    ensure that the development would not adversely affect the integrity of the SPA.
18. The Dorset Heathlands SPA provides habitats which are susceptible to disturbance
    by human activity. The additional dwelling proposed, whilst modest in scale, would
    contribute to an increased population in combination with other plans, projects, and
    developments in the area. The Dorset Heathlands Planning Framework requires a
    contribution from the proposal towards the fund for Strategic Access Management
    and Monitoring (SAMM). This proposal requires such a contribution, without which it
    would not satisfy the appropriate assessment required by the Habitat Regulations.
19. Furthermore, as the proposal would result in a net increase in dwellings. It cannot
    be ruled out that occupiers would not visit the New Forest SPA creating a further
    recreational impact. As such, and in accordance with the New Forest SAMM
    Strategy [2024], a contribution towards the New Forest SAMM would also be
    required.
20. The Council state a financial obligation in line with its established mitigation
    strategies, would be appropriate in satisfaction of CS policies CS32, CS33 and
    CS34. The appellant has provided a completed Legal Agreement that aims to
    secure such mitigation.
21. However, to conclude whether the offered mitigation is suitable to prevent a likely
    significant effect on the designated habitats, an appropriate assessment would need
    to be undertaken and consultation with Natural England. As I am dismissing for
    other reasons, I do not need to explore this matter further.
Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG)
22. The appeal site is an unkempt garden area to the rear of No 20. Although the site
    seemed largely cleared of vegetation during my visit, the Council states that the site
    was, prior to making an application, occupied by vegetation.
23. The requirement for BNG is sought under a statutory framework introduced by
    Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as inserted by Schedule
    14 of the Environment Act 2021). Under the statutory framework for BNG, subject to
    some exceptions, every grant of planning permission is deemed to have been
    granted subject to the condition that the biodiversity gain objective is met. As such,
    unless specifically exempt, the development would be subject to the mandatory
    Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP) condition, which requires the delivery of at least 10%
    BNG. This can be achieved through on-site and/or off-site biodiversity gains or
    statutory biodiversity credits which would need to be off-site in this case.
24. Two offers of BNG credits for off-site delivery have been provided by the appellant.
    These are for provision at both the Environment Bank and Wild Capital. The
    Council’s ecologist states that the 10% provision could be made through the
    purchase of the identified credits which could be secured by the imposition of a
    planning condition.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007161


25. Nonetheless, the application is not supported by a completed BNG Metric and
    habitat plan which is a key requirement of the legislation to calculate the required
    10% uplift. Accordingly, the proposed development would not comply with the
    requirements of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and
    Schedule 14 of the Environment Act 2021.
Planning balance and Conclusion
26. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with development plan CS policy
    CS41 and LP policy 6.8 and would conflict with the development plan when taken
    as a whole. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be
    determined in accordance with the development plan unless material considerations
    indicate otherwise.
27. The National Planning Policy Framework (2026), at policy H07, requires substantial
    weight to be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards
    meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community. This is especially
    pertinent in a district where the Council is not meeting its required 5-year supply of
    housing land, with a provision of only 2.55 years.
28. Furthermore, Policy S03 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. Policy S04, for development within a settlement, states
    that such development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
29. The appeal site is within a settlement, and the proposal would provide a dwelling in
    an accessible location and would make use of underutilised land. The site is within
    walking distance of Winton town centre and good bus routes. These sustainable
    locational benefits of the site are consistent with the Framework which seeks
    development to support sustainable patterns of movement, enabling good
    accessibility for different users and make the most of existing and proposed
    transport infrastructure. Furthermore, the proposed dwelling would provide
    accommodation of an acceptable size in meeting the Council’s internal and external
    size requirements.
30. Nonetheless, the proposal would not be consistent with the overall streetscene and
    would not respond well to its context, in conflict with policy L2(1)(d)(i) and DP3(1) of
    the Framework. The scheme would also create poor living standards for existing
    residents, in terms of effect on outlook and privacy, as sought by the Framework’s
    policy L2(1)(d)(ii), resulting in the creation of unacceptable living standards for
    neighbours.
31. In this instance, the benefits of the proposed development, would be substantially
    outweighed by the identified adverse effects of the proposal, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. As such
    the presumption in favour of sustainable development would not apply. Accordingly,
    the identified conflict with the development plan would not be outweighed by the
    material considerations.
32. For the reasons given above the appeal is, therefore, dismissed.

B Plenty (INSPECTOR)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
