Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007390
1-54 Garden Road, Richmond TW9 4NR
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
       to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 20, Class A of the Town and
       Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•      The appeal is made by Mr C Ackley on behalf of Harepath Estates LLP against the decision of the
       Council of the London Borough of Richmond Upon Thames.
•      The application Ref is PA25/4588.
•      The development proposed is construction of additional storey to include nine new flats to an existing
       building.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The application sought prior approval of a proposed development under the
         provisions of Schedule 2, Part 20, Class A of the Town and Country Planning
         (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, as amended (the Order).
         These provisions permit the construction of up to two additional storeys of new
         flats above the existing topmost residential storey on a building which is a
         purpose-built, detached block of flats.
3.       A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) came into force on
         the 17 August 2026. It is a material consideration which should be taken into
         account from the day of publication. Although the revised Framework is
         significantly different from the previous versions the wording of the details most
         pertinent to this appeal are not significantly changed. Having considered the
         revisions and in light of the principles of natural justice, in this instance it is not
         necessary to invite any submissions from the parties on the revised Framework.
Background and Main Issues
4.       The site is a detached residential building which contains fifty-four flats. It is 5-
         storeys, the uppermost storey of which is formed within two timber clad
         projections, between which there is a clear gap. The development proposed would
         see one additional storey added to each of the two existing timber clad projections,
         providing an additional floor on the two distinct elements of the topmost residential
         storey of the existing building. In this regard, the appeal before me is materially
         different to the previous appeal at the same site1 which included infilling between
         the existing two uppermost sections and, therefore, did not constitute permitted
         development under Class A.

1
    Appeal reference 6004697

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007390


5.     Given this background the main issues are whether the proposal would be
       permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 20, Class A of the Order; and if so,
       whether prior approval should be granted, having regard to the matters set out in
       Paragraph A.2 (1) of Part 20, Class A of the Order.
Reasons
Whether the proposal would be permitted development
6.     Article 3(4) of the Order confirms that "Nothing in this Order permits development
       contrary to any condition imposed by any planning permission granted or deemed
       to be granted under [Part 3 or Part 13] of the Act otherwise than by this Order."
7.     The original planning permission for the development of the fifty-four flats included
       condition U35498 DV11 which states: The roof of the building (other than identified
       as terraces) shall not be used for any purpose other than as a means of escape in
       emergency or for maintenance of the building. The reason for the condition was:
       To safeguard the amenities of adjoining premises and the area generally.
8.     As noted in the Council’s reason for refusal the proposal constitutes development
       within the meaning of Section 55 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, it is
       not for an alternative use to those permitted by the condition. The appeal proposal
       would, therefore, not be contrary to the condition imposed on the original planning
       permission. Moreover, the reason for the condition, so as to safeguard the
       amenities of adjoining premises and the area generally, would be assessed as part
       of the prior approval process under Part 20, Class A.
9.     For these reasons, the appeal proposal would not be contrary to the condition
       imposed on the planning permission and Article 3(4) would not prevent the
       proposal being considered under Part 20, Class A of the Order. The principle of
       the appeal proposal would be permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 20,
       Class A of the Order.
Whether prior approval should be granted
10. The conditions set out in paragraph A.2(1) (a) to (j) relate to certain details of the
    proposed development, including transport and highways, the impact on the
    amenity of the existing building and neighbouring premises including overlooking,
    privacy and the loss of light, and the external appearance. Given my findings
    above I have assessed the proposal against A.2 of the Order.
Transport and highways
11. Paragraph A.2(1)(a) of the Order requires the transport and highways impact to be
    assessed. The building is near to Richmond town centre, within an area that has a
    public transport access level (PTAL) rating of three, and a number of services and
    facilities are available within the area, including public transport.
12. The proposal is indicated to be car free. However, although the appellant suggests
    that the future occupants of the nine flats would be ineligible to apply for on-street
    parking, should a Controlled Parking Zone (CPZ) be brought in, this would only be
    capable of being secured through a Section 106 legal agreement and I have no
    such agreement before me. I, therefore, have no means to ensure that the future
    occupants of the development would not own and use a vehicle. The appellant’s
    own evidence advises that, even considering census data, the development would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007390


       likely result in six additional vehicles which would need to be parked on roads in
       the area.
13. Part C of Policy T6 of the Mayor of London - London Plan, March 2021 (the
    London Plan) advises the absence of local on-street parking controls should not be
    a barrier to development. However, it does not confirm that areas without
    Controlled Parking Zones (CPZs) would have capacity for additional on-street
    parking.
14. Policy 48 of the Richmond upon Thames Local Plan 2024-2039 (the LP) advises
    that car-free developments may be appropriate where, amongst other matters, the
    applicant can demonstrate that their development would not increase on-street
    vehicular parking stress above 85% of total on-street vehicular parking capacity.
    The policy advises that this is evidenced through a parking stress survey.
15. At the time of my visit there was very little on-street parking available in the
    immediate area and this corresponds with information provided by interested
    parties. No parking stress surveys have been provided with the appeal to evidence
    the appellant’s contention that the area has sufficient space to accommodate the
    predicted level of additional vehicles. I, therefore, cannot be certain that the
    proposed development would not increase parking stress to an unacceptable level.
16. In the absence of this information, I cannot be certain that the development would
    not result in adverse highways impacts, contrary to the requirements of Paragraph
    A.2(1)(a) of the Order, Policies 47 and 48 of the LP, in so far as they are relevant
    to the appeal proposal.
Amenity of existing buildings and neighbouring properties
17. Paragraph A.2(1)(g) of the Order requires the assessment of the impact of the
    development on the amenity of the existing building and neighbouring premises
    including overlooking, privacy, and the loss of light.
18. The proposal would result in an additional floor above units 1-54, known as Blocks
    A and B. The adjacent building, Block C, is already six storeys and the proposal
    would bring Blocks A and B to the same height. There are windows in the side
    elevations of Blocks A and C and would alter the extent of daylight and sunlight
    entering these rooms.
19. The appellant’s Daylight & Sunlight Report (the D&S Report) provides details of
    the Vertical Sky Component test (VSC), Daylight Distribution Analysis (DDA) and
    Annual Probable Sunlight Hours (APSH) and refers to the BRE Guidance.
20. The text of the D&S Report focuses on the rooms in the topmost floors of Blocks A
    and C, which currently have unobstructed outlook and unobstructed daylight. It
    advises that although the VSC loss is above the 20% target in the BRE Guidance,
    with losses of up to 36.79%, the absolute residual VSC values are only just under
    the 27% target. The D&S Report, therefore, contends that the daylight to the
    rooms in the topmost floors would continue to be acceptable.
21. However, the text and conclusions of the D&S Report do not fully consider the
    effect of the development on the lower floors of Block C. The VSC table at
    appendix 4 details percentage losses for all floors in Block C. Ten of the rooms are
    recorded as having percentage VSC losses of over 20%. The worst affected would
    be room R2, on the fourth floor, which would suffer a 54.13% loss. Other rooms on

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007390


       the third and fourth floors would see reductions over the 20% target set out in the
       BRE Guidelines.
22. Even if I accept that a number of these rooms already have low levels of VSC,
    some of which are already under 27%, a number of the rooms currently have more
    than, or very near to 27% VSC but would see reductions to well below that level
    post development. The reductions in VSC to several rooms in floors below the
    sixth floor would be significant.
23. Even with the flexibility given to the targets, I cannot conclude that the numerical
    results satisfy the tests and standards in the BRE Guidelines, as the appellant
    contends. Moreover, even if losses of daylight that exceed the 20% threshold are
    not inappropriate or unreasonable in London and high density areas, a number of
    the residual VSC values would be significantly below 27%. The change in daylight
    levels would be noticeable and harmful, even considering the existing low levels of
    light. I, therefore, find that the evidence before me indicates that the loss of
    daylight, primarily to the rooms in the third and fourth floors of Block C, would be
    harmful to the living conditions of the occupiers of those properties.
24. Furthermore, even though the DDA indicates that the rooms on the fifth floor of
    Block C would continue to achieve an appropriate level of daylight, rooms R1 and
    R2 on the fourth floor and room R1 on the fourth floor of Block A would see DDA
    losses of over 30%.
25. With regard to the effect of loss of sunlight to the neighbouring flats I note the
    appellant has referred to the BRE Guidelines expressly clarifying that sunlight
    targets only now apply to living rooms. From the evidence before me, the only
    windows in the side elevation of Block C, which serve living rooms, are on the
    corner where the windows also faces over Garden Road. The other windows in the
    side of Block C serve bedrooms and bathrooms.
26. The potential for direct overlooking from windows in the new flats to existing
    balconies and windows in neighbouring flats can be restricted by ensuring that the
    proposed windows in the elevations facing existing flats are fitted with obscure
    glazing. Moreover, I noted that there is already an element of overlooking between
    flats and of the shared communal area and the additional flats proposed would not
    cause unacceptable additional levels of overlooking.
27. Whilst I have found that the proposed development would not result in
    unacceptable impact on the amenity of the existing buildings and neighbouring
    premises in regard to overlooking, privacy or sunlight, I have found that the
    information submitted shows that the amenity of existing neighbouring premises
    would be adversely affected, specifically the flats in the side of Block C and Block
    A, with regard to loss of light.
28. Based on the information before me the proposed new dwellinghouses on the
    existing block of flats would result in unacceptable adverse effects to the amenity
    of the neighbouring premises, with particular regard to loss of light. As far as it is
    relevant, the appeal proposal would fail to comply with Policy 46 of the LP which
    requires development to protect the amenity and living conditions for occupants of
    existing, adjoining, and neighbouring properties, including impact on levels of
    daylight. The proposed development also fails to comply with paragraph A.2(1)(g)
    of the Order.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007390


External appearance
29. Paragraph A.2(1)(e) of the Order requires developments to be assessed against
    the external appearance of the building.
30. The appeal proposal relates to a single building, known as Blocks A and B. It is
    currently five storey with the fifth floor provided in two separate sections. The
    appeal building is one of three buildings on the corner of Garden Road and
    Orchard Road that are predominately flats. The wider area is a mix of residential
    and commercial uses with varying scale, design, and appearance.
31. The existing building is rendered with sections of timber cladding, metal framed
    windows, and Juliet balconies. Both fifth floor sections are set in from the north
    and south elevations. The fifth floors are wholly clad in vertical timber boarding.
    This provides the existing topmost floor with a different appearance to the floors
    below which makes the top floor recessive in its design and appearance.
32. The proposal is for two new sections, providing an additional floor above each of
    the existing topmost floors. The proposal would continue the vertical timber
    cladding and the same window layout, design, and shape as the floor below. The
    matching materials and design would mean that the development would appear
    the same as the existing topmost floor. It would result in two floors with timber
    cladding above four floors of render.
33. However, although this would draw the attention to the upper floors, I find that,
    even with two floors timber clad, the upper floors would continue to be subservient
    to the remainder of the building. The views of the building from the surrounding
    area are restricted due to the density of development. Even from Garden Road the
    views of the uppermost floors, even with the appeal proposal, would be restricted
    due to being set back from the front of the lower section of the building. The
    elevations shown on the submitted drawings are not viewable from public vantage
    points. The appeal proposal would not result in a top-heavy appearance due to the
    dominance of the scale and appearance of the lower section of the building.
    Moreover, the Order permits two additional storeys on top of existing buildings and
    this would always result in additional massing on the top of a building.
34. In this instance I find that the external appearance of the proposal would relate
    well to the existing building and would not result in a building that is harmful to the
    character and appearance of the area. The proposal would, therefore, comply with
    paragraph A.2(1)(e) of the Order and Policies 28 and 45 of the LP, as far as they
    are relevant. Collectively these policies require all development to be of high
    architectural and urban design quality, integrate positively with its surroundings,
    and seeks to ensure that extensions to existing buildings, which would increase
    their height to five storeys or over, respect the local character, including the scale,
    width and proportions of adjacent streets. Nevertheless, this would not overcome
    the failure to comply with other subsections of A.2(1).
Other Matters
35. There would be benefits of the proposal including boosting housing supply and
    providing high quality living accommodation for the future occupants of the
    development. These aspects of the proposal are supported by the Framework.
    Nonetheless, they do not alter my assessment of the proposal. Neither do these
    benefits outweigh the harm I have identified.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007390


Conclusion
36. For the reasons given above, the proposal would not comply with paragraph
    A.2(1)(a) and A.2(1)(g) of the Order and consequently prior approval cannot be
    given for the proposal. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
