Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by C Shearing BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007319
275 Addiscombe Road, Croydon CR0 7HY
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
     •     The appeal is made by A Datoo of Marlpark 275 CR0 Ltd against the decision of the Council of
           the London Borough of Croydon.
     •     The application ref is 25/02716/OUT.
     •     The development proposed is demolition of existing buildings and erection of 4 storey building
           with accommodation in roof space comprising 19 self contained flats.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted for demolition of
       the existing buildings and erection of a 4 storey building with accommodation in
       the roof space comprising 19 self contained flats at 275 Addiscombe Road,
       Croydon CR0 7HY in accordance with the terms of the application, ref
       25/02716/OUT subject to the conditions set out in the schedule below.
Application for Costs
2.     An application for costs has been made by A Datoo of Marlpark 275 CR0 Ltd
       against the Council of the London Borough of Croydon. That application is the
       subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The description of development is taken from the application form but with
       descriptions of the reserved matters removed. The application sought outline
       planning permission with details of layout and scale submitted for consideration.
       Despite the detail of the proposed drawings, the associated documents refer to the
       drawings insofar as they relate to the other reserved matters as illustrative. I have
       therefore determined the appeal on this basis and I have treated details relating to
       matters of access, appearance and landscaping as illustrative.
4.     The appeal is accompanied by a new set of plans dated 18 March 2026, revision
       F. The changes to the plans include an amendment to the front second floor
       balconies and the design of the roof pitches above. I consider this a minor change
       to the proposal, particularly having regard to the scope of matters which can be
       considered under this appeal. The Council and interested parties have had the
       chance to consider this amendment I am satisfied that no party would be unduly
       prejudiced by my taking it into account. I have therefore determined the appeal on
       the basis of those drawings.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007319


5.     A signed Unilateral Undertaking has been submitted with the appeal, dated 10
       September 2026 (the UU). This has also been taken into account.
6.     During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework 2026
       has been published (the Framework). Both main parties have been invited to
       comment on the implications of this change and those responses have been taken
       into account. The appeal is determined having regard to the new Framework.
7.     In determining the appeal I am mindful of the site’s extensive planning history.
       Among others, this includes three appeals dismissed in October 20251, as well as
       a permission granted at appeal in July 20242 and permission granted by the
       Council in April 2025 for the redevelopment of the site to provide nine flats3. There
       is a further appeal currently in progress and relating to the redevelopment of the
       site, which remains undetermined, having been submitted some time after this
       appeal. For the avoidance of doubt, this appeal decision only considers the
       development set out in the banner heading above.
Main Issues
8.     The main issues are:
       -   Whether the development would provide an acceptable standard of
           accommodation for future occupiers;
       -   Effects on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard
           to noise and disturbance, and;
       -   Whether the development would deliver appropriate contributions to affordable
           housing and infrastructure.
Reasons
Living Conditions of Future Occupiers
9.     As a result of the amendments to the size of the balconies serving Flats 16 and 17,
       the Council accept that those units would now provide acceptable living conditions
       and I agree with that finding. The remaining concerns relate specifically to units 1,
       4 and 5 as annotated on the plans. Those units would be contained within the
       lower ground floor level and served by lightwells which would be their only source
       of light and outlook while also providing their private outdoor space.
10. The appellant has provided a Daylight Assessment Report which considers natural
    light provision within the habitable rooms of the proposal. This finds the daylight
    conditions within all rooms would be compliant with BRE standards given the
    results of daylight factor test and illuminance assessments. I have no strong
    reason to doubt those findings. Details of levels of sunlighting have not been
    provided, and this is likely to be limited at the lower ground level units.
11. Despite these reservations, details of the treatment of those lightwells would be
    subject to further consideration at a later date as part of the reserved matters
    relating to appearance and landscaping. The appellant has detailed measures
    which could reasonably be integrated into the design of the lightwells to enhance

1
  Appeal decisions APP/L5240/W/24/3341508, APP/L5240/W/24/3345390 and APP/L5240/W/24/3352094 - 10 October 2025
2
  Appeal decision APP/L5240/W/23/3326610 - 5 July 2024
3
  Council’s reference 25/00262/OUT and varied by 25/01681/CONR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
Appeal Decision 6007319


       lighting levels and provide visual interest. Having regard to the scope of matters
       before me, I consider that an acceptable solution could reasonably be achieved
       which would deliver an acceptable standard of accommodation to those lower
       ground units. The wider site layout also includes areas of open space which could
       be used by future occupiers, providing alternatives to the private gardens of the
       lightwells.
12. Flats 4 and 5 are shown to have a significant portion of their windows in the east
    facing elevation where they would be immediately adjacent to the access ramp to
    the basement car park. Vehicles would therefore pass directly in front of the
    windows and occupiers of those rooms could experience noise disturbance,
    particularly from vehicles accelerating up the ramp, waiting vehicles as well as
    disturbance from headlights, both at night and during day times.
13. Despite this, the drawings show those units to be dual aspect with other windows
    facing away from the ramp, offering respite from those conditions. A condition can
    be imposed to secure measures to address this relationship since it arises from
    the site layout and I see no strong reason that, in combination with the other
    reserved matters at a later date, good living conditions could not reasonably be
    achieved here.
14. In conclusion on this main issue, having regard to the scope of matters before me,
    the proposal would provide an acceptable standard of accommodation for future
    occupiers. This would comply with policies D3 and D6 of the London Plan 2021
    (the LP) and Policy DM10 of the Croydon Local Plan 2018 (the CLP) which relate
    to housing standards, as well as the Housing Standards London Plan Guidance
    2023.
Living Conditions of Adjoining Occupiers
15. I observed Addiscombe Road to be a busy route leading to the centre of Croydon,
    with reasonably heavy use by vehicles including HGVs and buses. As a
    consequence, the site’s location can be described as vibrant, and I observed a
    high level of background noise, as agreed by the Council. The proposal would
    entail additional movements associated with the use of the site, from both
    pedestrians coming and going via the front of the building, vehicles using the
    access ramp and people using the cycle and bin stores. However given the
    attributes of the immediate area, I do not find this level of activity would be
    incongruous or harmful to its character.
16. The proposed access ramp would be positioned adjacent to the boundary with
    no.277 which is a modest bungalow with garden behind. As set out above, there is
    potential for the ramp to be used throughout the day and during nighttime hours
    and associated vehicle movements would be more than the previously approved 9
    unit scheme. The plans show that there would be ample space for an appropriately
    designed boundary treatment to the eastern side of the site, which could reduce
    noise levels to no.277 and prevent disturbance by headlights. Since these effects
    arise from the site layout, a condition could be imposed to secure details of
    measures for the boundary to ensure acceptable effects on no.277.
17. In conclusion on this main issue, the effects on the living conditions of no.277
    could be acceptable, subject to measures which could reasonably be secured by a
    condition and the reserved matters. The proposal would comply with policies D3,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007319


       D13 and D14 of the LP and DM10 of the CLP insofar as they relate to standards of
       amenity of existing residents and noise.
Affordable Housing and Infrastructure Contributions
18. The Council have accepted that, in light of viability testing, the proposal could not
    reasonably make a contribution to affordable housing and none is proposed. I
    have no strong reason to doubt that finding or conclude otherwise. Since the
    minimum level of 15% would not be achieved the development would be in conflict
    with Policy SP2.5 of the CLP. The UU would secure viability reviews at both early
    and late stages of the development being carried out. I have not been provided
    with substantive reasons to suggest the UU would not be effective for this purpose
    and the proposal would comply with LP Policy H5 which supports viability testing
    subject to those reviews. While there are tensions between the CLP and LP
    policies here, the LP policies are the more recent and I am satisfied that this
    position is compliant with the development plan overall.
19. The UU includes other financial contributions such as an air quality contribution,
    sustainable transport contribution and a carbon off-setting contribution. A Local
    Employment and Training Strategy, restrictions on parking permits and seasonal
    tickets for Council car parks and details of energy performance of the development
    would also be secured by the UU, as well as associated monitoring fees payable
    to the Council for those obligations. Based on what I have seen I am satisfied that
    those obligations meet the relevant tests and can be taken into account in
    determining the appeal.
20. The Council consider the obligations should be secured by a S106 agreement
    between the appellant and the Council. Such a draft S106 was submitted with the
    appeal for the Council’s consideration and it not clear why this was not pursued. In
    any event, given the UU specifies the amounts to be payable to the Council and
    their purpose, and in the absence of reasons to suggest otherwise, I am satisfied
    that the UU would be capable of delivering the required obligations.
Other Matters
21. Policy S3 of the Framework contains a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development and includes that development proposals that accord with both an
    up-to-date development plan and the decision-making policies in the Framework
    should be approved without delay. For the reasons given, this is the case for the
    appeal scheme. The development therefore benefits from the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development in the Framework, which is of critical
    importance to decision making.
22. I have had regard to the concerns of third parties, including those raised during the
    course of the planning application. Notably these include concerns for the safety of
    the highway and increase in vehicle movements from the site. Matters of access
    are not for consideration at this time and would be subject to assessment at the
    reserved matters stage. Conditions appropriate to the access would therefore be
    imposed at that stage and given the comments from TfL and highways officers, I
    have no strong reason to doubt that an acceptable solution could reasonably be
    achieved. Having regard to the scope of matters before me, the appellant has
    demonstrated that 45 degree lines could be maintained from the nearest windows
    at the back of the neighbouring properties. While there is little substantive
    evidence surrounding the effects on the natural lighting received by the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007319


       neighbouring properties, given the scale of the building and relationship to the
       boundaries, the effects on natural lighting are unlikely to be significant. There are
       many windows shown on the side elevations of the building which would face
       towards the neighbouring properties, however since appearance is not a matter for
       consideration at this stage, this should not weigh against the proposal.
23. Concerns are raised regarding the loss of the existing building, which appears to
    have previously been an attractive Edwardian home. It is now in a heavy state of
    disrepair and the planning history includes recent approvals for its removal under
    the same development plan. In the absence of a change of circumstances it would
    not be reasonable for the demolition to weigh against the proposal. I am mindful of
    the recently dismissed appeals on the site where harm was identified to the
    character and appearance of the area, but note the Council’s comments that the
    proposed scheme here is similar in scale to another recently approved application.
    On this basis no objection is raised to the scale of the proposed building. Similarly
    I consider the Council’s position on the potential for protected species on the site
    to be a reasonable and proportionate one, given the history of the site and
    permissions granted for demolition as recently as 2025. On the basis of the
    information before me I am satisfied that the proposal would not harm to the
    setting of a conservation area.
24. As below, conditions are imposed relating to controls on the construction process
    and protection of the important trees on the site. Noise and disturbance from
    construction would otherwise be for a limited period of time and separate
    legislation exists beyond the planning system to assist with those matters.
Conditions
25. The Council have suggested conditions which it considers would be appropriate in
    the event that the appeal were allowed. I have considered these in light of the
    relevant tests for planning conditions and amended the wording where necessary
    to ensure compliance with the Planning Practice Guidance. Standard conditions
    are imposed relating to the timescales for submission of reserved matters and
    implementation. To provide clarity to all parties the approved drawings are listed.
    Given the detailed nature of the plans and difficulty separating the matters which
    are hereby approved, I have listed all the drawings as suggested by the Council,
    but stated that the approval can only relate to scale and layout.
26. For reasons of highway safety and the amenity of local residents, construction
    logistics are conditioned. Tree protection measures also need to be implemented
    for visual amenity. Given the passage of time and to ensure appropriate mitigation
    for protected species, conditions are also necessary relating to ecology and bat
    surveys. As set out above, since they relate to site layout, measures for the east
    facing windows of the development and boundary with no.277 also need to be
    conditioned to ensure satisfactory living conditions. Together those conditions
    need to be satisfied prior to commencement as a later trigger could limit their
    effectiveness.
27. For reasons of visual amenity and to ensure provision of adequate facilities, details
    cycle and refuse stores are necessary. To ensure appropriate site drainage those
    details are conditioned. To ensure safety of future occupiers, ensure a good
    standard of living conditions and to meet the policy requirements, details relating to
    fire safety and secure design are necessary, and levels of accessibility and water


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007319


       efficiency are conditioned. Given the proximity to a sewer as set out by Thames
       Water, a restriction relating to piling during construction is necessary.
28. I have not imposed conditions relating to windows and balcony screens, since they
    will be assessed under the reserved matters when the external appearance is
    established. Similarly, given the connection between the appearance of the
    development and public art, that matter is best addressed at the reserved matters
    stage. Given the scale of the site, the established site layout and since areas
    around the protected trees would be retained, it is not apparent that further details
    of biodiversity protection areas meet the test of necessity, particularly given the
    other condition relating to protected species.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given, the development would comply with the development plan
    when read as a whole and there are not material considerations of sufficient
    weight which indicate a decision should be made other than accordance with it.
    The appeal is allowed.

C Shearing
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007319


                                           Schedule of Conditions
     1)       An application(s) for approval of the reserved matters of access, appearance
              and landscaping shall be made to the local planning authority not later than 3
              years from the date of this permission.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than 2 years
              from the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.
     3)       The development shall be carried out in accordance with the following
              drawings only insofar as they relate to matters of scale and layout:
              Location Plan PP-14261986 v1, A101 Rev F, A102 Rev F, A103 Rev F,
              A104-1 Rev F, A104-2 Rev F, A105 Rev F, A106 Rev F, A107 Rev F, A108
              Rev F, A109 Rev F, A110 Rev F, A111 Rev F, A114-1 Rev F, A114-2 Rev F,
              A115 Rev F, A116 Rev F.
     4)       Prior to commencement of development including demolition, an updated
              ecological appraisal and bat survey shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. If protected species are identified
              then appropriate mitigation shall be carried out in accordance with details
              which have first been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority.
     5)       Prior to the commencement of development including demolition, a
              Construction Logistics Plan (CLP) shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. This shall include the following for all
              construction phases:
                -    Hours of construction, and timing of deliveries;
                -    Details of locations for parking of vehicles associated with deliveries, site
                     personnel, operatives and visitors;
                -    Facilities for the loading and unloading of plant and materials;
                -    Details of any site hoardings,
                -    Measures to prevent the deposit of mud and substance onto to the
                     highway and dust control measures.
               The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
               details.
     6)       Prior to commencement of development including demolition, the tree
              protection methods detailed in the Arboricultural Survey Impact Assessment
              and Method Statement by Owen Allpress ref 2479-2A shall be implemented
              in full and shall be maintained for the duration of the demolition and
              construction works.
     7)       Prior to commencement of development, details shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority to demonstrate how any
              ground and lower ground level windows of the development facing the
              basement access ramp will be protected from disturbance from passing
              vehicles. The approved measures shall be installed in full prior to the first
              occupation of the units they serve and shall be maintained at all times.
     8)       Prior to commencement of development, details of measures to prevent
              noise disturbance from the basement access ramp to the adjoining property
              at no.277 Addiscombe Road shall be submitted to and approved in writing.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         7
Appeal Decision 6007319


              The approved measures shall be installed in full prior to the first use of the
              basement car park and shall be maintained at all times.
     9)       Prior to the commencement of development, excluding demolition, a surface
              water drainage scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              Local Planning Authority. This shall include:
                -    Calculations of the existing and proposed run-off rates, which should
                     achieve greenfield run-off rates unless an alternative rate is adequately
                     justified and achieved;
                -    A site layout plan with confirmation of the impermeable and permeable
                     site areas used for the infiltration calculations;
                -    Details of on-site infiltration drainage;
                -    Details of any attenuation tank and any further sustainable drainage
                     measures;
                -    Details of management for the approved surface water drainage
                     scheme.
               Those measures shall be implemented in accordance with the approved
               details, prior to the first occupation of the development and maintained
               thereafter.
     10)      No piling shall take place until a Piling Method Statement, detailing the
              locations, depth and type of piling and its methodology including
              consideration of Thames Water wastewater assets, has been submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Any piling shall take
              place only in accordance with the approved details.
     11)      Prior to the commencement of development above the ground level, a
              Planning Fire Safety Strategy shall be submitted to and approved in writing
              by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved details.
     12)      Prior to commencement of development above the ground level, details of
              security measures to ensure the development achieves the ‘Secured by
              Design’ accreditation, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              Local Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out and
              maintained in accordance with those details.
     13)      Prior to the first occupation of the development, details of cycle and refuse
              storage shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority. Those facilities shall be installed in accordance with the approved
              details and be available for use prior to first occupation. They shall remain
              available for these purposes at all times.
     14)      The development shall achieve a minimum water efficiency standard of 100
              litres per person per day.
     15)      No less than two of the units hereby approved shall be built to Building
              Regulation M4(3) requiring wheelchair adaptability or accessibility and the
              remaining shall be built to M4(2) requiring accessible and adaptable
              dwellings.
                                           End of Schedule


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       8
