Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007179
Land opposite Camel Valley Cottages, Dunmere Road, Bodmin PL31 2RD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Knowles Jnr against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA22/00580.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a detached dwelling and the installation of a sewage
     treatment plant.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2.     The main issue is whether the site is a suitable location for the proposal, having
       particular regard to the local development strategy and access to services and
       facilities.
Reasons
3.     Policy 3 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010-2030 (LP) sets out a
       hierarchical strategy for the delivery of new housing based on the role and function
       of places. This Policy provides that outside larger named settlements, housing
       growth is to be delivered through, amongst other means, rounding off of
       settlements within or immediately adjoining that settlement of a scale appropriate
       to its size and role.
4.     As such, to be considered ‘rounding off’ and gain support from LP Policy 3, the
       appeal site needs to be within or immediately adjoining a settlement. Dunmere is
       formed from a loose and rather dispersed grouping of buildings. The appeal site is
       not isolated, being near dwellings where people collectively live in permanent
       buildings, including notably a terrace opposite. However, due to the small number
       of dwellings within the grouping, interspersed with verdant undeveloped areas and
       the lack of a recognisable centre or wider settlement form, I find that the character
       of the grouping of buildings is more akin to a low-density straggle of development.
5.     This is emphasised by the proximity of Bodmin, which displays a clear settlement
       form and shape, with Dunmere’s low-density collection of buildings being outside
       of, but leading to the settlement of Bodmin. Consequently, I find that this grouping
       of dwellings is not a settlement as anticipated within LP para 1.68 or the Chief
       Planning Officer’s Advice Note – Infill/Rounding Off (December 2017) (CPOAN).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007179


6.      It is argued that a Planning Inspector has previously confirmed that Dunmere is a
        settlement within a differing appeal decision1 (the appeal decision). However, the
        Inspector, did not conclude on whether Dunmere was a settlement, having found
        that particular appeal site was in any case separated from Dunmere (para 6 of the
        appeal decision). This is emphasised by the Inspectors use of ‘even in the event
        that Dunmere was considered to be a settlement ‘ at paragraph 13 of the appeal
        decision
7.      Given the above, the appeal site cannot be said to be located within, adjacent to or
        adjoining a settlement in the context of LP Policy 3. As such, the appeal site is
        located within the countryside for planning purposes and, therefore should be
        assessed against LP Policy 7. This policy supports housing proposals within the
        countryside where it shown that special circumstances, for example where there is
        re-use of a redundant building, where accommodation is required for rural workers,
        or where the proposal is for affordable housing, apply. None of these special
        circumstances apply to the appeal proposal.
8.      In terms of access to services and facilities, whilst there is a nearby public house,
        the nearest services and facilities required for day to day living are located within
        Bodmin. Bus stops providing public transport links to surrounding larger
        settlements are within walking distance, as is the Camel Trail cycleway.
9.      Nonetheless, the route to the bus stops would involve either walking or cycling
        along the highway without any significant pavement. There is very limited
        pedestrian refuge on the highway verge to reach the bus stop on the appeal site
        side of the highway. In respect of the bus stop on the opposing, this will require
        crossing the road, to walk along a short area of pavement, before again having to
        walk on the highway along a section with no pavement. I observed that the
        highway was busy and relatively fast flowing notwithstanding speed limits. If
        pedestrians were to walk along the road, they would be in close proximity to, and
        in potential conflict with passing vehicles and associated danger.
10. Moreover, due to its proximity to a bend in the highway, volume and speed of
    approaching traffic, crossing the road directly from the appeal site to reach the
    pavement on the opposite side is difficult and again could result in danger to
    pedestrians. In terms of the Camel Trail, even if this is a level and pleasant
    walkway, access would still be via the highway conditions outlined above, with the
    trail also being unlit, making use during hours of darkness unappealing.
11. Consequently, walking and cycling from the site to bus stops or indeed services
    and facilities, particularly in the dark, inclement weather or in colder months, would
    be unattractive to most future occupiers and result in potential conflict between
    pedestrians and vehicles. Therefore, even given the proximity to Bodmin, and
    even if the area is part of a network of settlements as outlined in the CPOAN,
    future occupiers of the proposal would be heavily reliant on private vehicles to
    access wider services and facilities for day to day living. This is a matter,
    particularly given the identified lack of safe and suitable pedestrian access to bus
    stops or indeed wider services or facilities, of significant weight.
12. To conclude, the site is not suitable for the proposal, having particular regard to
    the local development strategy and access to services and facilities. The proposal
    is contrary to LP Policies 1, 2, 3, 7, 21 and 27 and policies C1 and T1 of the
1
    APP/D0840/W/20/3247124


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007179


        Climate Emergency Development Plan Document 2023. As well as the purposes
        of the policies already noted above, these seek, amongst other things to achieve
        sustainably located development and take a hierarchical approach to direct
        development based on the role and function of places, require safe and suitable
        access for all people and minimise the need to travel and support sustainable
        travel options.
Other Matters
13. Planning permission has been granted at the appeal site in relation to a storage
    building2. Given that the appellant has previously applied for and gained planning
    permission for the storage building, I consider that there is a real prospect of the
    development taking place and is a fallback position.
14. However, whilst this would introduce a building onto the appeal site, the Council
    have not sought to argue that the proposal would result in harm to the character
    and appearance of the area, and given the evidence before me, I see no reason to
    disagree. Moreover, the fallback development relates to a differing use with
    differing associated movements and policy considerations. As a result, the
    potential for the fallback development to be implemented is a matter that carries
    little weight.
15. The Council are unable to demonstrate a five-year housing land supply of
    deliverable housing sites, with the Council’s published position indicating a 3.9
    year supply can be demonstrated.
16. The proposal would conflict with policies of the development plan as outlined in the
    main issue above, and the development plan as a whole. The development plan
    policies in relation to the matters that the scheme conflicts with are broadly
    consistent with the National Planning Policy Framework (Framework). As the
    application of policies in the Framework that protect areas or assets of particular
    importance do not provide a strong reason for refusing the development proposed
    and given the housing supply shortfall, the proposal needs to be considered
    against Paragraph 11 d)ii of the Framework.
17. Being contrary to the local spatial strategy means that the proposal would be
    contrary to the Framework where it states the planning system should be
    genuinely plan-led. This attracts modest weight as the current strategy is not
    providing sufficient housing.
18. Moreover, it is in a location where future occupiers would be reliant on the use of
    private vehicles to access services and facilities that are reasonably required for
    everyday living. Even taking into account sustainable transport solutions will vary
    between urban and rural areas, this is contrary to key policies in the Framework for
    directing development to sustainable locations and given the identified lack of safe
    and suitable pedestrian access to bus stops or indeed wider services or facilities,
    this adverse impact is of significant weight.
19. Benefits of the proposal include achieving an increase in housing supply within an
    area with an acknowledged lack of housing provision and align with the objectives
    of the Framework which seek to significantly boost housing supply. However, the


2
    PA25/09342


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007179


       benefit to housing delivery is modest given the small scale of the proposal for a
       single dwelling.
20. Furthermore, there would be modest short term economic benefits from the
    construction of the proposal. Further modest economic and social benefits would
    flow from the future occupation of the dwelling and associated spending in the
    locality in accordance with the Frameworks aims to support a prosperous rural
    economy.
21. Nevertheless overall, the adverse impacts would significantly and demonstrably
    outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the Framework taken
    as a whole. Therefore, the proposal would not represent sustainable development.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan, read as a whole. No material considerations, individually or
    cumulatively, outweigh the identified harm and associated development plan
    conflict. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.




S Harrington
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
