Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007187
5 Higher Blandford Road, Poole, BH18 9AB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by S Budd against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole
     Council.
•    The application Ref is P/25/02321/OUT.
•    The development proposed is Outline application with Some Matters Reserved to sever land and
     erect 2no. detached houses and 1no. detached bungalow with shared vehicular access with no. 5
     Higher Blandford Road.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for an outline application
   with Some Matters Reserved to sever land and erect 2no. detached houses and
   1no. detached bungalow with shared vehicular access with no. 5 Higher Blandford
   Road at 5 Higher Blandford Road, Poole, BH18 9AB in accordance with the terms of
   the application, Ref P/25/02321/OUT, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the
   conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. Whilst this made certain revisions to aspects of national planning
   policy, the provisions in respect of the matters relied on by the main parties are not
   materially changed. Therefore, I did not need to consult with the main parties
   regarding the revised Framework.
3. The appeal proposal is made in outline form with all matters for consideration other
   than appearance. The submitted plans therefore show the proposed access points,
   landscaping, layout and scale of the scheme. Although ‘appearance’ is indicative
   only, the submission includes a 3D rendering showing pitched roofs, brick walls and
   a traditional form of development, using traditional materials. Whilst these details
   are not prescriptive, they show one way that the scheme could be finished.
   Accordingly, the submission provides a clear indication of most elements of the final
   scheme, and I shall consider this appeal in those terms.
4. The appellant suggests that as ‘appearance’ is a reserved matter, the submitted
   layout plans and elevation plans are indicative only and demonstrate the potential
   form and disposition of development rather than to fix detailed design parameters.
   However, as layout and scale are not reserved, I find that the submitted details in
   these regards are important material considerations that form part of the proposed
   development, notwithstanding the final appearance of the scheme which largely
   relates materials, colour and final design.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007187


5. Planning permission was given in 2020 for the erection of two 2-bedroom dwellings
   on the appeal site (reference APP/20/00185/F). This is no longer extant. The
   Council suggest there have been no material changes since that decision was made
   in its officer report but has noted in its Statement of Case that the existing house
   has been extended.
6. A signed Section 106 Legal Agreement has been submitted in the form of a
   Unilateral Undertaking (UU) dated 11 June 2026. This would secure the required
   sums to address Reasons for Refusal (RfR) 7 and 8. These relate to the Dorset
   Heathlands Special Protection Area (SPA), the Dorset Heaths Special Area of
   Conservation (SAC) and the New Forest SAC and Ramsar site. As such, the UU
   commits to making contributions towards these European sites to mitigate the
   adverse effects in the form of Strategic Access and Management and Monitoring
   (SAMMs). The Council has confirmed that these sums would mitigate the identified
   effects, I shall return to this matter later.
Main Issues
7. The main issues are:
      •     The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
            the area,
      •     The effect on the living conditions of occupiers of 7 Higher Blandford Road (No
            7), with particular regard to privacy,
      •     Whether the proposal would create satisfactory living conditions for future
            occupiers with respect to floor area, shared facilities, layout, outlook and
            privacy,
      •     The effect of the proposal on the Poole Harbour SPA/SAC and Ramsar site,
            with particular regard to nitrate levels,
      •     The effect of the proposal on the New Forrest SAC, New Forest SPA and
            Ramsar Site, and
      •     The effect on the Dorset Heathlands SPA and Ramsar Site and Dorset Heaths
            SAC.
Reasons
Character and appearance
8. Higher Blandford Road is a residential street with housing that is a combination of
   bungalows and two storey dwellings. These stand within spacious plots with street
   trees contribution to a spacious, verdant suburban character. Dwellings are various
   designs and some stand within back-land plots, close to the appeal site. As such,
   the area, of mostly traditional designs, has a strong sense of speciousness but is
   absent a regimented pattern of development. The appeal site consists of a detached
   two-storey house and its extensive associated plot. The site makes a positive
   contribution to the character and appearance of the area.
9. The proposed development would place a bungalow behind the existing dwelling
   and two chalet bungalows further into the rear part of the site. The type of dwellings,
   and their general form, would complement local development with comparable


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007187


    footprints and scale. The indicative details of appearance seem appropriate for the
    context and a final palette of materials could be adequately managed through the
    consideration of the reserved matter and a condition seeking details of materials.
10. In layout terms, the proposal would result in the introduction of development within
    the existing gap between buildings facing Higher Blandford Road and Ascot Road
    as a backland site. Although backland in character, the development would be
    readily assimilated into the local context in consideration of similar nearby
    development. Furthermore, the proposed dwellings would be substantially recessed
    from the highway and would be largely screened from the streetscene by the
    existing dwelling, vegetation and boundary fencing.
11. Furthermore, the layout shows development that has modest footprints and would
    not appear cramped. Also, whilst plots and proposed gardens would be smaller than
    local examples, this would not readily mean that the scheme would be inherently out
    of character. Consequently, the proposal would not result in an adverse effect on
    the character or appearance of the area.
12. The Council has raised concerns with respect to layout in relation to garden areas
    and the relationship between the proposed dwellings, especially the fence between
    plots 1 and 3. As such, these matters relate more to whether the scheme would
    function well and create pleasant living conditions rather than raising matters that
    might affect the area’s character and appearance. These therefore have only a
    limited bearing on this first main issue.
13. The proposal would include a relatively small courtyard, for parking and
    manoeuvring. This hard surfaced space would be in front of and to the side of plot 2.
    In combination with the long driveway this could create a sense that the frontage
    would be a harsh area, absent landscaping. However, to its benefit the proposal
    includes the retention of existing tree and hedge landscaping along the wide grass
    verge of the access driveway and to the side of plot 2, creating a green corridor that
    balances any concerns about the prevalence of hard standing. The retention of
    these green features enables the scheme to integrate well with its surroundings.
14. Accordingly, the proposal would comply with policies PP27 and PP28 of the Poole
    Local Plan [2018] (LP) and policies BP4 and BP5 of the Bradstone Neighbourhood
    Plan [2018] (NP) and the Broadstone Residential Design Guide, with respect to
    matters associated with character and appearance. These seek, among other
    matters, for development to reflect local patterns of development, for plot
    subdivisions to create development that would preserve an area’s residential
    character and to be high-quality design.
Living conditions - existing
15. The appeal site is within a suburban location where rear windows of dwellings
    overlook neighbouring rear gardens, creating an existing degree of intervisibility
    between properties.
16. Plot 3, a two-storey house with a low roof sitting into the first floor, would be located
    alongside the extensive rear garden of No 7. Drawings show that the proposed
    dwelling would have a bedroom at first floor, with front and side facing windows. The
    front window, looking toward the garden of plot 1, is proposed to be obscurely
    glazed, whereas the side window would be clear. The side elevation of plot 3 would
    be around one metre from the boundary fence.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007187


17. The Broadstone Design Guide [2023] provides distance separation guidelines. This
    requires a 12 metre gap to be provided between the habitable room of a two-storey
    proposed dwelling and a site boundary. The proposed window would breach this
    guideline by a substantial margin.
18. The side boundary between the site and the garden of No 7 consists of a close
    boarded fence. The garden of No 7 is substantial and includes a range of trees and
    bushes that afford some screening from the development. Views from the side
    bedroom window would overlook the rearmost part of this garden. Accordingly, only
    oblique and distant views could be gained of the patio area and rear windows of the
    neighbouring dwelling. As such, the extent of overlooking would be modest,
    resulting in only moderate harm being caused to the residential occupiers of No 7.
    The modest extent of overlooking is deemed similar to the extent that can take
    place from existing neighbouring windows.
19. As such, the proposal would result in only modest harm to the living conditions of
    the adjoining occupiers, with respect to a loss of privacy. Accordingly, it would not
    cause conflict with LP policies PP27 and PP28, NP policies BP4 and BP5 or the
    Broadstone Design Guide with respect to effect on existing living conditions. This
    includes requiring development to not result in a harmful impact on residential
    amenity.
Living conditions – proposed
20. The Council informs that the proposed chalet bungalows, being two storeys and
    occupied by 4 people, should have a floorspace of 84sqm, rather than its 80sqm to
    meet the Nationally Described Space Standards (NDSS) showing a modest
    shortfall. However, the Council has not formerly adopted these standards. As such,
    whilst this provides a useful starting point to make an assessment it cannot alone be
    determinative. The submitted layout plans show the configuration of internal spaces,
    showing furniture positions with adequate space provided for storage and circulation
    around them. As a result, the proposed dwellings would function well and would not
    result in a cramped internal arrangement.
21. A boundary fence would be required to enclose the garden of plot 1. This would
    need to be around 2 metres high to provide privacy for occupiers of this plot. Such a
    fence would be close to the front elevation of plot 3, placing the fence within the
    outlook for the ground floor bedroom. However, I do not find that this would result in
    restricted access to the front door or create such an adverse effect on outlook to
    create a poor-quality relationship. Also, sufficient space would be provided between
    the frontage of plot 2, and the pathway and parking of plot 3, to create a small
    pocket of defensible space, enabling an adequate separation area.
22. Access to plot 3, by future occupiers and visitors, would be relatively infrequent.
    Consequently, any disturbance to occupiers of plot 2 through people coming and
    going, would be limited and reasonable in this courtyard configuration.
23. The front facing window of plot 3 would be obscurely glazed, a detail which could be
    adequately secured by the imposition of a planning condition. On this basis, this
    would not enable overlooking to occur into the garden of plot 1. Furthermore, I am
    unconvinced that this window, despite being opaque, would create a perception of
    overlooking. Furthermore, whilst the required bin and cycle stores would reduce the
    useable areas of the proposed gardens, such feature could be accommodated


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007187


    without materially eroding the space available for future occupiers and would create
    a good standard of external amenity space.
24. Accordingly, the proposal would comply with LP policies PP27 and PP28, NP
    policies BP4 and BP5 and the Broadstone Residential Design Guide, regarding
    effect on proposed living conditions. These seek development that would not result
    in a harmful impact on amenity and include defensible design where occupiers of
    adjacent buildings can exercise effective supervision and control to encourage a
    sense of ownership of space.
Biodiversity Net Gain
25. The requirement for Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is sought under a statutory
    framework introduced by Schedule 7A of the TCPA 1990 (as inserted by Schedule
    14 of the Environment Act 2021). Under the statutory framework for BNG, subject to
    some exceptions, every grant of planning permission is deemed to have been
    granted subject to the condition that the biodiversity gain objective is met. As such,
    unless specifically exempt, the development would be subject to the mandatory
    Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP) condition, which requires the delivery of at least 10%
    BNG. This can be achieved through onsite biodiversity gains, registered offsite
    biodiversity gains or statutory biodiversity credits.
26. The proposal would retain most trees on site, and those lost would be adequately
    replaced. A Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan would be required to explain
    how the retained trees would be protected during construction and in the long term.
    The Council has identified that the BNG details were absent consideration of some
    of the landscaped areas, how these would be managed and whether on site habitat
    creation had been adequately considered.
27. However, upon review of the appellant’s Statement of Case the Council finds that
    there is no dispute between main parties that the mandatory 10% net gain can be
    achieved once sufficient information is provided to clarify a target condition of the
    trees. I am therefore content that this is a matter than can be specified through the
    imposition of a condition.
28. Consequently, BNG can be appropriately secured through the satisfaction of a
    condition, securing details of metrics, habitat types, and management regimes. As
    such, I am satisfied that a BGP condition can be delivered as part of this proposal in
    compliance with Schedule 7A of the TCPA and the Environment Act.
Poole Harbour - Nitrates
29. High levels of nitrogen in Poole Harbour, through eutrophication, is encouraging the
    growth of algal mats which have become widespread. These degrade the Harbour’s
    habitat by restricting the important food sources that are available for local wildlife.
    Accordingly, Natural England has advised the Council that all new residential
    developments within the catchment should achieve ‘nutrient neutrality’, failure to do
    so would cause significant adverse effects.
30. To achieve the required nitrogen reduction in Poole Harbour development must be
    supported by appropriate nutrient credits or utilise nutrient calculators. The
    appellant’s submitted full nutrient budget, dated 5 May 2026, demonstrates that the
    proposed scheme would result in a net annual net nitrogen budget of 1.70kg



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007187


    TN/year, with a pre-2030 figure of 3.41kg TN/year. This requires credits to be
    provided to offset the nitrate loading.
31. Based on the recent calculation, the Council is content that suitable mitigation can
    be secured by the imposition of a Grampian condition requiring the purchase of
    credits, a view shared by Natural England (NE) in its consultation response
    16 September 2026. I am therefore satisfied that this approach would successfully
    mitigate the likely significant effects that would otherwise be caused by the
    increased nitrate load from the development into the Poole Harbour SPA and
    Ramsar site. Accordingly, the proposal would comply with LP Policy PP33 and NP
    policy BP3 which require development to provide suitable mitigation.
Dorset Heathlands SPA and Ramsar Site and Dorset Heaths SAC
32. The site is within the zone of influence (ZOI) of the Dorset Heathlands SPA and
    Ramsar Site and part of the Dorset Heaths SAC. These provide protected priority
    habitats for species including Dartford warblers, nightjars, woodlark, hen harrier,
    merlin, sand lizards and smooth snakes as well as other typical species of lowland
    heathland, wetlands and dunes. The Dorset Heathland SPD sets out a strategy for
    the avoidance and mitigation of impacts of new residential and tourism development
    upon the Dorset Heathlands. I have, therefore, carried out an Appropriate
    Assessment (AA) under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 (the Habitats Regulations) and my findings are recorded below.
33. The proposal is for residential development, and it is likely that future occupiers
    would visit the SPA for recreation. Additional visits from the public would be likely to
    erode the specific interests of the European Site. As such, likely significant effects
    on the integrity of the SPA cannot be ruled out which would harm its conservation
    objectives.
34. Mitigation, as identified through the Dorset Heathland SPD, would be required to
    address the identified adverse effect on the bird and reptile habitats within the Site
    of Special Scientific Interest. The UU would make provision for a SAMM financial
    contribution. This would mitigate the identified effects of the proposal on the SPA, a
    conclusion shared by NE who has responded through consultation for this appeal.
35. Accordingly, following AA I am satisfied that the proposal, in combination with other
    development, would not lead to an adverse effect on the integrity of the Dorset
    Heathlands SPA. As such, the proposal would comply with LP policy PP33, NP
    policy BP3 and Dorset Heathland SPD, in terms of impact on the Dorset Heathlands
    SPA, the Ramsar Site and Dorset Heaths SAC. This seeks, among other matters,
    for development to demonstrate it would not result in an adverse effect upon the
    integrity, directly or indirectly, of the Dorset Heaths.
New forest SAC/SPA and Ramsar site
36. The appeal site is also within the ZOI of the New Forest SAC, which is designated
    for its wildlife importance. It is likely that future occupiers of the proposed dwelling
    would visit the New Forest for recreational purposes. It is also likely that additional
    residential development within the ZOI would, in combination with other projects,
    erode the integrity of the SAC, requiring an AA. The New Forest Strategic Access
    Management and Monitoring Strategy [2023] identifies the need for mitigation in the
    form of SAMM contributions to address the likely significant effects. The UU would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007187


    make provision for a SAMM financial contribution that, NE has also confirmed,
    would mitigate the identified effects of the proposal on the SAC.
37. Accordingly, through undertaking an AA I am satisfied that the proposal, in
    combination with other development, would also not lead to an adverse effect on the
    integrity of the New Forest SPA. As such, the proposal would comply with LP policy
    PP33, the NP policy BP3 and the New Forest Strategic Access Management and
    Monitoring Strategy [2023], in terms of impact on the New Forest SAC, New Forest
    SPA and Ramsar Site, the requirements of which are set out above.
Other Matters
38. Most trees on site, and around its boundaries, are protected by a Tree Preservation
    Order. The Tree Constraints Plan shows that five trees are proposed to be
    removed, consisting of a silver birch, willow, oak and two holly trees, all category C
    (low quality) trees. The Tree Protection Plan shows protective fencing placed
    around the four retained trees which would provide adequate protection during
    construction. The landscape scheme shows replacement trees that would
    adequately offset the loss of trees, retaining the verdant character of the site and
    area. Furthermore, whilst some interested parties are concerned as the effect of
    new trees on gardens in terms of shadowing, such an effect would not be materially
    different to the effect of existing trees on site.
39. Specific concern has been raised by the Council with respect to the proposed oak
    ‘Quercus robur’ tree, in the rear garden of the existing property, alongside the side
    boundary. Its current position would result in a modest adverse effect on the
    neighbouring occupiers. Nonetheless, a condition could be applied to seek a revised
    landscape scheme to address this matter.
40. Also, whilst some hardstanding would be placed within the root protection areas of
    some trees, this would be detailed through compliance with the Arboricultural
    Method Statement secured by condition. This would ensure that root compaction
    would not occur, and this approach received no objection from the Council’s
    Aboriculturalist.
41. In terms of wildlife, the Council’s ecologist has raised no objection subject to
    provision of biodiversity enhancements including swift boxes, bat boxes and
    hedgehog gaps in fencing. Therefore, whilst interested parties have suggested that
    the site could include a bat habitat and provide nesting for birds, this has not been
    demonstrated with compelling evidence. Furthermore, although neighbouring
    occupiers have raised concerns that the site was once a verdant habitat occupying
    a range of habitats, it appears that the site has, in the past, been prepared for the
    implementation of the now expired approval. This has resulted in an overall
    reduction of green infrastructure. As such, the baseline for the current proposal
    presents a site with reduced ecological interest. Biodiversity enhancements could
    be secured by condition in satisfaction of NP policy BP3.
42. Interested parties have raised concerns as to the effect of the two chalet bungalows
    on the outlook, daylight and sunlight gained to neighbouring plots. Properties on
    Ascot Road are single-storey and have relatively short rear gardens. Furthermore,
    the proposed dwellings would be to the northeast of these neighbouring dwellings
    and would potentially affect morning sunlight. Nonetheless, due to the proposed
    separation distance, comparatively low height of the proposed buildings and their
    orientation, the proposed development would not result in materially adverse

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007187


    effects. Furthermore, any overlooking from the first-floor bedroom windows towards
    the Ascot Road properties, of both dwellings, would be limited, causing modest
    effects in terms of impact on privacy.
43. Concerns raised with respect to parking, on-site manoeuvring and means of access
    have been raised by local residents. The scheme would provide an access driveway
    of 4.9m and have one parking space per dwelling. This provision would be suitable
    for the proposed infill scheme being small-scale, being on a good bus route and due
    to its proximity to the town centre, enabling future occupiers to walk and cycle to
    access goods and services. Furthermore, the driveway is wide enough to
    accommodate occasional visitor parking if required and the hardstanding area is of
    sufficient size to enable cars to turn and leave in a forward gear, even if spaces are
    occupied. As such, subject to a condition requiring the provision of bicycle storage,
    the proposal would not raise concerns in this regard, a view shared by the Highway
    Authority.
44. It is reported by interested parties that the area, especially some local back
    gardens, are subject to surface water flooding at times of high rainfall and
    photographs have been provided to demonstrate this. The site is within flood zone 1
    and is therefore the least likely to flood. The Council is content that the drainage
    matters associated with the proposal could be suitably addressed by securing a
    sustainable urban drainage scheme by condition. I see no reason, within the
    submitted evidence to disagree with this view. Therefore, with suitable conditions for
    a surface water drainage scheme and sustainable drainage strategy, the proposed
    scheme would not increase the risk of flooding on site or worsen flood events off
    site.
45. Interested parties identify that sewer pipe runs through the site along the south
    boundary and a culverted stream follows the western boundary. There is concern
    that damage to these during construction would be disruptive to the local
    community. The main pipe that runs along the southern boundary would follow the
    line of the new driveway. Damage to any existing drainage within a development
    site would be a civil matter, but nonetheless the existence of onsite utilities has
    been taken into consideration in the proposal, and I am content that there is no clear
    reason why these would be adversely affected by the proposal.
46. Concerns have been raised by interested parties that the scheme may not satisfy
    fire safety requirements due to the length and width of the driveway and turning
    provision. However, the access drive would be over 3.7m wide, be able to
    accommodate a fire tender and would enable turning if essential at the terminus of
    the road if required.
47. The proposed development would consist of three modest sized dwellings. The
    driveway access would pass close to the existing dwelling at 5 Higher Blandford
    Road and the adjacent church. Other nearby residential plots would be set away
    from the driveway and parking areas. As such, due to the limited comings and
    goings associated with the proposal, neighbouring occupiers both existing and
    proposed would not experience material noise or disturbance.
48. NP policy BP5 seeks to achieve a balanced housing stock. This states that new
    residential development will be supported subject to several criteria including, within
    the inner zone and a 5-minute walk of the village centre, for a scheme to provide
    one and two-bed dwellings. The proposal would include 1xtwo bed dwelling and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007187


    2xthree bed dwellings. Consequently, in providing a two-bed dwelling the proposal
    would comply with this requirement and overall would provide modest sized units
    that would help create a balanced housing stock.
Conditions
49. I have considered the use of conditions in line with the guidance set out in the
    Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). I have taken into account the Council’s
    suggested conditions and applied these, with some minor alterations for clarity. I
    have applied the standard timescale condition for reserved matters and with respect
    to approved plans as advised by the PPG for clarity and certainty [conditions 1 and
    2].
50. Conditions 3, 5 and 16 have been applied requiring details of materials, including
    boundary treatment, and details of tree works and compliance with the Arboricultural
    Method Statement, in the interests of the character and appearance of the area. To
    manage any adverse impact on the highway and to ensure the scheme would
    function well, details are required for a Construction Management Plan, bicycle
    store details, lighting scheme, for the hardstanding to be laid out as shown and to
    provide and maintain suitable visibility splays [4, 10, 11, 13, and 14].
51. Furthermore, conditions 7 and 8 with respect to the submission of a Landscape and
    Ecological Management Plan and Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan are
    necessary to protect and improve the biodiversity interest of the site. A condition is
    required to secure a revised landscape scheme to prevent trees from materially
    affecting neighbour’s living conditions [15], any conflict between this and conditions
    7 and 8 could be readily addressed when the details of these conditions are agreed.
52. A condition is required to ensure that Nutrient mitigation is provided in accordance
    with an agreed strategy [9] and obscure glazing is required to be installed to prevent
    overlooking towards plot 1 [17]. Also, conditions 6 and 12 are necessary to require
    details of surface water drainage and to provide a surface water management
    scheme to prevent on-site and off-site flooding.
53. Some conditions sought by the Council have not been applied. Conditions for the
    use of porous hardstanding materials, hardstanding within 5m of the footway and
    boundary treatment have been included in other conditions. Conditions seeking a
    standard three-year time limit, the provision of a new access crossing, closure of the
    existing access and the prevention of the creation of a new access are not
    necessary for the development to proceed.
Conclusion
54. For the above reasons, the appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is
    granted subject to the attached conditions.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007187


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       Details of the appearance, "the reserved matter", shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority before any development
              takes place and the development shall be carried out as approved. The
              application for approval of the reserved matter shall be made to the local
              planning authority not later than three years from the date of this permission.
              The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than two years
              from the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location & Site Plans drawing number 001
              rev. D; 01 Indicative Plans and Elevations dated 11.12.2025; and 04
              Proposed Site Massing dated 11.12.2025.
     3)       Prior to the commencement of development above ground floor slab level
              details/samples of the materials (including bricks and tiles) to be used on the
              external surfaces of the proposed development, and details of boundary
              treatment, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. Development shall be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details.
     4)       Prior to the commencement of development, a construction management
              plan shall be implemented and continued thereafter for the whole contract
              period, in accordance with details to be submitted to and agreed in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority. The construction management plan shall
              include details of loading and delivery arrangements to the site for
              construction traffic and a temporary car park within or near the site to
              accommodate operatives’ and construction vehicles for the whole contract
              period.
     5)       Prior to the commencement of development, including any site clearance, the
              digging of any trenches and the bringing on to site of any equipment,
              materials or machinery for use in connection with the implementation of the
              development (save as is necessary for the purpose of this condition): (a) A
              site meeting involving a representative of the local planning authority and an
              Arboricultural Consultant has first taken place to identify any supplemental
              requirements, for protecting trees during the carrying out of the development
              on and adjacent to the application site, to the details identified in the
              approved Arboricultural Impact Assessment and Method Statement and Tree
              Protection Plan; and (b) There has been submitted to and agreed in writing
              by the local planning authority details of supplemental requirements
              confirmed at the meeting; and (c) All tree protection has been provided in
              accordance with both the Approved Tree Details and the Supplemental
              Requirements. Once provided, the Full Approved Tree Protection Measures
              shall thereafter at all times be retained until the development has been
              completed and all equipment, machinery and surplus materials relating to the
              construction of the development have been removed from the site unless an
              alternative time is otherwise agreed in writing by the local planning authority.
              Until such time as the Full Approved Tree Protection Measures have all been
              removed, nothing shall be stored or placed in any area secured by any part
              of the Full Approved Tree Protection Measures nor shall the ground levels
              within those areas be altered or any excavation made without the written
              consent of the local planning authority.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6007187


     6)       Prior to the commencement of development, detailed proposals for the
              management of surface water (including provision of final and substantiated
              drainage designs), which accord with the national standards for SUDS, shall
              be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              surface water scheme must be completed in accordance with the approved
              details and fully functional, prior to occupation of the development.
     7)       Prior to the commencement of development, a Landscape and Ecology
              Management Plan (“LEMP”) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
              the local planning authority. The LEMP shall accord with the Biodiversity
              Gain Plan approved for the purposes of the development and the approved
              HMMP required in accordance with the conditions forming part of this
              permission (“the agreed HMMP”). The LEMP shall in particular include: (a)
              details of all ecological matters (including species enhancements) and
              landscaping associated with the development not otherwise identified in the
              agreed HMMP including identification of what is to be retained as well as all
              proposed creation and enhancement; (b) details of all proposed works
              relating to such ecological matters and landscaping together with any relating
              to on-site habitat not otherwise identified in the agreed HMMP including any
              proposed hard landscaping and all boundary treatments; (c) a timetable for
              the provision of all such ecological matters, landscaping and works; and (d)
              details and arrangements as to future on-going retention, management and
              maintenance of all such ecological matters, landscaping and works including
              provision for the replacement of any plant or tree found damaged, removed,
              dead or dying. The approved LEMP shall at all times be accorded with and
              the identified ecological matters, landscaping and works at all times retained,
              managed and maintained in accordance with the approved LEMP.
     8)       Prior to the commencement of development, a Habitat Management and
              Monitoring Plan (“HMMP”) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
              the local planning authority. The HMMP shall accord with the Biodiversity
              Gain Plan approved for the purposes of the development hereby permitted.
              The HMMP shall in particular include: (A) a background section; including: a
              high level summary of all relevant matters identified in the HMMP; details of
              the person(s) who have written the HMMP and who will be responsible for
              delivery and maintenance of all Habitat Provision; and the metric used for the
              purposes of the HMMP; and (B) a section setting out all planned habitat
              activities, including: overarching aims and objectives; design principles
              informed by all relevant baseline information; full details of the Habitat
              Provision; a Condition Target for each habitat forming part of the Habitat
              Provision together with targets required to meet every Condition Target
              including timelines against which progress against those targets can be
              assessed; details of all protective, management and maintenance measures
              in relation to the Habitat Provision to cover a period of at least thirty years
              from the Completion of Development; and details of any identifiable risk
              relating to the Habitat Provision and also the meeting of any Condition Target
              together with initial identified remedial measures relating to any such risk;
              and (C) a monitoring schedule section including: a monitoring strategy;
              details of monitoring methods to be used for a Monitoring Report together
              with intervals for the provision of every Monitoring Report to the local
              planning authority; and details of how Adaptive Management will be



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6007187


              incorporated into meeting every Condition Target; and (D) plans and details
              reasonably necessary for each section.
              No part of the development shall be occupied unless the local planning
              authority has approved in writing the Completion of Development Report. The
              approved HMMP shall at all times be accorded with. If at any time it is
              identified that any Condition Target specified in the approved HMMP may not
              be, or is no longer being, met then Adaptive Management shall be
              implemented without unreasonable delay sufficient to ensure that the
              Condition Target will be met or continues to be met (as the case may be) in
              accordance with the approved HMMP. Whenever a Monitoring Report is
              submitted to the local planning authority in accordance with the approved
              HMMP, in addition to any other information, it shall in particular include: i) a
              progress summary; ii) details of the person(s) responsible for compiling the
              information in the monitoring report; iii) details identifying the success or
              failure of the Habitat Provision both generally and in particular as against
              every relevant Condition Target; iv) progress toward every Condition Target
              including any identified barrier(s) to such progress; v) any Adaptive
              Management required to ensure that the Habitat Provision is on track to meet
              each Condition Target and continues to meet every Condition, vi) Target
              once achieved; vii) a register of activity; and viii) any identified need to vary
              the approved HMMP together with relevant explanation.
     9)       Prior to the commencement of development hereby approved the necessary
              nutrient mitigation credits, comprising temporary credits up to 2030 and
              permanent credits thereafter, to mitigate the impacts of the development on
              the Poole Harbour SPA and Ramsar shall be secured from an accredited
              nutrient provider. A copy of the Nutrient Credit Certificate, demonstrating that
              purchase has occurred, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              Local Planning Authority prior to the occupation of the first dwelling.
     10)      Prior to the construction of development above damp-proof course level,
              details of a bicycle store for at least one bicycle per dwelling shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. No part
              of the development hereby permitted shall be occupied unless each bicycle
              store has been fully provided and laid out in accordance with the agreed
              details. The bicycle stores shall thereafter at all times be retained and
              maintained in perpetuity to ensure that each bicycle store is secure to use.
     11)      Prior to the construction of development above damp-proof course level,
              details of a scheme of lighting along the shared access drive and parking
              area shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority. The approved scheme shall then be fully implemented prior to the
              first occupation of the first dwelling hereby approved and thereafter retained
              and maintained to ensure the lighting remains in working order.
     12)      Prior to the occupation of any approved dwelling, a scheme for maintenance
              and management of the Surface Water Management system must be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              system shall thereafter be managed and maintained in accordance with the
              approved scheme. These should include a plan for the lifetime of the
              development, the arrangements for adoption by any public body or statutory
              undertaker, or any other arrangements to secure the operation of the surface
              water drainage scheme throughout its lifetime.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6007187


     13)      Prior to the occupation of any dwellings, the access, turning and parking
              areas shown on approved ‘Location & Site Plans drawing number 001 rev. D’
              shall be fully constructed and laid out in accordance with the specification as
              set out in an approved plan specification that has first been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority and shall be made of
              porous material. Thereafter, these areas shall at all times be retained, kept
              free from obstruction, be available for use for the purposes specified and
              maintained in a manner such that the areas remain so available.
     14)      Prior to the occupation of any dwellings, the visibility splay areas as shown
              on approved drawing ‘Location & Site Plans drawing number 001 rev. D’ shall
              be provided to a height not exceeding 0.6 metres above the relative level of
              the adjacent highway. The visibility splay areas shall at all times thereafter be
              retained at that level, kept free from all obstructions and maintained in a way
              that ensures that they provide clear visibility to and from the highway and any
              access associated with the visibility splays.
     15)      Prior to the occupation of any approved dwelling, a revised landscape plan
              shall be submitted and approved in writing by the local planning authority,
              that shows the proposed oak in the rear of the existing property on plan 712-
              1-R7, to be relocated to a more central location of that garden. This revised
              scheme shall then be implemented prior to the first occupation of any
              approved dwelling.
     16)      No part of the development hereby permitted shall be carried out other than
              in accordance with the details and timetable contained in the approved
              Arboricultural Method Statement from RNapc dated 21 August 2025.
     17)      The dwelling identified as plot 3 hereby permitted shall not be occupied until
              the first-floor bedroom window, on the east elevation, has been fitted with
              obscured glazing, and no part of that window that is less than 1.7 metres
              above the floor of the room in which it is installed shall be capable of being
              opened. Details of the type of obscured glazing shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority before the window is
              installed and once installed the obscured glazing shall be retained thereafter.
End of conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
