Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Nick Davies BSc(Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007122
58-60 Ocean Street, Plymouth PL2 2DL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Damien Symons against the decision of Plymouth City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01695/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of C4 HMO to Sui Generis HMO for 9 persons.
     Installation of bike and bin store in the rear courtyard.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of C4
       HMO to Sui Generis HMO for 9 persons. Installation of bike and bin store in the
       rear courtyard at 58-60 Ocean Street, Plymouth PL2 2DL in accordance with the
       terms of the application, Ref 25/01695/FUL, and the plans submitted with it,
       subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). Both parties have had the opportunity to comment
       on its implications for their respective cases. I have considered the new
       Framework in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           a) The effect of the development on on-street car parking and highway safety;
              and,
           b) Whether the development would provide suitable outdoor amenity space for
              the proposed occupants.
Reasons
Car parking and highway safety
4.     The appeal site lies in a densely developed residential part of the city. The area
       comprises a series of straight back-to-back terraces with rear service lanes and
       interlinking perpendicular roads. Occupants are generally reliant on on-street
       parking, with some roads subject to permit holders’ schemes. Ocean Street lies on
       the eastern edge of this block of development, and is not entirely typical of the
       remainder, as, in the vicinity of the appeal site, the dwellings on the eastern side of
       the road are set further back from the highway, and many have off-street car-

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007122


       parking spaces within their front curtilages. Consequently, not all residents in the
       immediate locality are dependent on kerbside parking, which is unrestricted here.
5.     58-60 Ocean Street has no off-street car-parking and is currently in use as a
       House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) for up to six residents. It is proposed to
       increase the occupancy to nine people through internal alterations only. Policies
       DEV10 and DEV29 of the Plymouth & South West Devon Joint Local Plan 2014-
       2034 (the Local Plan) provide that HMOs will only be permitted where levels of on-
       street car-parking can be reasonably accommodated to protect residential amenity
       and highway safety. The Policies of the Local Plan do not, however, identify any
       minimum or maximum parking standards.
6.     Guidance on parking provision is provided at Section DEV29.3 of the Plymouth &
       South West Devon Joint Local Plan 2014-2034 Supplementary Planning
       Document (July 2020) (the SPD). Table 30 shows indicative car parking provision
       to be provided in new residential development. For HMOs this is one parking
       space per 2 bed spaces. The additional three bed spaces would therefore result in
       the indicative parking requirement for the use increasing from three spaces to
       between four and five. It is clear, however, that the guidance is not expected to be
       followed rigidly in all cases, as paragraph 8.7 says that where lower or higher
       levels are proposed, justification will be required. The necessary evidence may
       include the impact on the function of the highway, or availability or restrictions in
       the surrounding area.
7.     In this case, there are no parking restrictions, so any additional parking resulting
       from the proposal would take place on the road near to the site. At the time of my
       visit, on a weekday afternoon, I was able to park right outside the building, and I
       observed that there were further vacant kerbside spaces for approximately ten
       cars to park within 100 metres. I acknowledge that the Council’s Officer observed
       parking pressure at the time of their visit, but I also saw that there was available
       capacity within the unrestricted on-street parking nearby in Renown Street. I am
       not persuaded, therefore, that a minor increase in parking demand as a result of
       the proposal would be likely to result in a noticeable reduction in the availability of
       on-street parking, or in interference with the free-flow of traffic or highway safety.
8.     The Council contends that car-free tenancy agreements could not be secured
       through the planning process. However, in view of my findings above, they would
       not be necessary to make the development acceptable anyway. Furthermore,
       whilst the evidence indicates that 71.65% of households in the area own a car, this
       may not reflect the level of car ownership amongst occupants of HMOs in the
       locality. Paragraph 4.166 of the SPD advises that additional pressure for on-street
       parking arising from a HMO conversion can be reduced if the HMO is located
       within easy walking distance of shops, amenities, and public transport services. In
       this case, there are bus stops and a railway station within a 300-metre walking
       distance of the site, a convenience store within 200 metres, and a range of
       community facilities, services, and employment opportunities within an 800-metre
       walk. Consequently, the additional three residents would not be reliant on a private
       car, so additional pressure for on-street parking is likely to be reduced.
9.     Overall, due to the accessibility of the location it is unlikely that the additional three
       occupants will result in a significant increase in parking demand. In view of the on-
       street car-parking capacity that I observed, any minor increase could be
       reasonably accommodated without harm to residential amenity or highway safety.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007122


         The proposal would, therefore, accord with Policies DEV10 and DEV29 of the
         Local Plan and the guidance in the SPD.
Outdoor amenity space
10. Policy DEV1 of the Local Plan requires development proposals to safeguard the
    health and amenity of local communities. Policy DEV10 addresses the approach to
    be taken to HMO proposals, and requires the provision of adequate communal
    space for future residents. However, no space standards are prescribed for the
    amount of outdoor amenity space. Guidance is provided at Section DEV10.5 of the
    SPD, and Table 11 indicates that the standard for HMOs with more than seven
    occupants is 15 square metres of outdoor amenity space per person. This would
    result in a requirement of 135 square metres for the appeal proposal. I have not
    been provided with measurements of the rear yard, but I estimate that the current
    useable area is about half of that. This would be further reduced by the provision
    of the bike and bin store. The proposal would, therefore, fall well short of the level
    of outdoor amenity space advised by the SPD.
11. However, the SPD makes it clear that the guidance should be applied flexibly.
    Paragraph 4.140 says that the site’s location and proximity to local parks and
    public open spaces will be taken into account, as well as whether the proposed
    site is within an older and more densely developed neighbourhood, and that
    exceptions to the standard will be negotiated on a case-by-case basis. Paragraph
    4.158 says that where outdoor amenity space is restricted, applicants will need to
    demonstrate that occupants have good access to public green space to mitigate
    for limited amenity space at the application site. The appellant has provided
    examples of two very similar proposals where this flexible approach was adopted,
    and permission was granted by the Council1. In both cases, increased occupancy
    of HMOs was permitted where the SPD standard for outdoor space was not met,
    but good quality public outdoor space was available nearby.
12. The site lies in an older, densely developed neighbourhood, where small rear
    yards are the norm, although many have been built over so that little, if any
    outdoor space remains. The appeal site does, however, have a private courtyard,
    secured by high boundary walls. All occupants of the HMO would have easy
    access to it, and it would provide for some essential activities, such as drying
    clothes. Furthermore, there is a range of public open spaces within easy walking
    distance. Alexandra Park and Keyham Green Places are within 250 metres, and
    North Downs Park Sports Field is within 300 metres. These provide a range of
    opportunities for outdoor relaxation or recreation within easy walking distance of
    the appeal site. Occupants would, therefore, have good access to public green
    space.
13. Consequently, applying the SPD’s approach to considering exceptions to the
    outdoor space standard, there would be mitigation for the restricted on-site
    amenity space. Furthermore, the on-site space would allow for essential needs to
    be met. As a result, the proposal would provide adequate communal space for
    occupants and would safeguard their health and amenity. The proposal would,
    therefore, accord with Policies DEV1 and DEV10 of the Local Plan and the
    guidance in the SPD.


1
    Council references: 24/00943/FUL and 24/00943/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6007122


Conditions
14. In accordance with the legislation, I have imposed a condition limiting the period
    within which the development must commence. I have also included a condition
    specifying the relevant plans, as this provides certainty. The Council has
    suggested two further conditions. A condition requiring provision of cycle storage
    facilities is reasonable and necessary to ensure that sustainable transport options
    are maximised. As these facilities are clearly shown on the submitted drawings, I
    see no reason why further details need to be submitted, so I have amended the
    suggested condition to require provision of the facilities prior to occupation.
15. The appellant suggested that noise and disturbance would be managed by a
    welcome pack that could be required by condition. I have, therefore, imposed the
    condition suggested by the Council in this regard.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



Nick Davies
INSPECTOR


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: J772-10-01 (Existing Plans) and J772-15-01
              Rev A (Proposed Plans).
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the storage
              facilities for 9 bicycles have been provided in accordance with the details
              shown on the approved drawing numbered J-772-15-01 Rev A. These
              facilities shall thereafter be permanently retained and kept available for their
              intended purpose.
     4)       Each new occupant of the house in multiple occupation hereby approved
              shall be provided with a welcome pack setting out how to limit disturbances
              to neighbouring properties, providing details of public transport and cycle
              routes, and setting out how and where refuse and recycling bins should be
              stored and their location for collection.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
