Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 4 – 6 August 2026
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by Stewart Glassar BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2025


Appeal Ref: 6007183
Glebe Court, Glebe Way, West Wickham BR40RZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by McCarthy and Stone Retirement Lifestyles Ltd against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 24/02895/FULL1.
•    The development proposed is redevelopment of the site to provide a part 3 / part 4 storey building
     comprising 34 one and two bedroom Retirement Living units for older persons with associated
     communal facilities, parking and landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for redevelopment of the
       site to provide a part 3 / part 4 storey building comprising 34 one and two bedroom
       Retirement Living units for older persons with associated communal facilities,
       parking and landscaping at Glebe Court, Glebe Way, West Wickham, BR40RZ in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 24/02895/FULL1, subject to the
       conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published by
       the Government in August 2026, after I had held the Hearing. I sought the main
       parties’ observations on the revised Framework and have taken their comments
       into consideration in my decision.
3.     The proposal is accompanied by a unilateral undertaking. It addresses affordable
       housing contributions and review mechanisms. It also provides contributions to
       address carbon offsetting, offsite highways works as well as the Council’s
       monitoring and costs. I consider this further in my decision below.
4.     The absence of appropriate cycle parking was a reason for refusal. However, the
       matter was resolved prior to the start of the Hearing and a revised drawing
       submitted. The matter was not therefore discussed at the Hearing and so I make
       no comments on it in my decision.
5.     The scheme was amended to 34 units during the Council’s assessment of the
       planning application and they determined the proposal on this basis. Therefore, I
       too have considered the scheme as being for 34 units and accordingly have used
       that within the description of development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007183


Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
       a. The living conditions of future occupiers;
       b. The living conditions of neighbouring occupiers;
       c. Whether the proposed development would expose future occupiers to an
          unacceptable fire safety risk; and
       d. The extent to which the proposed development should make provision for
          affordable housing.
Reasons
       Living Conditions – Future Residents
7.     The overall quality of the accommodation as proposed was questioned by the
       Council with particular reference to dwellings 1 – 3. Concerns were also raised in
       relation to the outlook from certain other units as well as the use of mechanical
       ventilation throughout the building. These were said to be in part a consequence of
       the layout of the scheme and a lack of sufficient numbers of dual aspect units,
       which in turn affects issues such as ventilation and outlook.
       Dwellings 1 - 3
8.     Dwellings 1-3 would be at lower ground floor level. Unlike all the other units in the
       building they would not benefit from the ‘community feel’ engendered by double
       stacked corridors, a stated benefit of the development and a reason for why the
       scheme is unable to offer many dual aspect units. Instead, they would have guest,
       plant and refuse rooms opposite. Internally, their Kitchen/Living/Dining areas
       would fall below the British Research Establishment’s (BRE) guidelines with regard
       to light. These deficiencies would be experienced towards the rear of these
       spaces, around the kitchen areas. Thus, an integral part of the internal
       accommodation which is likely to be used throughout the day would be affected.
       Providing these units with larger, private outside spaces would not in my opinion
       compensate for these internal deficiencies. It is likely that these spaces being
       enclosed by retaining walls and hedging to the car park as well as having the
       upper floor balconies overhead would, at least in part, contribute to the internal
       lighting levels. These factors would also limit the outlook from these spaces and so
       further diminish the quality of the accommodation and living environment. In
       addition, these outside areas would be bound to the south by the car park and thus
       be subject to disturbance from that area.
9.     The appellant noted that some future residents may prefer a more secluded
       outside space and that if a future resident did not consider the rooms to obtain
       enough sunlight they would not purchase a unit. Whilst the appellant may be
       experienced in providing retirement living units, it is not appropriate for me to rely
       on the ‘buyer beware’ principle as such an approach would excuse a failure to
       have sufficient regard to the standard of accommodation in any new unit.
       Ventilation
10. The need for the accommodation to rely on mechanical ventilation, as opposed to
    just passive ventilation, is said to derive from a combination of noise from road

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007183


       traffic and the lack of dual aspect units. There is no dispute between the main
       parties that road noise will require mitigation through the use of appropriate glazing
       to the front of the building. Whilst windows could still be openable, the concern is
       that they would need to be kept closed at certain times of the day and particularly
       at night, reducing the opportunities for passive ventilation.
11. Some units at the front of the building do now have windows on the side elevation,
    giving them a second aspect. However, it seems highly probable that these
    windows would still need to be kept closed at certain times of the day, as they too
    would be susceptible to road noise. Thus, it does not appear that dual aspect units
    would necessarily overcome the need for mechanical ventilation.
12. Indeed, given the nature of the site, its constraints and that a rectangular block
    layout was agreed at the Hearing as being a reasonable approach to the site’s
    development, it is likely that any redevelopment of the site would face similar
    competing demands. Thus, it seems to me that in reality any residential
    development on this site might need to consider some form of mechanical
    ventilation, regardless of whether the units benefit from more than one aspect.
    However, in the case of a building which relies on having double stacked corridors,
    the ability to provide a large number of double aspect units is particularly
    constrained.
13. The cooling hierarchy does not rule out the use of mechanical ventilation but
    requires other, more preferable options to be considered first. In this case, passive
    ventilation is still possible for the units, but I consider that the circumstances are
    such that the addition of mechanical ventilation is a reasonable response to the
    competing constraints of developing this site.
       Outlook
14. Those dwellings to the rear, (aside from Nos. 1 – 3) would have views out across
    the landscaped rear garden areas. Those on the upper floors would benefit from
    more extensive views out across the rooftops and open spaces to the south-west.
    This outlook, despite being single aspect would be acceptable. These units would
    all receive sufficient levels of sun and daylight.
15. The dwellings on the front of the building would look out across Glebe Way. Their
    orientation towards the north east indicated that these units would generally
    receive levels of daylight below that recommended in the BRE guidelines.
    However, additional side windows were included in some units as part of the
    revised design, and this may have helped improve the situation to these internal
    spaces.
16. Any redevelopment of the site would be likely to result in units facing onto Glebe
    Way and thus their outlook would be affected in a similar way. Units on the
    proposed upper floors would have a more extensive outlook which would be
    complemented by views from the external balconies. On the whole, given the
    constraints of the site and the need to make efficient use of the land, the outlook
    across units 4 - 34 would be reasonable for a location such as this one. The living
    conditions would not be unduly compromised by the single aspect afforded to most
    units.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007183


       Findings
17. Overall, I find the need for mechanical ventilation has been demonstrated in this
    case. I also find that the majority of dwellings would have reasonable levels of
    sunlight, daylight and outlook and the single aspect nature of the accommodation
    would be acceptable. However, the lower ground floor accommodation (Nos. 1-3)
    would offer living conditions which are deficient in these respects and so the
    standard of accommodation in these dwellings would fall below the high levels of
    design quality sought by Policies D3, D4, D5 and D6 of the London Plan 2021
    (LP); and Policies 4 and 37 of the Bromley Local Plan 2019 (BLP).
       Living Conditions – Neighbours
18. At the Hearing the Council confirmed that it was principally concerned with the
    effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the residents of Nos. 30 and 32
    Courtfield Rise.
19. Some amendments were postulated in the Council’s appeal statement which it
    was said would address their concerns regarding the overlooking of No.30. These
    were discussed at the Hearing and the main parties agreed that the provision of
    side screens to some balconies and the installation of obscure glazing to certain
    windows on the east elevation would alleviate the potential for overlooking this
    neighbouring property. Conditions ensuring the provision of these measures were
    agreed. Having viewed the site and the relationship of the proposed building with
    this neighbouring building, I have no reason to disagree with the main parties.
20. The proposed building would sit much further away from its shared boundary with
    No.32 than the existing building. However, the new building’s southern elevation
    would contain many more windows and introduce balconies. The provision of 1.1m
    high screens on the fronts of the balconies was discussed at the Hearing and
    whilst they might hide some of the activity and paraphernalia from the neighbour
    they would not prevent views westwards.
21. Whilst the windows and balconies on the ground and first floors are unlikely to
    offer extensive views towards this neighbour’s garden, those on the second and
    third floors would, by virtue of the additional height, have greater potential to obtain
    such views. These upper storeys would also be evident in views from the
    neighbour’s property.
22. However, the rear of the proposed building would be some 19m from the
    neighbour’s boundary and just over 28m to the side elevation of No. 32, which are
    reasonable separation distances in a suburban location such as this one. I also
    note that the third and fourth floors would contain fewer units than the floors below.
    Furthermore, there is already an existing boundary fence and mature planting
    along the boundary which in combination does further temper the extent to which
    the neighbour’s garden and kitchen would be overlooked.
23. I visited another neighbour as part of my site visit. I am satisfied that they are a
    sufficient distance from the appeal site and thus neither their privacy nor living
    conditions would be affected by the proposal.
24. Overall, whilst some mitigation measures are necessary, the development as now
    proposed would not unduly affect the amenity of occupiers of the neighbouring



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007183


       buildings and thus it would comply with the requirement of Policy 37 of the BLP in
       this regard.
       Fire Safety
25. Policy D12 of the LP requires developments to achieve the highest standards of
    fire safety. This includes ensuring that there is unobstructed outside space for fire
    appliances, appropriate fire alarm systems, that building design considers matters
    such as means of escape, an evacuation strategy and access for firefighting
    equipment.
26. The initial planning application was accompanied by a Fire Safety Planning
    Review. It identified certain requirements, materials and construction techniques,
    that would need to be incorporated into the fabric of the building and site layout.
    The London Fire Brigade (LFB) made a number of observations on the application
    submission, chief among them being the lack of lobby areas around the
    evacuation lifts. This matter was addressed in revised drawings.
27. Most of the LFB’s other observations were more detailed aspects relating to
    adherence to British Standards, use of sprinkler systems, provision of a secure
    information box and protection of the mobility scooter/cycle store, which would no
    doubt all be considered at the building regulations stage. There was nothing to
    indicate that these necessary fire safety matters could not be fully integrated into
    the fabric of the proposed building. The LFB did not object to the proposal as a
    whole.
28. Nonetheless, the Council adopted a precautionary approach, concerned that if
    other regulatory regimes required changes, particularly to accommodate
    evacuation needs, this might necessitate changes to any approved scheme. It was
    also noted that the appellant’s Fire Safety Review had assumed that occupants
    could self-evacuate if required but that there was no consideration of personal
    emergency evacuation plans.
29. Having regard to how the building would be laid out, there is nothing before me to
    indicate that the assisted evacuation of a resident could not be achieved from
    within the proposed building. The Council has not pointed me towards anything,
    even in general terms, which might be likely to hinder someone needing
    assistance in evacuating the building or that there would be consequential
    implications for the layout or design of the building.
30. Furthermore, the appellants operate a ‘stay put’ approach to their buildings in a fire
    emergency situation. The appellants also pointed me towards the Fire Safety
    (Residential Evacuation Plans) (England) Regulations 2025 which have only just
    come into effect and which it was said exempt the proposed building from the
    requirements of having to prepare evacuation plans.
31. Nonetheless, the appellant agreed to a condition requiring the submission of a Fire
    Evacuation Strategy in the form of a finalised fire statement. It requires the Fire
    Evacuation Strategy to be approved before the building is constructed above
    ground level. Thus, in the event that changes to the building are found to be
    necessary, there would be an opportunity for them to be sensitively incorporated
    into the building’s design. It would be for the Council to determine whether any
    such changes represented material amendments.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007183


32. Overall, I find that the appellant has sought to address the matter of fire safety and
    there is no substantive evidence to indicate that the proposed development would
    expose future occupiers to an unacceptable fire safety risk. Therefore, the
    proposal would accord with policy D12 of the LP which requires all development
    proposals to achieve the highest standards of fire safety.
       Affordable Housing
       Policy
33. Local Plan Policy 2 of the BLP requires that on sites of 11 or more dwellings, 35%
    of the total dwellings will be in the form of affordable housing. The policy further
    establishes that where proposals fall short of the target, the developer will need to
    demonstrate through viability testing that a lower affordable housing contribution is
    justified.
34. There is no need for me to rehearse the parties’ initial positions in relation to
    viability, which then evolved through the course of the appeal. Suffice to say that in
    the lead up to, and at the Hearing, there was broad agreement on the approach to
    be adopted albeit there were some differences of opinion on the application of
    certain elements. The respective calculations did produce differing figures as to
    the level of affordable housing contribution that was considered to be viable. I
    therefore consider the submissions below.
       Comparable Method
35. To support the parties’ approach to comparable costs, I was referred to a number
    of alternative sites. None was directly comparable to the appeal site geographically
    or in terms of the building and its layout. The appellant’s consultants looked at five
    comparable sites and took more of an overall view, before concluding on a
    £/bedroom figure of £47,000.
36. The Council’s assessment included a greater number of comparable sites and
    then focussed on two which were said to be most closely related to the appeal
    scenario: Keeson House and Grace Muriel House. The Council excluded Bakers
    Court and Elmwood from their considerations given the age of the transactions.
    Whilst the limited number of comparable cases means that the net had to be cast
    reasonably wide, these two transactions were some 4 years ago. Given that the
    buildings are also much newer than the appeal building, I agree with the Council
    that they should be removed from the comparative analysis.
37. It seems to me that Queensmead, Willesden Court and Elmstead are also more
    modern, recently constructed buildings and so are likely to deliver a greater price
    per bedroom than the appeal site. I do not find them to be particularly comparable
    with the appeal site. However, I did note that Elmstead was trading as a care
    home at the point of sale and yet reflected a price not much greater than that
    suggested by the appellant.
38. Sanderstead is located closer to the appeal site than many of the other
    comparable sites that were presented. However, it did appear to be in a better
    condition internally than the appeal building. I also note that the sale price was
    said to include hope value for Class C3 use, perhaps pointing towards a higher
    price per bedspace than could reasonably be expected at the appeal site.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007183


39. It is also possible that the transaction price of Dene Holm included an element of
    hope value given that it was bought by a property company. The building is also
    newer than Glebe Court which may have also contributed to a higher price being
    paid. I am though mindful that there is a price differential in land values between
    Gravesend and West Wickham and this needs to be taken into account.
40. Of the two sites said to be most comparable to the appeal site, Keeson House,
    which was not within the appellant’s list of comparable sites, has certain
    restrictions in terms of layout and this may have some impact on how the site were
    to operate. The photographs of the property that were provided also suggest that it
    may be in better condition than the appeal property. Whilst the location of this
    property may mean lower prices than West Wickham, this may in part be offset by
    the transaction price including an element of hope value.
41. Grace Muir House is likely to have been in a similar condition to the appeal
    property when it was being sold but was no doubt offered at a discount due to the
    lease/land situation. It also has fewer en-suite rooms than Glebe Court so a lower
    price per bedspace would be expected.
42. The limited evidence and information makes it difficult to derive a completely
    reliable figure for the appeal site. The site being in West Wickham may mean that
    it could in reality achieve levels above the £30,000 per bedspace figure suggested
    by the Council. However, there is no sufficiently substantive evidence to suggest
    that it would get closer to the appellant’s £47,000 figure. Indeed, when I consider
    the properties that have been put to me and the reasonings for the comparable
    figures, the Council’s assumptions and conclusions are more robust and so are
    overall to be favoured.
       Residual/Profits Method
43. As a cross check to the comparable figures, the Residual/Profits Method was
    used.
44. The appellant produced a very similar result using the Residual/Profits Method to
    that found in their comparable results. The implication of this being that it
    underlined the robustness of the approach/figures. However, their estimated costs
    of the refurbishment works were unclear. At the Hearing more detail was
    presented on behalf of the appellant as to the refurbishment costs involved. Whilst
    I do not doubt the appellant’s consultant and their experience, particularly of
    operators using their own in-house teams to help reduce costs, there was little
    substantive evidence to support the case.
45. In contrast, the Council’s figures were based on RICS Building Cost Information
    Service (BCIS) average costs data. Given that BCIS is an independent source of
    information, it does to my mind offer a more rounded approach and in a situation
    such as this, one on which I can more readily rely.
46. Following discussions at the Hearing as to whether the appropriate categories
    from BCIS were used, the Council has revised its refurbishment costs down from
    just over £2.7m to just under £1.75m. Nonetheless, this revised refurbishment cost
    is still far in excess of the appellant’s initial estimate of £905,000 for the costs of
    the refurbishment.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007183


47. Consequently, I do not find the appellant’s refurbishment costs to have been
    sufficiently evidenced. To my mind this undermines the suggestion that the close
    correlation between their comparable and residual figures intrinsically proves them
    to be correct.
48. The Council’s approach is more nuanced, acknowledging aspects such as time lag
    and Gross Development Value growth to explain the difference between their
    Residual/Profit approach and that of the higher Comparable results. Given that the
    comparable evidence is limited and the time frames over which they are
    presented, the time lag and thus GDV growth seem likely to play a part in the
    different figures.
49. Some items such as fees, profit target, purchasers’ costs were in dispute, but the
    Council conceded in favour of the appellant, despite there being grounds to pursue
    the matters. Similarly, it would seem sensible to use the figure of 7.5% for finance
    and so be consistent across the exercise. These disputed points and the revised
    refurbishment costs do have some effect on the Council’s eventual residual figure
    but do not make a difference to the Council adopting the higher £1.41m
    comparable valuation in the overall viability calculations. This seems to be a
    reasonable approach in the circumstances.
       Viability Findings
50. Taking all the above considerations into account, I find that the Council’s figures
    and viability calculations are reasonable in the circumstances of this case and are
    to be preferred. Thus, I find that the viability position is that the scheme can
    provide a £1.175m contribution towards affordable housing.
       Vacant Building Credit
51. Planning Practice Guidance (the PPG) identifies the concept of Vacant Building
    Credit (VBC) as an incentive for brownfield development on sites containing
    vacant buildings. The PPG sets out the purpose of the approach, which is to
    provide an incentive for brownfield development on sites containing vacant
    buildings. The Framework supports the re-use of brownfield land and indicates that
    where proposals include the reuse or redevelopment of vacant buildings, any
    affordable housing contributions which are due should be reduced by a
    proportionate amount.
52. The PPG sets out certain factors against which it may be appropriate to consider
    individual schemes. However, before it does that, the PPG is clear that in
    considering how the VBC should apply to a particular development, local planning
    authorities should have regard to the intention of national policy. Thus, the
    application of VBC is discretionary rather than mandatory.
53. It was only at the appeal stage that the appellants introduced the issue of VBC into
    their viability appraisal. This coincided with their viability calculations showing a
    surplus, whereas initially there was not said to be sufficient viability to be able to
    provide an affordable housing contribution.
54. Thus, the issue subtly shifted to become one of not whether an affordable housing
    contribution should be paid but rather how much it should be. The application of
    VBC would in this case appear to be simply a mechanism to act as an upper limit



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007183


       to any affordable housing contribution, rather than as an incentive to develop a
       brownfield site.
55. The Mayor’s guidance on the application of VBC pre-dates the Framework and
    there is no Local Plan policy on this particular matter. Nonetheless, given the
    imperative in the Local Plan, the London Plan and in national policy, to deliver
    affordable housing and consistent with the discretionary approach to the
    application of VBC in the Framework and PPG, I do not consider that VBC should
    apply in this case.
56. I am mindful that the Viability Statement of Common Ground (August 2026)
    demonstrates that even if I were to agree that VBC were applicable, the cap that
    would be applied to this scheme (£1,217,975) would exceed the figure of
    £1,175,00 which I have deemed the viable affordable housing contribution. Thus,
    the VBC would have no effect on the initial level of contribution. However, the
    unilateral undertaking provided with the appeal includes provision to apply the
    VBC as part of the review mechanisms unless this decision indicates otherwise.
    Therefore, for that reason and the avoidance of doubt, I confirm that no such
    deduction in relation to VBC should be made in relation to this scheme.
       Payment in Lieu
57. Both the London Plan and the Local Plan seek the provision of on-site affordable
    housing where it is viable. The respective policies allow for off-site
    provision/payment in lieu if there are exceptional circumstances although these are
    not defined. The viability figures discussed above were calculated on the basis of
    the contribution being a payment in lieu of on-site provision whilst acknowledging
    that this was not the Council’s preferred approach.
58. The appellant contacted 29 registered providers as part of the application process
    to gauge the level of potential interest. At the Hearing copies of correspondence
    with 6 providers was submitted. These indicated that the approach was on the
    basis of the development needing to provide a full, policy compliant scheme.
    Although it would have been useful to have had fuller details of all the interactions
    with providers as part of the appeal submissions, these 6 responses did
    nonetheless reflect the situation as set out in the appellant’s evidence. I have no
    reason to believe that the other 23 providers were not contacted on a similar basis
    or that their responses were any different to that recorded in the appellant’s
    evidence.
59. In short, the nature of the accommodation, the number of units and how they were
    to be provided (i.e. with communal facilities) meant that either from a cost or
    operational point of view there was no provider interested in taking units at the
    appeal site. At the Hearing it was suggested that the Council might be interested in
    taking units but there was no substantive evidence to demonstrate that this was
    likely to occur or financially possible. It was also suggested by the Council that the
    appellant had in the past acted as a registered provider albeit details were limited.
    It was then subsequently explained as having occurred when a Homes England
    grant was available for shared ownership on a site, and thus it was not a regular
    route for affordable housing provision in retirement living schemes.
60. On-site provision of affordable housing is clearly the desirable approach. However,
    in this particular case, the appellant has demonstrated that there is a lack of
    demand from registered providers due to the size of the scheme and the way in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007183


       which it would operate. Whilst this does not mean that other similar schemes will
       necessarily always be unable to deliver on-site affordable housing, in this
       particular case I am satisfied that the circumstances dictate that an off-site
       payment in lieu would be acceptable.
       Conclusion on Affordable Housing
61. I find that the Council’s viability calculations are to be preferred and that the
    scheme should provide a contribution of £1.175m as set out in the Viability
    Statement of Common Ground (August 2026). I have not found that VBC should
    apply to the scheme, but I have found that this contribution can be delivered as a
    payment in lieu of on-site provision. On this basis, the proposal would accord with
    Policies H4 and H5 of the LP and Policy 2 of the BLP in delivering an appropriate
    level of affordable housing contribution.
Other Matters
62. The main parties agreed that the housing land supply figure as of October 2025
    was 1.93 years. It therefore falls well below the objective of national policy which is
    to increase the supply of homes. There is also no dispute that there is a need for
    older persons accommodation in the area.
63. The government revised the Framework following the close of the Hearing and the
    main parties were given an opportunity to provide comments on the new
    document. Policy S4 which addresses the principle of development within
    settlements makes it clear that in such locations development proposals should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    this Framework.
64. In tandem with S4, Policy HO7 places substantial weight on the provision of new
    homes which, as is the case here, contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. The redevelopment of the former care
    home can therefore also be seen as making effective use of land, in accordance
    with Policy L2.
65. I am satisfied in this case with the level of affordable housing contribution and that
    it is provided as a payment in lieu and so there is no conflict with Policies DM5 or
    HO8. My finding in relation to fire safety leads me to conclude that there is similarly
    no conflict with Policy DM7. My observations regarding the use of mechanical
    ventilation do not conflict with Policy P1 and I am satisfied that there is no conflict
    with Policy DP3 regarding the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
66. However, there is some conflict with Policy P3 as regards dwellings 1-3 as this
    policy seeks to ensure, amongst other things, that occupiers have acceptable
    levels of daylight and sunlight. I am mindful that this is not a policy which directs
    permission to be refused if conflict is identified.
67. The proposal is also accompanied by a unilateral undertaking. It provides for an
    affordable housing contribution, which I have indicated should be £1.175m and
    allows for early and late stage reviews, which I have also indicated should not
    include a VBC component.
68. It also provides contributions of £36,765 to address carbon offsetting, offsite
    highways contribution of £85,000 for highway, pedestrian, cycleway and traffic

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6007183


       management improvements on Addington Road. It is anticipated that these
       highway works will principally involve a new pedestrian crossing that will enable
       residents to more easily access local facilities. Various monitoring fees and costs
       are also provided for in the document.
69. Payments are to be made on commencement of development for the affordable
    housing, monitoring and carbon off-set payments whereas the highways
    contribution is upon first occupation. This may slightly delay the delivery of the
    highways works/crossing but given the anticipated timescale for sales of units
    within the scheme, there is no reason to assume that it would not be fully
    implemented by the time the development were fully occupied. I consider this to be
    reasonable and thus the obligation should ensure timely delivery of the highway
    works/crossing.
70. I am satisfied that the obligations make the proposal acceptable in planning terms
    and accord with Policy DM6 of the Framework and Regulation 122 of the
    Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 (as amended).
Planning Balance
71. I have found conflict with the development plan given the likely living conditions of
    the occupiers of dwellings 1 - 3. Given the nature of the harms I have identified,
    and notwithstanding the fact that only a limited number of dwelling units within the
    scheme would be adversely affected, this carries considerable weight. In other
    respects, I have found the scheme to be compliant with the relevant policies of the
    development plan.
72. The Framework similarly indicates that the effect on the living conditions of future
    occupiers should weigh against a proposal. However, this harm must be
    considered against the Framework’s starting point that development within a
    settlement should be approved and that substantial weight should be given to the
    provision of housing, especially in a context of this area’s housing supply situation.
    Therefore, whilst dwellings 1-3 would be a negative aspect of the proposal, I do
    not find the level of harm to substantially outweigh the benefits of the scheme.
    Therefore, the Framework indicates that permission should be granted.
Conditions
73. The matter of conditions was discussed at the Hearing. An agreed list of conditions
    was subsequently provided by the two main parties, which also reflected my own
    observations, which had regard to the Framework and the advice in the PPG.
74. In addition to the standard time limit, a condition setting out the approved plans is
    necessary in the interests of certainty. As the proposal has been assessed on the
    basis of being restricted to persons aged 55 and above, a condition limiting the
    accommodation in this way is reasonable.
75. To ensure the development functions as intended, details relating to noise
    mitigation measures, drainage, wheelchair accessible units, refuse storage, cycle
    parking, car parking, access and highways works, fire safety, delivery and
    servicing will all need to be provided. In order to protect local residents, a separate
    condition controlling all Non-Road Mobile Machinery is necessary.
76. To ensure the development positively affects the biodiversity and ecology of the
    site, enhancement and management details will need to be submitted, together

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6007183


       with landscaping plans. Conditions ensuring the implementation of the
       precautionary measures set out in the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal are also
       necessary.
77. Conditions addressing energy monitoring and assessment are necessary to
    ensure the development minimises energy usage and achieves the necessary
    zero-carbon targets set out in the development plan. Similarly, a condition on
    water usage would accord with the London Plan.
78. As discussed at the Hearing, conditions addressing the provision of screening and
    obscure glazing are required to address the effect of the development on the
    adjacent neighbour. A separate condition requiring these materials and other
    external surface treatments to be agreed by the Council will be necessary to
    ensure the building is of an appropriate finish and appearance.
79. A condition requiring the development to achieve Secure by Design accreditation
    would also help to ensure the risk of crime is minimised.
80. A number of pre-commencement conditions are necessary. In submitting the
    conditions, the email confirmed the appellant’s agreement to the conditions as a
    whole and I have taken this to include their agreement to the pre-commencement
    conditions. Given the nature of the site and its location, the following matters need
    to be addressed by pre-commencement conditions in order to protect local
    residents and road users: Construction and Environmental Management Plan;
    construction logistics; plant noise; land contamination reporting; slab level details,
    tree protection; and lighting.
Conclusion
81. The proposed development would not fully adhere to the development plan but
    material considerations, in this case the Framework, indicate that a decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal
    succeeds subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.

Stewart Glassar
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6007183


APPEARANCES


FOR THE APPELLANT:
Robert Walton KC   Barrister, Landmark Chambers
Ian Hann           Principal Planning Associate, The Planning Bureau
Carla Fulgoni-Rowe Group Planning Manager, The Planning Bureau
Dan Brunt          Architect, Re-Format
Samuel Carson      Partner, Alder King
John Hodgkins      Registered Valuer, Christie & Co


FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:
Claire Brew      Development Management Team Leader – Major Developments
Karen Daye       Appeals & Enforcement Team Leader
Amina Bhikoo     Principal Planner
Benjamin Terry   Urban Design Officer
Clare Jones      Registered Valuer, Director: BPS Chartered Surveyors
Neil Powling     Chartered Project Management Surveyor, PDM


INTERESTED PERSONS:
Yvonne Hall     Chair, Residents Panel
Zarina Sheikh   Local Resident


Documents submitted during the Hearing:
Copies of emails from Registered Providers
Updated list of draft planning conditions
Extracts from Draft London Plan and Panel Report


Documents submitted after the Hearing:
Viability Statement of Common Ground
Signed and completed legal agreement
Comments on revised National Planning Policy Framework




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6007183


Schedule of Conditions

1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
        date of this decision.

2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans and documents:

        Plans:
        Main Entrance View Visualisation Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0603 Rev P02
        Rear View Visualisation Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0601 Rev P02
        Front View Visualisation Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0600 Rev P02
        Updated Sections Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0500 RevP03
        Elevations Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0401 Rev P02
        Elevations Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0400 Rev P02
        Roof Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0205 Rev P03
        Third Floor Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0204 Rev P03
        Second Floor Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0203 Rev P03
        First Floor Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0202 Rev P03
        Upper Ground Floor Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0201 Rev P03
        Lower Ground Floor Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0200 Rev P02
        Site Plan Ref: LSE-2899-03-AC-0100 Rev P03
        Design and Access Statement Addendum, dated May 2025
        Accommodation Schedule Ref: LSE 2899-02-A-0800 Rev P01
        Ground Investigations Report Parts 1, 2, 3 & 4
        Apartment 11 – 1:50 accessible/ wheelchair apartment layout Ref: LSE-2899-02-
        A-1200 Rev P01, dated June 2023
        Apartment 15 – 1:50 accessible/ wheelchair apartment layout Ref: LSE-2899-02-
        A-1201 Rev P01, dated June 2023
        Apartment 25 – 1:50 accessible/ wheelchair apartment layout Ref: LSE-2899-02-
        A-1202 Rev P01, dated June 2023
        Apartment 33 – 1:50 accessible/ wheelchair apartment layout Ref: LSE-2899-02-
        A-1203 Rev P01, dated June 2023
        Waste Strategy Drawing Ref: LSE-2899-02-A-0700 Rev P01, dated June 2023
        Location Plan Ref: LSE-2899-02-A-0001 Rev P03, dated June 2023
        Tree Constraints Plan Ref: 2253-KC-XX-YTREE-TCP01 Rev 0, dated February
        2024
        Proposed Cycle Provision Ref: LSE-2899-02-AC-0206 Rev P01, dated July 2026

        Documents:
        Updated Biodiversity Net Gain Matrix
        Updated Landscape Report
        Tree Protection Plan Ref: 2253-KC-XX-YTREE-TPP01Rev0
        Transport Technical Note
        ADO Dynamic Thermal Model Report West Wickham, dated September 2025
        Landscape Design Report, dated December 2024. Ref: LSE-2899-02-LA-0900
        Construction Logistics Plan & Construction Environmental Management Plan,
        dated 14 March 2024
        Preliminary Ecological Appraisal, dated 24 April 2024
        Drainage Strategy Report Including Wastewater Strategy, dated April 2024
        Statement of Community Involvement, dated July 2024
        Daylight and Sunlight Report, dated 26 July 2024

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6007183


        Healthy Streets Transport Statement, dated July 2024
        Archaeological Desk Based Assessment, dated 7 July 2023
        Travel Plan, dated July 2024
        Noise Assessment, dated 24 July 2024. Ref: R10377-1 Rev 1
        Fire Safety Planning Review, dated July 2024. Project Reference: FE1800 Rev 4
        Planning Statement, dated July 2024
        Air Quality Assessment, by Cass Allen, dated 21 March 2024. Report Ref: RP01-
        24121-R1
        Energy Statement by Focus, dated July 2024
        Tree Survey, dated February 2024. Ref: 2253-KC-XX-YTREE-TreeSurvery Rev0

3)      The development hereby approved shall be constructed to comply with the GLA
        'Be Seen' energy monitoring requirements set out in points a, b, c and d below for
        at least five years:

        a. Within six weeks of planning permission being issued, accurate and verified
           estimates of the 'be seen' energy performance indicators, as outlined in
           Chapter 3 'Planning stage' of the GLA 'Be seen' energy monitoring guidance
           shall be submitted to the GLA's monitoring portal and Local Planning Authority
           for information.
        b. Once the as-built design has been completed and prior to occupation updated
           accurate and verified estimates of the 'be seen' energy performance
           indicators for each reportable unit of the development, as well as supporting
           evidence, as per the methodology outlined in Chapter 4 'Asbuilt stage' of the
           GLA 'Be seen' energy monitoring guidance shall be uploaded to the GLA's
           monitoring portal and submitted to the Local Planning Authority for
           information. Confirmation that suitable monitoring devices have been installed
           and maintained for the monitoring of the in-use energy performance
           indicators, as outlined in Chapter 5 'In-use stage' of the GLA 'Be seen' energy
           monitoring guidance document.
        c. Upon completion of the first year of occupation following the end of the
           defects liability period (DLP) and for the following four years, accurate and
           verified annual in-use energy performance data as well as supporting
           evidence for all relevant indicators under each reportable unit of the
           development as per the methodology outlined in Chapter 5 'In-use stage' of
           the GLA 'Be seen' energy monitoring guidance shall be uploaded to the GLA's
           monitoring portal and submitted to the Local Planning Authority for
           information.
        d. In the event that the in-use evidence submitted shows that the as-built
           performance estimates have not been or are not being met, the developer
           shall investigate and identify the causes of underperformance and the
           potential mitigation measures and set these out in the relevant comment box
           of the 'be seen' spreadsheet. Where measures are identified, which can be
           reasonably practicable to implement, an action plan comprising such
           measures shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
           Planning Authority within six weeks of the submission of the information being
           uploaded to the GLA's Portal. The measures approved by the Local Planning
           Authority shall be implemented as soon as reasonably practicable and based
           on the agreed action plan timescales.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
Appeal Decision 6007183


4)      Prior to commencement of development, a Construction and Environmental
        Management Plan (CEMP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority. The CEMP shall be in accordance with the Control of
        Pollution and Noise from Demolition and Construction Sites Code of Practice
        2017 (available on the Bromley web site) and as a minimum shall cover:

         a) Dust mitigation, continuous monitoring (in accordance with the IAQM
            Guidance on Monitoring in the Vicinity of Demolition and Construction Sites
            and the Mayor of London’s SPG “The Control of Dust & emissions during
            Construction & Demolition” 2014 and the recommendations of the approved
            air quality assessment (Report Ref: RP01-24121-R1) and management
            measures;
         b) The location and operation of plant facilities;
         c) Measures to reduce construction noise including noise trigger levels and
            monitoring and a plan to show where the nearest noise sensitive premises
            are in relation to the site;
         d) Details of construction traffic movements including cumulative impacts which
            shall demonstrate the following:

                  i.
                  Rationalise travel and traffic routes to and from the site as well as
                  within the site.
              ii. Provide full details of the number and time of construction vehicle trips
                  to the site with the intention and aim of reducing the impact of
                  construction related activity.
             iii. Measures to deal with safe pedestrian movement.
             iv.  Full contact details of the site and project manager responsible for
                  day-to-day management of the works.
              v.  Parking for operatives during construction period.
             vi.  A swept path drawings for any tight manoeuvres on vehicle routes to
                  and from the site including proposed access and egress arrangements
                  at the site boundary.
         e) Hours of operation;

         f) Details of a complaints procedure with a designated person on site
            responsible for complaint handling;
         g) Other site specific Highways and Environmental Protection issues as
            requested on a case by case basis.

5)      No part of the development hereby permitted shall be commenced (including
        demolition) prior to a contaminated land assessment and associated remedial
        strategy, together with a timetable of works, being submitted to and approved in
        writing by the Local Planning Authority.
        a) The contaminated land assessment shall include a desk study to be
            submitted to the Local Planning Authority for approval in writing. The desk
            study shall detail the history of the sites uses and propose a site investigation
            strategy based on the relevant information discovered by the desk study. The
            strategy shall be approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority prior to
            investigations commencing on site.
        b) The site investigation, including relevant soil, soil gas, surface water and
            groundwater sampling shall be approved in writing by the Local Planning
            Authority.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
Appeal Decision 6007183


        c) A site investigation report detailing all investigative works and sampling on
           site, together with the results of analysis, risk assessment to any receptors, a
           proposed remediation strategy and a quality assurance scheme regarding
           implementation of remedial works, and no remediation works shall commence
           on site prior to approval of these matters in writing by the Local Planning
           Authority. The works shall be of such a nature so as to render harmless the
           identified contamination given the proposed end-use of the site and
           surrounding environment.
        d) Following demolition and site clearance, but prior to the commencement of
           any construction works (excluding demolition, site clearance and agreed site
           investigation works), a supplementary site investigation and updated
           contamination risk assessment shall be undertaken in accordance with the
           recommendations of the approved contaminated land assessment. The
           supplementary investigation shall include any additional soil, groundwater,
           ground gas and/or surface water sampling necessary to characterise
           contamination beneath existing structures or areas previously inaccessible.
           The findings, together with any revised remediation strategy and timetable of
           works, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
           Authority.
        e) The approved remediation works shall be carried out in full on site in
           accordance with the approved quality assurance scheme to demonstrate
           compliance with the proposed methodology and best practise guidance. If
           during any works contamination is encountered which has not previously
           been identified then the additional contamination shall be fully assessed and
           an appropriate remediation scheme submitted to the Local Planning Authority
           for approval in writing.
        f) Upon completion of the works, a closure report shall be submitted to and
           approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The closure report shall
           include details of the remediation works carried out, (including of waste
           materials removed from the site), the quality assurance certificates and details
           of post-remediation sampling.
        g) The contaminated land assessment, site investigation (including report),
           remediation works and closure report shall all be carried out by contractor(s)
           approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

6)      Prior to the commencement of development (including demolition) a full
        Construction Logistics Plan (CLP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing
        by the Local Planning Authority. The CLP should include as applicable (but not
        be limited to):
        a) Details of measures for managing and mitigating impacts on pedestrians,
            cyclists and public transport infrastructure, and supporting Vision Zero and
            Healthy Streets objectives.
        b) Pedestrian and vehicular access routes and access points to the site.
        c) Swept-path analysis of the access to the development, estimated vehicle
            numbers and mitigation in line with TfL’s current guidance.
                i.  In order to minimise impacts on traffic flow, pedestrian amenity and
                    bus operations, limited construction vehicles/equipment, skips, or
                    construction materials should not be parked/stored on the Highway at
                    any time.
               ii.  All construction vehicles exiting the site must undergo wheel-washing
                    prior to entering the public highway and do so in forward gear.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
Appeal Decision 6007183


                 iii.   There should be limited on-site parking available for demolition and
                        construction workers, and the use of public transport
                        active/sustainable means of travel to the site should be strongly
                        encouraged.
                 iv.    All haulage operators associated with construction should adhere to
                        CLOCS (Construction Logistics and Community Safety) standards and
                        should have achieved Freight Operation Recognition Scheme (FORS)
                        accreditation.
                 v.     All HGVs must comply with the Direct Vision Standard and HGV
                        Safety Permit scheme and, as far as is practicable, contractor vehicles
                        should include side-bars, blind spot mirrors and detection equipment
                        to reduce the risk and impact of collisions with cyclists and other road
                        users and pedestrians on the highway.

7)      Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved (including the
        arrival of machinery and materials and all preparatory work), tree protection
        measures in accordance with the approved tree protection plan shall be installed
        and an arboricultural method statement shall be submitted to the Local Planning
        Authority for approval. Such measures shall not be moved or removed but shall
        be retained in situ until completion of the development and all materials and
        machinery have been removed from the site, unless otherwise agreed in writing
        by the Local Planning Authority. Development shall only proceed in accordance
        with the approved arboricultural method statement.

8)      An acoustic assessment covering all proposed noise-generating fixed plant (in
        line with the methodology of BS 4142:2014+A1:2019) shall be submitted to the
        Local Planning Authority for approval prior to the development commencing,
        along with a scheme of mitigation to ensure that:

            i.     at any time, the plant rating level calculated according to BS
                   4142:2014+A1:2019 shall not exceed the measured typical day and
                   nighttime LA90 background levels at any noise sensitive receptor, and
                   additionally,
           ii.     that the measured or calculated plant specific noise level (i.e. in the
                   absence of any rating penalties) does not exceed 10dBA below the typical
                   day and night-time LA90 levels at any noise sensitive receptor. Once
                   approved the scheme of mitigation shall be implemented in full prior to the
                   use commencing and permanently maintained thereafter to ensure
                   compliance with the noise levels.

        Before any mechanical plant is used on the premises it shall be mounted in a
        way which will minimise transmission of structure borne sound or vibration to any
        other part of the building in accordance with a scheme to be submitted to and
        approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

9)      Prior to commencement of development (excluding demolition) details of the
        proposed slab levels of the building(s) and the existing site levels shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
        development shall be completed strictly in accordance with the approved levels.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     18
Appeal Decision 6007183


10)     Prior to the commencement of any development other than demolition, a lighting
        strategy showing the distribution of light on and around the site (including the
        appearance, siting and technical details of the orientation and screening of the
        lights and the means of construction and laying out of the cabling) shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

        The lighting strategy should be devised in accordance with the Bat Conservation
        Trust lighting guidelines (https://theilp.org.uk/resource/gn08-bats-and artificial-
        lighting-pdf.html)).

        If artificial lighting is required, a sensitive lighting plan with sensored lights
        triggered by large bodies should be incorporated.

        The scheme of lighting for the access drives and car parking areas shall be self-
        certified to accord with BS 5489 - 1:2020.

        Once approved in writing, the scheme of lighting shall be installed in full
        accordance with the approved details; and on completion a verification report
        shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for written approval. The
        Report should include photographs and measurements where necessary and
        shall be produced by a suitably qualified person to confirm that lighting has been
        installed in accordance with the approved scheme.

        The use shall not commence until written approval of the verification report has
        been given by the Local Planning Authority, and thereafter the approved scheme
        shall be permanently maintained in an efficient working manner and no further
        lighting shall be installed on the site without the prior approval in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority.

11)     Prior to commencement of any above-ground works (which for avoidance of
        doubt excludes demolition works), details of biodiversity enhancements to
        maximise biodiversity net gains as set out in the Preliminary Ecology Appraisal,
        prepared by Greenlink Ecology Ltd, 24/04/24, shall be submitted to and approved
        in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Details shall include the provision of 12
        no. ‘wall-integrated’ bat boxes and 18 no. ‘wall- integrated’ bird boxes (including
        swift boxes) to ensure long-term roosting/nesting opportunities are available for
        the lifetime of the building.

        The measures shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details and
        timescales and permanently retained thereafter.

12)     Prior to commencement of any above ground works, a Landscaping Plan
        detailing the treatment of all parts on the site not covered by buildings shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Plan
        shall demonstrate that, following completion of the development, the site shall
        achieve a minimum Urban Greening Factor Score of 0.4. The landscaping Plan
        shall also include:
          i.    A scaled plan showing trees and plants to be planted which shall include
                use of native and wild plant species of home grown stock (where possible)
                and no invasive species;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   19
Appeal Decision 6007183


           ii.    location, type and materials to be used for hard landscaping including
                  specifications, where applicable for:
                      a. permeable paving
                      b. tree pit design
                      c. use within tree Root Protection Areas
          iii.    Full details of retained and proposed boundary treatments.

        There shall be no excavation or raising or lowering of levels within the prescribed
        root protection area of retained trees unless agreed in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority.

        Unless required by a separate landscape management condition, all soft
        landscaping shall have a written five year maintenance programme following
        planting. Any new tree(s) that die(s), are/is removed or become(s) severely
        damaged or diseased shall be replaced and any new planting (other than trees)
        which dies, is removed, becomes severely damaged or diseased within five years
        of planting shall also be replaced.

        The site shall be landscaped strictly in accordance with the approved timings and
        details.

13)     A Landscape Ecological Management Plan (LEMP), including details of long-term
        site management and regular long-term monitoring of the habitat enhancements,
        tree planting and landscaping at the site for a minimum of 30 years, shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority prior to
        above-ground works on any part of the development.

        The approved Landscape and Ecological Management Plan shall be adhered to
        unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

14)     Prior to commencement of any above ground works, details (including samples)
        of the materials to be used for all external surfaces of the building, including
        balcony screening, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
        approved details.

15)     Prior to the commencement of above ground works detailed information of a Fire
        Evacuation Strategy in the form of a finalised fire statement shall be submitted to
        and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall
        be carried out in complete accordance with the approved final Fire Statement and
        maintained for the lifetime of the development.

16)     An acoustic assessment shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for
        approval in writing prior to above ground works. A scheme of mitigation, as
        necessary in light of the results of the assessment, [covering façade, glazing and
        ventilation specifications] shall achieve levels not exceeding 30dB LAeq (night)
        and 45dB LAmax (measured with F time weighting) for bedrooms, 35dB LAeq
        (day) for other habitable rooms, with window shut and other means of ventilation
        provided.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   20
Appeal Decision 6007183


        Once approved the mitigation shall be installed fully in accordance with the
        approved scheme and permanently retained and maintained thereafter.

17)     Details of arrangements for storage of refuse and recyclable materials (including
        means of enclosure for the area concerned where necessary) shall be submitted
        to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority prior to construction of
        any above ground works on the relevant phase.

        The approved arrangements shall be fully implemented prior to occupation of the
        development.

18)     The measures set out in the Energy Statement by Focus for McCarthy Stone and
        Glebe Housing Association (dated July 2024) (or an alternative energy strategy
        which shall have first been approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority),
        which should provide a reduction in expected carbon dioxide emissions of at
        least 35% above that required by the 2013 Building Regulations, shall be
        incorporated into the final design of the development.

        Prior to the installation of Photovoltaics (PVs) details of their siting, scale and
        appearance (including a roof plan and elevations) shall have first been submitted
        to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

        The approved measures shall be implemented prior to occupation of the
        development and retained in operational working order for the lifetime of the
        development.

19)     The development shall not be occupied until the detailed design of the access
        arrangements and healthy streets improvements on Glebe Way (A232) have
        been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
        works shall include, but not be limited to:

            i.    provision of new vehicle cross-over
           ii.    lighting works
          iii.    re-instatement of existing footway, including re-paving of site frontage and
                  new SUDS area
          iv.     places to stop and rest
           v.     review of the controls of the red route loading bay adjacent to the site,
                  and, if necessary, measures to alter those controls

        The approved works shall be completed before the access is first brought into
        use. Thereafter, the works shall be retained and maintained in accordance with
        the approved details for the lifetime of the development.

20)     The existing access shall be stopped up at the back edge of the highway before
        any part of the development hereby permitted is first occupied in accordance with
        details to be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority. The approved enclosure shall be permanently retained as such and
        the footway/verge reinstated as appropriate.

21)     Details of the means of privacy screening for balconies serving dwellings 6, 7, 8,
        9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30, 31 & 32 shall be submitted to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    21
Appeal Decision 6007183


        and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority prior to occupation. Prior
        to each dwelling being occupied the approved balcony screening shall have been
        fully implemented for that dwelling. The approved screening shall be permanently
        retained as such thereafter.

22)     Details of the obscure glazing for dwellings 5, 6, 18 and 19 shall be submitted to
        and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority prior to occupation of any
        of these dwellings. Prior to each of these dwellings being occupied the approved
        obscure glazing shall have been fully implemented for that dwelling. The
        approved obscure glazing shall be permanently retained thereafter.

23)     The facilities for bicycle and mobility scooter parking and the means of enclosure
        shown on the drawings hereby approved shall be completed before any part of
        the development hereby permitted is first occupied/used. The approved parking
        shall be permanently retained thereafter.

        Before any part of the development hereby permitted is first occupied/used,
        details shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority to demonstrate compliance with London Cycle Design Standards
        regarding lighting, CCTV surveillance and entrance canopy details for the
        outdoor cycle parking. The approved details shall be permanently retained
        thereafter.

24)     Prior to the first occupation of the development details of the car parking and
        disabled persons parking arrangements including a lighting scheme which shall
        be self-certified to accord with BS 5489 - 1:2020 shall be submitted to and
        approved in writing by the local planning authority.

        Before commencement of the use of the land or building hereby permitted, the
        parking spaces and turning space shall be completed in accordance with the
        approved details and thereafter shall be kept available for such use and no
        permitted development whether permitted by the Town and Country Planning
        (General Permitted Development) Order (England) 2015 (or any Order amending,
        revoking and re-enacting this Order) or not shall be carried out on the land
        indicated or in such a position as to preclude vehicular access to the said land,
        unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

        Development shall not be carried out other than in accordance with the approved
        details.

25)     A Service and Delivery Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority prior to occupation/commencement of the use of any
        part of the development, and the Plan shall be implemented in accordance with
        the approved details and permanently retained thereafter.

26)     Prior to the occupation of the development hereby permitted, the Drainage
        Strategy Report Including Wastewater Strategy, dated April 2024 shall be fully
        implemented.

27)     The development shall incorporate measures to minimise the risk of crime and
        shall not be occupied until evidence has been provided to the Local Planning


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   22
Appeal Decision 6007183


        Authority that Secure by Design accreditation has been attained as awarded by
        the Metropolitan Police.

28)     The development shall be carried out in accordance with the air quality mitigation
        measures, controls and recommendations set out within the approved Air Quality
        Assessment by Cass Allen, dated 21 March 2024 (Report Ref: RP01-24121-R1).

        All mitigation measures identified within the assessment shall be installed and
        operational prior to first occupation of the development and shall thereafter be
        retained and maintained for the lifetime of the development unless otherwise
        agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

29)     The development shall be carried out in accordance with the Preliminary Ecology
        Appraisal, prepared by Greenlink Ecology Ltd, 24/04/24, including the
        precautionary measures relating to clearing habitat that could be used by
        breeding birds, hedgehogs and reptiles.

        If at any time during the proposed works, it becomes apparent that bats and/or
        great crested newt are present and at risk of impacts, works will need to
        temporarily cease whilst a Natural England licence holder is consulted about how
        to proceed without the risk of an offence being committed.

30)     The development hereby permitted shall be built in accordance with the criteria
        set out in Building Regulations M4(3) "wheelchair user dwellings" for the 4 no.
        dwellings identified in the application as Part M4(3) compliant apartments
        (wheelchair user dwellings) and the remainder of the dwellings shall be built in
        accordance with the criteria set out in Building Regulations M4(2) “accessible and
        adaptable dwellings”. The wheelchair user dwellings and the accessible and
        adaptable dwellings shall remain as such in perpetuity.

31)     The dwellings shall comply with Building Regulations Optional Requirement in
        Part G2 - Water efficiency - of Approved Document G (2015 edition, as updated)
        of not more than 110 litres per person per day.

        Notice of compliance shall be provided to the Local Planning Authority within a
        month of the completion of work or, if earlier, within a month of the date on which
        in accordance with regulation 17 of the Building (Approved Inspectors etc.)
        Regulations 2010 the initial notice ceases to be in force.

32)     The dwellings within the building hereby permitted shall be used solely for the
        designed purpose of providing self-contained independent living units of
        accommodation for person or persons who, for the purpose of acquiring
        purchase or lease of any of the approved apartments will have a minimum age of
        not less than 55 years old (or a spouse/or partner (who is themselves over 50
        years old) living as part of a single household with such a person or persons).
        The building shall not be used or occupied for any other purpose (including
        equivalent provision in Class C3 of the Schedule of the Town and Country
        Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 or any equivalent provision, and
        notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
        Permitted Development) Order 2015) and no permitted changes of use shall
        occur.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   23
Appeal Decision 6007183




33)     All Non-Road Mobile Machinery (NRMM) of net power of 37kW and up to and
        including 560kW used during the course of the demolition, site preparation and
        construction phases shall comply with the emission standards set out in chapter 7
        of the GLA’s supplementary planning guidance “Control of Dust and Emissions
        During Construction and Demolition” dated July 2014 (SPG), or subsequent
        guidance. Unless it complies with the standards set out in the SPG, no NRMM
        shall be on site, at any time, whether in use or not, without the prior written
        consent of the Local Planning Authority. The developer shall keep an up-to-date
        list of all NRMM used during the demolition, site preparation and construction
        phases of the development on the online register at https://nrmm.london/
                                           **** END OF SCHEDULE ****




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          24
