Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by Alison Fish BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007807
Zoar Cottage, 15 Passage Hill, Mylor Bridge, Cornwall TR11 5SN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant technical details consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs W Wells against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•   The application Ref is PA25/03672.
•   The development proposed is technical details consent for the construction of two dwellings with
    garages, off-road parking and garden amenity area.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties have had the
   opportunity to comment on the implications of these changes for the appeal, and I
   have taken it into account in coming to my decision.
3. The proposal is for Technical Details Consent following the grant of Permission in
   Principle. The Planning Practice Guidance advises that this is an alternative way of
   obtaining planning permission for housing-led development. The Permission in
   Principle has established that the location, land use, and amount of development is
   suitable in principle. The Technical Details Consent that is the subject of this appeal
   can consider the remaining detailed matters but cannot reopen what has been
   agreed at the Permission in Principle stage. I have determined this appeal on that
   basis.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the area including the Cornwall National Landscape (NL).
Reasons
5. The appeal site is located within the Falmouth and St Mawes Cornwall Character
   Area (CCA16). Key characteristics of the area include Cornish hedges with mature
   hedgerow trees and prominent tree-lined boundaries which create a wooded
   character. In respect of settlement pattern, the land around Mylor Bridge retains a
   special intimate character including attractive little villages, connected by many
   small lanes lined by trees, forming tunnels of vegetation.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007807


6. Located at the elevated north-eastern periphery of the settlement, the elongated
   appeal site slopes gradually upwards from south to north with its western boundary
   adjoining Passage Hill. Residential development lines both sides of Passage Hill up
   to the host dwelling, beyond which the road takes on the character of a rural, tree-
   lined lane. Mature trees on either side create a distinctive tunnel effect that is a
   defining feature of the CCA. The appeal site’s strong roadside boundary lined with
   trees means that the site contributes positively to the key characteristics of the CCA
   and makes an important contribution to the landscape and scenic beauty of NL.
7. The proposed dwellings would follow the linear form of development on Passage
   Hill, with the principal elevations facing towards the road and a materials palette
   reflecting those in the surrounding area. In this respect, the dwellings would not
   appear out of place.
8. The site benefits from a Certificate of Lawful Development for residential use of the
   land incidental to the host dwelling and could lawfully be subject to residential
   paraphernalia. The previous Inspector1 found that site was previously developed
   land and that the principle of development on the site complied with Policy 3 of the
   Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010-2030, adopted November 2016 (LP).
   The proposal before me relates to the provision of 2 dwellings. In this respect, it
   would be of a scale appropriate to the size and role of the settlement of Mylor
   Bridge and no conflict with Policy 3 of the LP would arise.

9. However, the provision of two dwellings, spread across much of the site area would
   necessitate the provision of visibility splays over a large extent of the site frontage.
   Whilst the tree constraints plan, tree protection plan and arboricultural impact
   assessment identify the loss of a number of trees, they fail to take into account the
   effect on the existing trees along the roadside boundary arising from the provision
   of the visibility splays. Constructing the required visibility splays would inevitably
   result in the loss of further trees within the splay itself or require works within the
   root protection area (RPA) of others.
10. This would result in a greater number of trees being lost or affected than shown on
    the submitted plans. From my assessment of the evidence before me, it would
    appear that the majority of the existing trees on the site frontage would either be
    lost or require works within their RPA which could affect their long-term
    appearance, health and vitality, eroding the important contribution they make to the
    character and appearance of the area.
11. The roadside trees are a strong visual feature and create a tunnel effect with those
    on the opposite side of the road. Whilst new tree planting could be secured by a
    planning condition, these would take years to mature and create a similar effect.
12. The proposals include the retention of the established planting on the highest part
    of the site as an undeveloped buffer and additional planting here and between the
    two plots could be secured by condition. However, for the reasons set out above,
    this would not mitigate the harm arising from the loss of the roadside trees.
13. The site is not included in the land identified within the Mylor Parish Neighbourhood
    Development Plan 202-2030, made July 2022 (MPNP) as land which the
    community would like to see preserved and not developed. However, as explained
    above, this does not diminish the contribution that the site makes to the key
1
    Appeal Ref: APP/D0840/W/23/3332955 Zoar Cottage, Passage Hill, Mylor Bridge, Falmouth TR11 5SN


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6007807


     characteristics of the CCA and the character and appearance of the area including
     the NL.
14. For the reasons set out above and having regard to the statutory duty to seek to
    further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the NL 2, I
    conclude that the proposed development would not achieve this. The proposal
    would conflict with Policies 1, 2, 12 and 23 of the LP, Policy C1 of the Climate
    Emergency Development Plan Document February 2023 and Policies L1 and W2
    of the MPNP. Together, these policies seek high-quality design that respects and
    maintains the distinctive landscape character of Cornwall’s NL and conserves the
    natural environment.
Other considerations
15. The Council’s 5-year housing land supply sits at 3.9 years which is well below the
    Government’s expectation. In light of this, the proposal would provide additional
    housing, supporting the Government’s objective of boosting the supply of homes.
    This would make a very modest but nonetheless useful contribution towards
    housing supply at a time when the Council are failing to deliver sufficient housing.
    For these reasons, I give this moderate weight.
16. There would also be economic and social benefits arising from the construction and
    occupation of the units in terms of jobs and expenditure, including the support for
    local services and facilities in Mylor Bridge. The proposal is for a small site which
    could be built out quickly. Given the scale of the proposed development, these
    benefits attract moderate weight. The provision of solar PV panels, rainwater
    harvesting and bee bricks attract some, but modest, weight.
17. The proposal is advanced as self-build. However, in the absence of a legally
    binding Planning Obligation to secure this, it carries limited weight in my
    assessment.
18. The lack of harm in respect of other issues including flood risk, contamination,
    highway safety and the effect on protected species together with the lack of public
    objection are factors which are neutral in my assessment. Compliance with space
    standards and the provision of suitable outdoor space are general expectations for
    development rather than a benefit of this proposal.
19. I have been directed to a number of decisions3 where Inspectors or the Council
    concluded that the benefits of the proposal outweighed the identified harm.
    However, none of these decisions appear to relate to development in the NL so are
    not comparable to the circumstances before me. In those appeal decisions which
    did relate to sites within or affecting the NL4, the Inspectors did not identify any
    harm to the NL. For this reason, they are also not comparable to the proposal
    before me.
Planning Balance
20. I have found that the proposal would be contrary to the development plan.
    Proposals should be determined in accordance with the development plan unless
    material considerations indicate otherwise.
2
  Section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 as amended by Section 245 of the Levelling Up and
Regeneration Act 2023
3
  Set out in appendices PB5, PB6, PB7, PB8, PB9, PB10 and PB14 of the appellant’s statement of case
4
  Set out in appendices PB12 and PB13 and of the appellant’s statement of case


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision 6007807


21. The site lies outside the settlement boundary and therefore Policy S5 of the
    Framework is relevant. This allows for the redevelopment of previously developed
    land and states that such proposals should be approved unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
22. Collectively, the benefits that would arise would be moderate. However, Policy N4
    of the Framework requires that substantial weight should be placed on the
    importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of Protected
    Landscapes5. In this case, the trees make an important contribution to the
    character and appearance of the NL, but their presence has not informed the
    development of the site. The proposed development would erode the verdant
    contribution they make to the landscape and scenic beauty of the NL.
23. In this instance, the moderate benefits would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects to the character and appearance of the area including the NL.
Other Matters
24. Had I been minded to allow the appeal, I would have had to consider the effect of
    the proposed development on the setting of the listed signpost and the Helford and
    Fal Special Area of Conservation. However, as the appeal is to be dismissed, I
    need not consider this further.
25. The proposal has the support of the parish council but this does not outweigh my
    conclusions in respect of the harm arising from the proposal.
Conclusion
26. The proposed development would be contrary to the development plan and there
    are no other considerations which outweigh this finding. Consequently, with
    reference to Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, the
    appeal is dismissed.

Alison Fish
INSPECTOR




5
    As defined in the glossary to the Framework which includes National Landscapes in England


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  4
