Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by L N Hughes BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007762
7 Church Street, Stamford, Lincolnshire PE9 2JX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Mr Robin Haycock against the decision of South Kesteven District Council.
•    The application Ref is S25/2181.
•    The development proposed is rear extension, new window, new rooflights, solar panels, Air Source
     Heat Pump and internal alterations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Council’s statement clarifies that the application would have been refused if a
       decision had been made prior to the appeal submission, with reasoning provided.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework ('the Framework')
       was published on 17 August 2026. I have considered its amendments against the
       December 2024 version before the parties for their evidence. Although there have
       been significant amendments to its layout and formatting such that previously cited
       paragraph references are no longer relevant, other changes have not been
       determinative to the outcome of this appeal. I have therefore not gone back to the
       parties to seek any comment.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the area, with particular regard to the preservation or enhancement
       of the Stamford Conservation Area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site dates from 1903, being a two storey dwelling at the end of a short
       terrace on Church Street. A wall with two pedestrian doors runs in front of the
       adjacent building gap, joining to another short terrace. The proposal is for a two-
       storey rear extension, creating only a small footprint increase due to demolition of
       the existing single storey extension. It would have a pitched roof, creating a valley
       with the existing rear roof slope, with both sides incorporating solar panels. The
       proposal also includes a larger rooflight on the existing rear roof slope and a new
       window in the existing side façade, alongside other internal alterations and an Air
       Source Heat Pump (ASHP) in the yard.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007762


6.     The site lies within the Stamford Conservation Area (CA), and so I have a statutory
       duty under section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
       Areas) Act 1990 to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or
       enhancing its character or appearance. Most of the buildings along its principal
       streets are listed, and so I also have a statutory duty under Section 66(1) of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to consider the
       proposal’s impact on the special architectural and historic interest of listed
       buildings and their settings.
7.     The Framework Policy HE6 criterion (1) requires substantial weight to be given to
       the conservation of designated heritage assets, and its criterion (4) states that
       where the significance of a designated heritage asset would be harmed, the effect
       on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits.
       Policy HE9 identifies that the design of development within CAs should consider
       the area’s special architectural or historic interest, and conserve buildings and
       other features which make a positive contribution to its character or appearance.
       The appeal property along with most of those along Church Street are identified as
       positive buildings within the CA. As such, they form non-designated heritage
       assets, whereby the Framework Policy HE7(2) further identifies that any harm to
       their significance should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a
       balanced judgement made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the
       significance.
8.     The South Kesteven District Council Local Plan 2011-2036 (‘the LP’) Policy EN6
       broadly reiterates the Framework guidance, whereby the Council will seek to
       protect and enhance heritage assets and their settings. The Stamford
       Neighbourhood Plan 2016-2036 (‘the NP’) Policy 8 supports development where it
       conserves or enhances the significance of designated and non-designated
       heritage assets and their setting, through high quality and sensitive design, taking
       into consideration appropriate scale, materials, and siting in relation to historic
       views.
9.     The significance of the Stamford CA results from how the town demonstrates the
       physical remains of at least a thousand years of continuous human occupation. It
       is characterised by a well-preserved medieval core, comprising of stone buildings
       largely dating from the 17th-18th centuries, interspersed with earlier timber-framed
       buildings, and a very high concentration of listed buildings including its five
       medieval parish churches as key features of the historic skyline. Elegant examples
       of 19th century residential developments extend beyond the confines of the
       medieval town.
10. The Stamford Conservation Appraisal and associated Analysis Map (2011) identify
    important views along Church Street in both directions. The appeal site lies within
    the St Martins Character Area, to the south of the river plus the Town Meadows on
    its northern bank. Of most relevance to the appeal site is the survival of the
    medieval street pattern, and its character of narrow connecting streets creating a
    feeling of enclosure, linking to High Street St Martin’s as the principal road in the
    parish. The numerous listed buildings hold significance from their historic group
    value and architecture. Buildings are closely-knit and aligned to the rear of the
    pavements. The area has a unity of character deriving from the predominant
    material of stone with coursed rubble masonry or ashlar for higher status buildings,
    together with their broad uniformity of scale and proximity. This layout allows for
    unfolding views along streets and of landmark buildings.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007762


11. In particular, the Grade I Church of St Martin is the focal point, listed for its
    outstanding fabric in a unified design of the late 15th century on an earlier site,
    re-ordered in 1845. Its significance arises from its visibility, and historic and
    architectural interest with links to the Burghley family. It is also significant internally
    for its mid-19th century fittings and 16th to 19th century monuments of high artistic
    and historical importance.
12. The Grade II* listed George Hotel site is an important example of a traditional
    English coaching inn and represents Stamford's status as a crossroads town. The
    hotel incorporates parts of medieval religious buildings and is a rambling mixture
    across many time periods, including the main block erected in 1597, the mid-18th
    century front elevation, and the 19th century wooden gallows sign extending across
    the road. The property includes mews buildings, cloistered garden, and a large car
    park which directly borders the rear of the appeal site and the other Church Street
    properties, separated by a wall and some vegetation.
13. The existing front and side elevation is faced with coursed limestone, with a roof of
    Collyweston slate, both reflecting the predominant CA building material. The
    proposed red brick and blue slate would thus be a harmfully prominent contrast.
    However, the appellant would accept a condition requiring amended materials.
    The proposed extension detailing would match the original dwelling, and rooflights
    would be conservation style. As such, I have assumed that were I to allow the
    appeal, more cohesive roof and brick materials could be imposed, and have
    therefore not taken materiality into account in assessing cumulative harm.
14. I concur with the Council that the proposed solar panels and ASHP would have a
    neutral effect on the area’s character, due to their small-scale and lack of visibility
    in the streetscene. Although the Council suggests harm from the proposed rear
    ground floor windows not being symmetrical or reflecting the traditional sash form,
    the existing rear windows also do not achieve this. There would be no views of
    these windows due to the property boundary wall, and they would not be so
    untoward in this domestic context so as overwhelm the property or the historic
    understanding of its original form.
15. The site is some distance from the built form of the George Hotel listing, and the
    proposal would retain the general arrangement and spatial relationship with those
    buildings and with its broader property boundary. On this basis there would be no
    effect on its significance. Similarly, the separation distance, relative scale, and
    localised views means there would be no impact on the significance of the Church
    of St Martin or any other listed buildings.
16. However, with regard to the non-designated heritage assets along Church Street
    and including the appeal dwelling itself, the additional massing at two storey level
    would be particularly prominent and incongruous in comparison to the existing
    form. It would not be sufficiently subordinate to the original dwelling, being nearly
    its full height and width, and with the dual gable as a new architectural form which
    would overwhelm the host. The Design Guidelines for Rutland and South
    Kesteven Supplementary Planning Document identifies that extensions are
    expected to respect the scale and character of the existing dwelling, and for
    development generally to be sensitive to the setting of adjacent properties.
17. The extension would be visible partway along Church Street due to the adjacent
    gap in the building line. This would detract from the otherwise uniform nature of the
    surrounding streetscene and be in juxtaposition with the building on the other side

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007762


       of the gap. It would also be visible from across the car park, used by an assumed
       regular turnover of Stamford visitors. Although the rear forms of the bounding
       properties incorporate some variation in heights and set-back extent, they present
       a harmonious scale overall at first floor level. The extension would be a large
       untoward projection gaining undue prominence and dominance within this vista,
       particularly in relation to the buildings either side.
18. I acknowledge that the Conservation Officer’s consultee response concluded that
    the proposal would preserve the character and appearance of the St Martins
    Character Area of the CA, and so would be of neutral impact to its significance.
    This conclusion was taken forwards into the Council’s Statement of Case.
    Nonetheless I am not bound by this position, and due to the elements I have
    identified above, I find overall that the proposal would cause less than substantial
    harm to the significance of the CA as a designated heritage asset, albeit this would
    be at the lowest end of that spectrum of harm to which the Framework Policy
    HE6(1) requires that I give substantial weight.
19. I give very minor weight to the proposed improved energy efficiency measures,
    and to the assumed local economic benefit from the proposal’s construction. I note
    that the dwelling only has a downstairs bathroom, and is described as being run
    down and with poor insulation. However, improvement of the latter two elements
    could be achieved in other ways, and provision of additional living space would
    only be a private benefit.
20. I find that these very minor public benefits would not outweigh the substantial
    weight I give to the less than substantial harm to the CA as a designated heritage
    asset, alongside the harm to the significance of the property itself as a non-
    designated heritage asset. The proposal would therefore conflict with the LP Policy
    EN6, the NP Policy 8, and the Framework section 20 on conserving and
    enhancing the historic environment.
21. Even were I to have agreed with the Council’s conclusion regarding no harm to the
    CA as a whole, I also find there would be moderate harm to the character and
    appearance of the area, and thus conflict with the LP Policy DE1. This requires
    development proposals to make a positive contribution to the local distinctiveness
    and character of the area, to not have an adverse impact on the streetscene, and
    to be of an appropriate scale and massing. Similarly, there would be conflict with
    the NP Policy 10, whereby proposals should have regard to an area’s form, the
    scale, mass, and orientation of surrounding buildings, and the pattern and grain of
    the existing spaces and streets.
Conclusion
22. Overall therefore, the proposed development would conflict with the development
    plan as a whole. With no other material considerations indicating otherwise, for the
    reasons given above I conclude that the appeal is dismissed.


L N Hughes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
