Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007535
Land at Whitings Lane, Burn, North Yorkshire YO8 8LG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant full planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Sharon Sutcliffe against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•    The application Ref is ZG2025/0803/FUL.
•    The development proposed is demolition of an existing single storey concrete and steel warehouse
     and the erection of steel portal frame building creating a new wood storage shed for Timclad Ltd.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matter
2.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
       amendments against the December 2024 version. Although there have been
       significant amendments made, the changes relevant to this appeal are not
       substantive or determinative to the outcome of my decision. I have therefore not
       gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues of the appeal are:
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance
                of the area;
           •    The effect of the proposed development on flood risk; and
           •    Whether the proposed development would be suitably located having
                regard to the development plan policy governing such proposals.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.     The appeal site is located to the south of Brick Kiln Lane and consists of a yard
       area with a building to its southern extent. The land to the south and west is in use
       for purposes associated with a plant hire company and for storage. Websters
       Timber is located further south along Whitings Lane, and two dwellings are located
       nearby to the west.
5.     Brick Kiln Lane runs to the north of the site and open fields surround the site to the
       east. The site is screened with established trees and hedges along the eastern

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007535


       and northern boundaries. The wider area is predominantly agricultural in nature
       and is surrounded by open fields.
6.     The proposed development seeks to demolish the existing commercial building
       and erect a steel-frame building. It would be used by the appellant for the storage
       of timber B8 use class. The timber would be used to manufacture timber sheds
       and outbuildings at a different site. The existing building to be demolished is an
       extension of a larger building, which is outside of the red line boundary but is
       understood to be within the appellant’s ownership.
7.     The proposed building would have a maximum length of 32 metres and maximum
       width of 10 metres. The proposed building would have a dual-pitched roof with
       eaves to 4.8 metres and a ridgeline to 6.15 metres. It would be a portal framed
       building constructed from corrugated sheet roof and wall panels with a goose grey
       colour finish.
8.     The proposed building would be substantially larger than the existing building on
       the site and would be more industrial in its appearance. A building like this is
       something commonly seen within a modern employment site or more urban area
       rather than in a location within the open countryside where the area is
       predominantly agricultural in nature. The building would be set well back from
       Brick Kiln Lane and would be screened by the existing tree planting along both
       Brick Kiln Lane and Whitings Lane where only limited views would be available.
       The proposed building would however be more apparent from Burn Lane to the
       east. I noted that although planting exists along the eastern boundary, it would not
       sufficiently screen the building. Taking into account the size, scale and design of
       the development, the proposal would be unduly prominent in this location and
       have an adverse impact on the character and appearance of the area.
9.     I note the building approved at Webster’s Timber, which is to the south, and is
       similar in appearance and size. However, I am unaware of the context in which
       that scheme was approved, and it would not be a sufficient reason to justify this
       scheme nor the cumulative erosion of the rural character that would arise from the
       appeal proposals. I have assessed this scheme based on its own merits.
10. I conclude on this issue that the proposed development would unacceptably harm
    the character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would therefore be
    contrary to Policies ENV1(1) and (4) of the Selby District Local Plan, 2005 and
    Policies SP13, SP18 and SP19 of the Core Strategy, 2013. Such policies together,
    amongst other matters, explain that proposals for development will be permitted
    provided a good quality of development would be achieved. For the same reasons,
    the proposed development would also be contrary to chapter 14 of the Framework
    relating to achieving well-designed places.
Flood risk
11. The appeal site is located within Flood Zones 1, 2 and 3 and is therefore at an
    elevated risk of flooding. Chapter 18 of the Framework relates to managing flood
    risk and coastal change. Policy F4 of the Framework explains that to inform the
    assessment of flood risk and, where relevant, appropriate mitigation, a site-specific
    flood risk assessment should accompany all development proposals in Flood
    Zones 2, 3a, and 3b. It goes on to explain that site-specific flood risk assessments
    should be appropriate to the scale, nature, and location of development and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007535


       should, where relevant, support an assessment of whether a development
       proposal satisfies the sequential and exception tests set out in Policies F5 and F6.
12. Policy F5 of the Framework explains that the aim of the sequential test is to steer
    new development to areas with the lowest risk of flooding from any source. Where
    the test applies, development proposals should not be located in areas at risk of
    flooding where alternative site’s, appropriate for the development, are reasonably
    available in areas with a lower risk of flooding. Policy F5 (2) (b) sets out exceptions
    to the sequential test including where a site-specific flood risk assessment
    demonstrates clearly that no built development within the site boundary, including
    access or escape routes, land raising or other potentially vulnerable elements,
    would be located on an area that would be at risk of flooding from any source, now
    and in the future (having regard to potential changes in flood risk). Policy F6
    amongst other matters, covers the application of the exception test. Due to the
    less vulnerable classification, I understand that an exception test is not required in
    the particular circumstances of this case.
13. A Flood Risk Assessment has been submitted for the site. It is however very brief
    and does not provide me with sufficient confidence that the sequential test need
    not be applied. The requirement of a sequential test applies irrespective of the
    presence of an existing building or nearby developments.
14. A sequential test has been submitted but again it is very limited in scope,
    identifying one site, Olympia Park which is said to be too big for the proposed
    development. I understand that Olympia Park is however located in Flood Zone 3
    and therefore cannot be regarded as sequentially preferable. The assessment
    concludes that there are no reasonable alternative sites within a lower flood zone,
    but it does not consider other reasonably available sites across the district. To this
    end, the Council has provided a list of other undeveloped local plan allocations
    and windfall sites which have failed to be considered. Additionally, the assessment
    does not demonstrate other land for sale or any search of commercial land
    platforms such as Zoopla or Rightmove to identify alternative sites.
15. Overall, I find that the proposed development has failed to undertake a sequential
    test that adequately assesses whether the development could be located in a
    sequentially preferable location. It would therefore be unacceptable in terms of
    flood risk and would conflict with Policy ENV1 (3) of the Selby District Local Plan,
    2005 and Policies SP15 and SP19 of the Selby District Core Strategy, 2013. Such
    policies together, amongst other matters, ensure that development in areas of
    flood risk is avoided wherever possible through the application of the sequential
    test and exception test; and ensures that where development must be located
    within areas of flood risk that it can be made safe without increasing flood risk
    elsewhere. For the same reasons, the proposed development would also be
    contrary to chapter 18 of the Framework relating to managing flood risk and
    coastal change.
Location
16. The site is located outside the development limits of any settlement and is
    therefore located within the open countryside in planning policy terms.
17. Policy SP2 of the Core Strategy, 2013 relates to the spatial development strategy.
    It explains that development in the countryside (outside development limits) will be
    limited to the replacement or extension of existing buildings, the re-use of buildings

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007535


       preferably for employment purposes, and well-designed new buildings of an
       appropriate scale, which would contribute towards and improve the local economy
       and where it will enhance or maintain the vitality of rural communities, in
       accordance with Policy SP13; or meet rural affordable housing need (which meets
       the provisions of Policy SP10), or other special circumstances.
18. Policy SP13 relates to scale and distribution of economic growth. It explains that in
    rural areas, sustainable development (on both greenfield and previously developed
    sites) which brings sustainable economic growth through local employment
    opportunities or expansion of businesses and enterprise will be supported,
    including for example, 1. the re-use of existing buildings and infrastructure and the
    development of well-designed new buildings and 2. the redevelopment of existing
    and former employment sites and commercial premises.
19. Policy EMP2 of the Selby Local Plan, 2005 explains that new employment
    development will be concentrated in and around Eggborough, Selby, Sherburn in
    Elmet and Tadcaster. Encouragement will also be given to proposals for small-
    scale development in villages and rural areas in support of the rural economy.
20. As set out earlier, the proposed development would erect a single storey building
    to be used for timber storage, which would then be used to manufacture timber
    sheds and outbuildings at a different site. The appellant does not currently operate
    from the site and thus the proposals would involve a new purpose-built facility in
    order for the company to store materials only. It is understood that the company
    operates from Beighton Airfield which is to the east of the former Selby district in
    East Riding of Yorkshire Council geographical area.
21. While the proposed development would redevelop a former commercial premises,
    it would bring a new business use in the open countryside rather than expand an
    existing rural business at the site. It is clear from the policies contained within the
    development plan that such proposals would only be supported, where amongst
    other matters, it would contribute towards and improve the local economy. The
    storage building may support an existing business operating elsewhere but the
    evidence demonstrates only very limited direct economic benefits arising from the
    appeal site itself. The site is also not located within a rural community where it
    would enhance or maintain the vitality of rural communities. On this basis, the
    proposed development would be at odds with the development plan governing
    such proposals and there is no real justification for the storage building to be
    located at this site within the open countryside as opposed to a more suitable
    location elsewhere as directed by the development plan.
22. I appreciate that Webster’s Timber is located nearby which has an extensive
    planning history including for wood storage. Even so, I understand that site
    represents an established rural business which has been subject to expansion of
    existing operations. In contrast, the appeal proposals do not relate to an existing
    business operating at the site and would not constitute an expansion of an existing
    business. It would be a new standalone B8 use which would conflict with the
    development plan which seeks to support sustainable economic growth and rural
    employment which contribute positively to the local economy.
23. Policy S5 of the Framework relates to the principle of development outside
    settlements, explaining that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements and sets out an exceptions list. It explains that these should be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007535


       approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
       any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
       in the Framework. While the appeal site may comprise previously developed land
       which is offered support by Policy S5 (1) (d), the proposals must still be assessed
       against the national decision-making policies in the Framework. In this case, the
       benefits of the scheme would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects
       identified in relation to the above main issues, when assessed against the national
       decision-making policies in the Framework. Although additional storage capacity
       may be required, I am not satisfied that the proposed use requires a rural location.
24. The Council raise concern regarding the location of the site with no realistic
    alternative to private vehicle use. They refer to increased travel demand. However,
    the evidence before me sets out that there would be no staff working from the site
    given the nature of the storage use and that there would be a maximum of 2
    deliveries each week in or out of the yard.
25. The proposals involve the redevelopment of a former commercial premises. Based
    on the evidence before me, it is unlikely that the proposals would generate greater
    travel demand than the site’s existing or previous use, or than could reasonably be
    expected from the site. While this reduces my concern regarding this aspect of the
    proposal, it does not outweigh the conflict with policy that I have identified.
26. For the above reasons, I conclude on this issue that the proposed development
    would not be suitably located having regard to the development plan policy
    governing such proposals. It would therefore be contrary to Policies SP2 and SP13
    of the Core Strategy, 2013. For the same reasons, the proposed development
    would also be contrary to chapter 7 of the Framework relating to building a strong,
    effective economy.
Other Matters
27. The appellant explains that the Council previously suggested the proposals were
    acceptable, but any prior comments were informal and understood to have been
    made before the completion of the application and receipt of consultation
    responses. Such matters would not therefore alter my findings.
Conclusion
28. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan as a whole.
    There are no other considerations, including the provisions of the Framework that
    would individually or cumulatively outweigh this harm. The appeal should therefore
    be dismissed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
