Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by Ann Veevers BA(Hons) PGDip(BCon) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007422
Brookfields Farm, Longhill Lane, Hankelow CW3 0JQ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
       Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•      The appeal is made by Mr Ian Reade against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/3355/PRIOR-3Q.
•      The development proposed is the conversion of an agricultural building into two single storey
       dwellings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
         3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General
         Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for prior approval for
         the conversion of an agricultural building into two single storey dwellings at
         Brookfields Farm, Longhill Lane, Hankelow CW3 0JQ in accordance with the
         application 25/3355/PRIOR-3Q and the details submitted with it, including Drawing
         No’s 200_01; 200_03 and 200_04 and subject to the additional conditions in the
         schedule at the end of this decision:
Procedural Matters
2.       I have taken the description of development from the application form and
         removed superfluous wording for conciseness.
3.       During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
         (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
         matters upon which prior approval is sought in the appeal before me and therefore
         no interested parties would be prejudiced by my consideration of the 2026 version
         of the Framework.
4.       The appellant’s appeal submission includes a Schedule of Works1 (SoW) which
         did not accompany the application to the Council, even though it is referred to in
         other application documents2. The SoW provides further evidence in relation to the
         Council’s reasons for refusal, rather than a fundamental change to the application.
         Furthermore, through the appeal process, the Council and interested parties have
         been provided with an opportunity to comment upon them. I therefore find that no
         one involved in the appeal has been subjected to any substantive or procedural
         unfairness as a result of their submission. Accordingly, I have had regard to the
         SoW in my decision.

1
    Acorus, ‘Schedule of Works Conversion of Agricultural Building to Form Dwelling’, Barn B, dated August 2025.
2
    Acorus ‘Notification of a Proposed Change of Use of an Agricultural Building to a Dwelling’, dated August 2025.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007422


5.       The appeal building forms part of a wider agricultural enterprise. A separate
         application for approval under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
         Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order
         2015 (as amended) (the GPDO) for the change of use of a different building on the
         agricultural enterprise to form four dwellings has also been refused by the
         Council3. This is the subject of a separate appeal4 (the other appeal).
Background
6.       Under Class Q(c) of the GPDO, development is permitted for the change of use of
         a building that is part of an established agricultural unit and any land within its
         curtilage, together with building operations reasonably necessary to convert the
         building, to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) or to extend that
         building, subject to limitations and conditions.
7.       The Council may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
         development would not comply with, or that the developer has provided insufficient
         information to enable the Council to establish whether the proposed development
         complies with, the conditions, limitations or restrictions set out in Q1 and Q2.
8.       The Council’s first reason for refusal relates to the extent of the works that would
         be required to enable the building to function as a dwelling, which are perceived to
         go beyond works that would reasonably be described as a conversion. While the
         decision notice only refers to paragraph Q1.(j), the Council’s delegated officer
         report also includes an assessment under Class Q(c), which similarly permits
         building operations reasonably necessary to convert the building. The appellant
         has addressed this matter in their appeal submissions. Therefore, I am satisfied no
         party would be prejudiced by my proceeding to determine the appeal on the basis
         of the requirements of both Q(c) and Q1.(j).
9.       The Council’s second and third reasons for refusal refer to prior approval matters
         relating to the location and siting of the building in proximity to other agricultural
         buildings and land; and the transport and highway impacts of the proposal insofar
         as they relate to parking provision and the effect on a Public Right of Way.
10. Neither of these reasons for refusal refer to specific paragraphs of the GPDO.
    However, the Council’s delegated officer report confirms that the relevant
    paragraphs are those set out at Q2(1)(e) regarding the location or siting of the
    building and Q2(1)(a) regarding the transport and highway impacts of the proposal.
    The appellant and interested parties have addressed these paragraphs in their
    appeal submissions. Therefore, I am satisfied that no interested party would be
    prejudiced by my proceeding to determine the appeal on this basis.
11. There is no dispute between the main parties about compliance with the remaining
    paragraphs of Q1 or Q2(1). Based on the evidence before me and observations I
    made at my site visit, I have no reason to take a different view.
Main Issues
12. Against the above background and the submitted evidence, the main issues are:



3
    LPA Ref: 25/3358/PRIOR-3Q, refused 28 October 2025.
4
    Appeal Ref: 6007456


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6007422


         • whether the proposal would be permitted development, with particular regard to
           paragraphs Q(c) and Q1.(j) and the extent of the building works; and, if it is
           permitted development:
         • whether, under the provisions of Q2(1)(a), the proposal would be acceptable in
           relation to its transport and highways impacts, with particular regard to parking
           and the effect on Public Right of Way 33 (PROW); and,
         • whether, under the provisions of paragraph Q2(1)(e), the location or siting of
           the building would make it impractical or undesirable for it to change to a use
           falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of the GPDO in terms of whether the
           proposal would provide satisfactory living conditions for future occupiers, with
           regard to disturbance and odours.
Reasons
Whether permitted development
13. Permitted development rights under Class Q of the GPDO are a grant of planning
    permission, subject to the prior approval requirements. Therefore, insofar as
    relevant to this appeal, it is necessary in the first instance to determine whether the
    proposal falls within the scope of permitted development.
14. Paragraph Q1.(j) specifies that development is not permitted by Class Q if it would
    consist of building operations other than (i) the installation or replacement of
    windows, doors, roofs, exterior walls, or water, drainage, electricity, gas or other
    services to the extent reasonably necessary for the building to function as a
    dwellinghouse; and (ii) partial demolition to the extent reasonably necessary to
    carry out building operations allowed by paragraph Q1.(j)(i).
15. The operative part of criterion (i) is that those building operations would be
    ‘reasonably necessaryt’, which also reflects the wording of Class Q(c). This is
    expanded on in Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)5 which states the Class Q
    permitted development right assumes that the agricultural building is capable of
    functioning as a dwelling, and that it is only where the building is already suitable
    for conversion to residential use that the building would be considered to have the
    permitted development right.
16. The appeal site includes a mono-pitch roof barn used for the storage of agricultural
    and other equipment together with an area of land immediately to the rear (south).
    The building is low in height, steel and timber framed, has a fibre-cement sheet
    roof and a concrete floor which steps between bays to accommodate changing
    levels on the site. The walls on three sides consist of single-skin blockwork, above
    which is a mix of profiled metal sheeting or timber boarding. The remaining side is
    partially open below a strip of timber boarding and partially enclosed by large
    metal sheet doors. At the time of my visit the building appeared to be structurally
    sound and in an overall good condition.
17. The building would be converted to two dwellings. The existing structural frame
    would remain to provide the main load-bearing element of the building. The
    submitted SoW and accompanying application plans clearly identify how much of
    the external envelope of the building would be retained. Aside from potentially

5
    Paragraph: 105 Reference ID: 13-105-20180615


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decision 6007422


         small areas of patch replacement between the existing large steel clad doors on
         the front (north) elevation and the provision of new cladding to the front of bays G
         and H, all the existing external metal and timber roof and wall cladding would be
         retained.
18. In terms of new works, the SoW identifies that an internal timber frame and internal
    perimeter walls would be constructed to incorporate insulation and an airtight
    membrane. A new loadbearing internal central party wall would be constructed in
    studwork to separate the two dwellings. The two open-fronted bays would be
    enclosed externally with metal sheeting and insulation would be provided beneath
    the existing roof covering. Openings for the existing rooflights on the rear roof-
    slope would be utilised to provide additional light into the building.
19. No significant increase in loading is envisaged to the roof, which the SoW notes
    would satisfy the relevant part of Building Regulations. No openings are proposed
    to the east and west (side) elevations. Numerous door and window openings are
    proposed to the north and south elevations, but there is nothing in the SoW to
    suggest that the structural integrity of the existing external facing material would be
    compromised as a result of creating these openings, particularly since the Council
    acknowledge that the internal insulated structure would accommodate the load of
    the windows. Although new cladding would be installed to the front of bays G and
    H, this would comprise relatively small proportion of new external walls in the
    context of the building as a whole.
20. Internally, the Council is concerned that excavations, load-bearing bases and
    footings would be required to support new walls, which would exceed what could
    reasonably be described as a conversion. The PPG states that internal works do
    not generally constitute development and, where necessary to enable a building to
    function as a dwelling, internal works, including the installation of internal walls,
    may be undertaken and are not prohibited under Class Q.
21. Information in the SoW suggests that, with the exception of the party wall to
    separate the two dwellings, internal walls would be self-supporting and constructed
    in non-load bearing timber studwork constructed directly off the floor slab, which
    would not require additional footings. Based on the information available, there is
    no evidence to indicate that the condition of the existing floor slab would prevent
    the proposed internal walls from being constructed or affect its stability once built.
    However, the proposed party wall separating the two dwellings would be
    constructed in load bearing studwork and would require the excavation of an
    approximate 6.5m strip footing. Even though the excavation of footing is not listed
    in paragraph Q1(j), such works would be internal and not relate to the
    underpinning or support of the main structure of the building. The creation of a
    party wall within the building would be negligible in the context of the proposed
    works to the building as a whole, being mindful of the considerable amount of
    existing external and structural framing material that would be retained.
22. In this regard, the proposal differs from the appeal example provided by the
    Council to support their case6. In that case, it is clear that substantial works to
    excavate, underpin and provide new footings, as well as replace the existing floor
    slab would be likely to be required. This is not comparable to the limited amount of
    works envisaged in this case.

6
    Appeal Ref: PP/H4505/W/25/3363090


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007422


23. Neither the GPDO nor the PPG define the term ‘reasonably necessary’.
    Consequently, this is a matter of planning judgement based on the nature and
    extent of the proposed building operations. Although the totality of works required
    to enable the building's conversion to residential use would be considerable, they
    would not involve the substantial replacement of the building’s external fabric, and
    the primary structural elements of the building would be retained.
24. Consequently, I find that the cumulative extent of the works to facilitate the
    proposed conversion of the agricultural building to residential use would fall within
    the scope of operations reasonably necessary for the building to function as
    dwellinghouses, in compliance with paragraphs Q(c) and Q1.(j). As there is no
    dispute about paragraph Q1.(j)(ii) or any other part of paragraph Q1, the proposal
    would be permitted development.
Prior approval - transport and highway impacts
25. The appeal building is located at the end of a long private access track from
    Longhill Lane. The unmade track currently provides access to four dwellings and
    agricultural land. It is also a PROW, which is not uncommon in rural areas. I note
    comments from interested parties about the condition, length and width of the track
    and that there are no passing places. However, in view of the limited number of
    dwellings proposed in this appeal, and even if cumulatively taken with the four
    additional dwellings proposed in the other appeal on the farmstead in the event
    that appeal was allowed, I am satisfied there would not be an unacceptable
    increase in the amount of traffic using the track or Longhill Lane.
26. In reaching this conclusion, I have taken into account that any potential increase in
    traffic movements from the proposed dwellings would be likely to be offset to a
    certain extent by the potential reduction in traffic associated with the buildings’
    agricultural use. Furthermore, the junction of the track with Longhill Lane is wide
    and has adequate visibility and, due to the condition of the track, traffic speeds
    would be low and the frequency of two vehicles passing would be very limited.
    Additionally, in a rural area such as this I would anticipate that the occupiers of any
    residential properties would be alert to the possibility of encountering some farm
    traffic in the vicinity. The track is relatively straight, thus there would be clear
    visibility for drivers of vehicles to see pedestrians using the PROW.
27. While there would be construction traffic along the track during any conversion
    works, given the scale of the proposal and that much of the building would be
    retained, it would be unlikely to be significant and would be time-limited.
28. I acknowledge there is no footway or lighting along the track, or Longhill Lane.
    However, the GPDO, through the provisions of Class Q, anticipates that new
    dwellings will be established in rural areas. As such, it would be unreasonable to
    preclude development in every location where street lighting and footways are
    absent. For the reasons given above, I therefore find that there would be no
    unacceptable increase in the risk to highway safety as a result of the proposal.
29. In relation to the Council’s concern about parking, the Site Location and Block
    Plan7 submitted with the application shows the site edged red including the access
    and drawn closely around the appeal building, encompassing part of the field to
    the south, at the rear of the building. It would be an area of land, whether closed or

7
    Drawing No. 200-01


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007422


         unenclosed, immediately beside or around the building on an established
         agricultural unit, closely associated with and serving the purposes of that building
         and would be no larger than the area occupied by the appeal building. As such, it
         would comply with the interpretation of curtilage at paragraph Q3 of Schedule 2,
         Part 3 of the GPDO and would be the extent of the land that would be subject to
         the change of use, were I to allow the appeal.
30. From the proposed layout of the dwellings and information in the appellant’s
    submissions, the land within this curtilage would be used as a garden for each
    dwelling. This would be the area subject to the change of use, rather than, as
    suggested by the Council, for parking associated with the proposed residential
    use. This means that there would be no defined curtilage for the parking of
    vehicles associated with the dwellings.
31. Nevertheless, there is nothing in the GPDO which stipulates that the access to the
    site and the areas of parking must be included within the curtilage. It should be
    noted that curtilage can differ from the site edged red, indeed, there is no
    requirement for a development proposed under Part 3 to include a curtilage. Thus,
    a proposal can be determined within the terms of the GPDO and without the need
    for reference to a curtilage. The procedure for applications for prior approval made
    under Part 3 of the GPDO is set out in paragraph W and part (2)(b) of paragraph
    W only requires the provision of a plan indicating the site and showing the
    proposed development.
32. It is important to note however, that development is not permitted under Class Q
    where it would involve the change of use of land beyond the area defined as
    curtilage, which in this case is clearly denoted by the hatched area within the site
    edged red in the submitted plans. Development outside this area would require a
    separate application for planning permission where its lawful use differs from that
    proposed.
33. In this respect, I saw at my site visit that the large area of hard standing fronting
    the appeal building is already used for the shared parking of vehicles associated
    with The Sycamores and Brookfields Farmhouse. It is of a sufficient size to
    accommodate the parking of vehicles associated with these dwellings and the
    proposed dwellings, and to allow for turning and manoeuvring. The area of
    hardstanding is also gated and accessed separately from the wider agricultural
    operation on the site. Consequently, I consider adequate parking facilities could be
    provided for future occupants of the appeal building. Whether or not this would
    require a separate permission is not an issue for me to determine in the context of
    this prior approval application and, if required, is capable of being dealt with by the
    parties outside the scope of this appeal.
34. The Council refers to an appeal decision for a similar proposal under Class Q
    where the Inspector in that case imposed a condition requiring the provision of
    parking within the curtilage of the site8. However, that example is not the same as
    the appeal before me insofar as the curtilage in this case would be used as private
    outdoor amenity rather than for parking, thus, any parking provided to the front of
    the building for occupants of the dwellings or their visitors would be outside the
    defined curtilage.


8
    Appeal Ref: PP/J1869/W/25/3364410


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007422


35. Turning to matters concerning the PROW, on the basis of the evidence, a small
    section of PROW would cross the south-west corner of the proposed curtilage. I
    note the site edged red plan was amended to exclude the PROW during the
    processing of the application, but this was not accepted by the Council. The
    amended plan has not been submitted with the appeal. Regardless, it is not
    unusual for PROW to cross private land. The key issue is that there is no
    interference with the ability for members of the public to use the PROW and that
    there is no diminution in its width, noting the comments of the Council’s Public
    Rights of Way team in this regard. The identification of a curtilage in association
    with the prior approval process would not, in itself, prevent the continued use of
    the PROW.
36. It may not be desirable for future occupants of the dwelling affected to have a
    PROW in the garden, but I am mindful that the appellant has indicated a
    willingness to reduce to size of the curtilage to avoid the PROW crossing through
    it. Even though the curtilage is identified as that in the submitted site edge red plan
    in this case, Paragraph W(13) of the GPDO enables prior approval to be granted
    subject to conditions that are reasonably related to the matters requiring prior
    approval. In this case, conditions could secure the submission and approval of
    details of all boundary treatments. This could ensure that the PROW is excluded
    from the area of land enclosed for residential use.
37. Drawing the above together, from the evidence before me, I find the proposal
    would provide adequate parking for future residents whom could safely access the
    appeal site from the existing access track. It would also not lead to the loss or
    degradation of a PROW. It would therefore satisfy paragraph Q2(1)(a) of Schedule
    2, Part 3 of the GPDO and the provisions of paragraph W(10)(b), in relation to the
    transport and highways impacts of the development.
Prior approval - location and siting
38. The appeal building is located within a wider agricultural enterprise. Two existing
    dwellings associated with the unit lie to the north, beyond which is a large, open-
    sided agricultural storage building. To the south of the building is a field, shortly
    beyond which are two further dwellings that are not associated with the agricultural
    enterprise; and to the west is the access track to the building. To the east is an
    agricultural building which, at the time of my site visit, accommodated a few
    calves, hay and agricultural equipment. This building is subject to the other appeal.
39. The Council argues that the proximity of the appeal building and its garden area to
    other buildings on the agricultural unit, which are predominantly for use in relation
    to dairy farming, would be undesirable or impracticable for future occupants of the
    building. However, the Council do not identify the nature of any potential harm.
40. Impractical or undesirable are not defined in the GPDO. The PPG states that
    impractical reflects that the location and siting would “not be sensible or realistic”,
    and undesirable reflects that it would be “harmful or objectionable”. It goes on to
    confirm that the decision maker should start from the premise that the permitted
    development right grants planning permission, subject to the prior approval
    requirements. That an agricultural building is in a location where planning
    permission would not normally be granted for a new dwelling is not a sufficient
    reason for refusing prior approval. Amongst other instances, the example of an
    undesirable location would be where a building would be located adjacent to uses


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007422


         such as intensive poultry farming buildings, silage storage or building with
         dangerous machines or chemicals9.
41. Paragraph W(10)(b) of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO requires that regard be
    had to the Framework so far as relevant to the subject matter of the prior approval
    as if considering a planning application. Policy P3 of the Framework, amongst
    other things, states that development proposals should provide healthy living
    conditions for occupiers including in terms of avoiding exposure to levels of air,
    noise, light or other sources of pollution which could have an unacceptable
    adverse effect on health and the quality of life.
42. The current lawful use of the appeal site and the surrounding land and buildings is
    for agriculture, although I note the evidence indicates that the land surrounding the
    buildings is part of a Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) habitat bank through a BNG
    registered conservation covenant. As such, the level of agricultural activity taking
    place on this land would be limited for at least 30 years. However, this would not
    prohibit all agricultural activity. Livestock grazing and hay cutting could typically still
    take place on land subject to a BNG habitat bank.
43. Therefore, even though I accept that the current farming enterprise is very limited
    in scale and I do not doubt, from observations at my site visit, that the site as an
    active farm operated by the appellant is ‘winding down’, it could be used more
    intensively in future. Even as part of a BNG habitat bank, I see no compelling
    reason why the modern, large open-sided building, the building subject of the other
    appeal, yard areas and land could not potentially accommodate a considerable
    number of livestock, farm vehicles and machinery, given the approximate 40
    hectare extent of the land indicated in the appellant’s information.
44. As such planning judgement is required as to the nature and intensity of activities
    that could reasonably occur given the land-use, as well as the character of the
    disturbance and odour likely to be generated by them. These could include from
    the keeping of livestock, storage of equipment, chemicals, movements associated
    with agricultural vehicles and other general agricultural practices. Such activities
    are likely to take place at any time of the day or night and for 7 days a week.
45. Despite this, given the distance between the other agricultural buildings and the
    appeal building, together with the intervening dwellings, there would be sufficient
    separation between these buildings and the agricultural activities that could take
    place in and around them and the appeal building. Moreover, no windows are
    proposed on the side (east) elevation that would face the building subject of the
    other appeal. Access to the other agricultural buildings and much of the land is
    separated from the hardstanding area immediately fronting the appeal building,
    thus avoiding vehicular movements associated with the agricultural enterprise.
46. I do not have the full details and circumstance of the case referred to by the
    Council pertaining to Friths Farm10 to make a robust comparison with the appeal
    before me, including where the building proposed for conversion is located in
    relation to other buildings and the distances between them. Even so, I recognise
    that the agricultural sector is dynamic and could be subject to change at any time,
    with limited recourse to planning matters. This is already evident in relation to the
    enterprise associated with the appeal before me insofar as land has been set

9
    Paragraph: 109 Reference ID: 13-109-20150305
10
     Appeal Ref: APP/Z2505/W/25/3367067


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           8
Appeal Decision 6007422


         aside as part of a BNG habitat bank. I am also mindful of the ‘agent of change’
         principle referenced in Policy P4 of the Framework and the potential for tensions to
         arise between agricultural operations taking place on the wider site and occupants
         of the appeal building, who would be unlikely to be associated with those
         operations.
47. Nonetheless, even if the use of the remaining agricultural buildings and land on the
    enterprise becomes more intensive in future, the appeal building sits between the
    two dwellings associated with the agricultural enterprise and two separate
    dwellings to the south, in a discrete and sloping corner of the wider site. Moreover,
    I consider it very unlikely that large agricultural vehicles and machinery would use
    the gated yard area in front of the appeal building and The Sycamores, or the field
    access to the west side of the appeal building, to access the existing agricultural
    buildings and land when there is a clear and more direct access to them.
48. I therefore conclude, for the reasons given above, the location or siting of the
    building would not make it otherwise impractical or undesirable for it to change
    from agricultural use to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses), with
    particular regard to the building’s proximity to other buildings used for agricultural
    purposes, including for livestock. The proposal would therefore satisfy paragraph
    Q2(1)(e) of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO and the provisions of paragraph
    W(10)(b) in this regard.
Other Matters
49. In addition to the main issues I have addressed above, Hankelow Parish Council
    and a neighbouring resident have raised several concerns, including the
    agricultural operations and agricultural integrity; the potential for pollution to nearby
    Birchall Brook; land contamination; the effect on the character of the area; historic
    planning context of the site; utility supply; flooding and drainage; heating provision
    and oil tanks; effect on national fuel line; infrastructure requirements; and the size
    of outdoor amenity space.
50. The application is not for planning permission and therefore not subject to the
    policy in the Hankelow Neighbourhood Plan that requires a replacement building.
    While paragraph W(10)(b) of the GPDO does make reference to having regard to
    the Framework so far as relevant to the subject matter of the prior approval, as if
    the application were a planning application, this does not require regard to the
    Framework as a whole, only insofar as it is relevant to the subject matter of the
    prior approval.
51. PPG11 advises that the statutory requirements relating to prior approval are much
    less prescriptive that those relating to planning applications. It goes on to say that
    this is deliberate, as prior approval is a light-touch process, and it is important that
    a local planning authority does not impose unnecessary onerous requirements on
    developers nor seek to replicate the planning application system.
52. I saw at my site visit that the site is in active agricultural use, albeit in a limited
    capacity. I am also aware, from the appeal documentation, of the BNG habitat
    bank pertaining to some of the wider site. Nevertheless, agricultural activities could
    increase at the site, but I have taken this into account in my assessment of the
    relevant prior approval matters.

11
     Paragraph: 028 Reference ID: 13-028-20140306


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            9
Appeal Decision 6007422


53. Matters relating to the appearance of the building, contamination and flood risk, as
    matters relating to prior approval, have been considered by the Council and found
    to be acceptable subject to conditions. I have no substantive evidence before me
    to disagree.
54. The appeal building is sited in close proximity to existing dwellings. I have no
    evidence to suggest that any issues would occur in ensuring that the proposed
    dwellings had access to utility services, including heating provision. Evidence
    indicates the site is located within Flood Zone 1 and an area with a low likelihood
    of surface water flooding. Concerns relating to surface water management and
    treatment of foul water relating to the residential use of the building are necessary
    and could be dealt with by conditions. There is no substantive evidence before me
    to demonstrate that the proximity of a national fuel line below the access track
    should render the conversion of the appeal building as unacceptable in relation to
    the prior approval matters. The amount of outdoor space that can be provided for
    dwellings created under Class Q is specifically limited by paragraph X of the
    GPDO.
55. I have not been provided with the details of the previous application on the site
    referred to by the Parish Council12, nor of the, now closed, golf course. In any
    event, the land remains in agricultural use. Any breach of covenant relating to the
    building and land subject of this appeal would be a separate legal matter outside
    the scope of the appeal.
Conditions
56. Paragraph W (13) of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO sets out that prior approval
    may be granted subject to conditions reasonably related to the subject matter of
    the prior approval. While the Council have suggested only one condition, I note
    that other conditions have been suggested by the Council’s Regulatory Services
    and Health team (RSH) and the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA). Therefore, I
    sought the views of the main parties on suggested conditions. The Council did not
    provide a response but I have taken the views of the appellant into account and
    have had regard to the relevant tests in the Framework and the PPG in doing so.
57. Paragraph Q.2(4) of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO states that
    development under Class Q is permitted subject to the condition that it must be
    completed within a period of 3 years starting with the prior approval date. It is
    therefore not necessary to impose a separate time limit condition.
58. Paragraph W (12) of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO requires the development to
    be carried out in accordance with the approved details. As such I have listed the
    plans in my formal decision for certainty. As these plans identify the materials for
    the external surfaces, a condition relating to materials is not necessary.
59. To ensure the PROW is not obstructed, and in the interests of the external
    appearance of the proposal, and as highways and external appearance are
    matters for prior approval, details of boundary treatment are reasonable and
    necessary.
60. The RSH team had no objection to the proposal subject to conditions regarding
    contaminated land. There is no evidence to suggest that contaminated soil would

12
     LPA Ref: 23/4302N


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6007422


       be brought onto the site, therefore a condition in relation to the importation of soils
       is unreasonable and unnecessary. However, the details of the past use of the
       building are unknown. Given land contamination is a prior approval matter, and
       that there is the potential for contamination from the storage of building and
       agricultural materials, a condition is proportionate, reasonable and necessary to
       ensure that, should any contamination be identified within the site, this is fully
       investigated and managed appropriately to protect surrounding and future
       occupiers. I have re-worded the RSH condition in this regard for precision.
61. To ensure satisfactory foul and surface water drainage is provided for future
    occupants a condition is necessary to prevent harmful environmental effects and
    to provide satisfactory living conditions for future occupiers.
62. The RSH team’s suggested noise condition during construction works would not
    be reasonable or necessary given the scale of the proposal, its time-limited nature
    and that other legislation could address any concerns in this regard.
63. The Council requested a condition requiring parking facilities for future residents.
    However, this would fall outside the scope of this application.
Conclusion
64. As the proposal meets the requirements for prior approval and is permitted
    development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GDPO, I therefore conclude
    that the appeal should be allowed, and prior approval is granted, subject to the
    standard conditions set out in paragraph Q.2 of Class Q and to the additional
    conditions specified above.



Ann Veevers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6007422



  Schedule of Conditions, Prior Approval Ref:25/3355/PRIOR-3Q

1. Prior to first occupation of the dwellings hereby permitted, details of the positions,
   height, design, materials and type of boundary treatment to be erected shall be
   submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The boundary
   treatment shall be completed in accordance with the approved details before any
   dwelling is first occupied and thereafter retained.
2. Any contamination that is found during the course of the conversion of the
   development hereby permitted not previously identified shall be reported
   immediately to the local planning authority. Development on the part of the site
   affected shall be suspended until a risk assessment has been carried out and
   submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. Where
   unacceptable risks are found, the development shall not resume or continue until
   remediation and verification schemes have been carried out in accordance with
   details that shall first have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
   planning authority.
3. Prior to occupation of the building as a dwelling a drainage scheme for the site,
   based on sustainable drainage principles has been submitted to and approved in
   writing by the local planning authority. The submitted details shall:
     i) provide information about the method employed to delay and control the surface
     water discharged from the building and the measures taken to prevent pollution of
     the receiving groundwater and/or surface waters;
     ii) include details how foul and surface water will drain on separate systems;
     iii) include details of rainwater harvesting butts;
     iv) include a timetable for its implementation; and,
     v) provide, a management and maintenance plan for the lifetime of the
     development.
     The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details. The
     foul and surface water drainage system shall be managed and maintained
     thereafter in accordance with the approved management and maintenance plan.


                                                END




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
