Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 June 2026
by M Cryan BA(Hons) DipTP MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026

Appeal Ref: 6007562
172 Royal College Street, Camden, London NW1 0SP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Demetris Anastasiou against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Camden.
•    The application reference is 2026/0055/P.
•    The development proposed is opening of front lightwell and provision of stairs and metal gates in
     association with access to basement from street.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Opening of front
       lightwell and provision of stairs and metal gates in association with access to
       basement from street, at 172 Royal College Street, Camden, London NW1 0SP in
       accordance with the terms of the application, reference 2026/0055/P, subject to
       the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved drawings and documents:
              • Location Plan
              • Existing Ground Floor and Basement Plans (25-352-01)
              • Existing First Floor and Second Floor Plans (25-352-02)
              • Proposed Ground Floor and Basement Plan (25-352-03)
              • Existing and Proposed Roof Plan (25-352-04)
              • Existing Elevation (25-352-05)
              • Proposed Elevation (25-352-06)
              • Existing Section A-A (25-352-07)
              • Proposed Section A-A (25-352-08)
              • Existing and Proposed Images (252-352-09)
              • Design and Access Statement and Heritage Statement (undated;
                 submitted to LPA as part of planning application).
     3)       Where materials and finishes have not otherwise been specified in the
              approved drawings and documents, all new external work shall be carried out
              in materials that resemble, as closely as possible, in colour and texture those
              of the existing building.
Procedural Matters
2.     The proposed development was described on the planning application form as
       “new access via stairs in front lightwell and associated alterations”. An amended


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007562


         description was used by the Council on the decision notice; while I note the
         appellant’s comment that they had not been notified of, or asked to agree to, that
         change, they subsequently adopted the amended wording for their appeal
         submissions. I have also used it in the banner heading and my formal decision
         above, as it provides a more comprehensive description of the scheme.
3.       The appellant submitted an additional drawing during the appeal. In deciding
         whether to accept this, I have had regard to the judgment of the High Court in
         Holborn Studios1 (which refined the long-standing and well-understood
         “Wheatcroft Principle” 2). The additional drawing, comprising “before” and “after”
         images of the front elevation, does not alter the scheme in any way and, while it is
         not the determinative factor, the Council did not object to it during the appeal. Any
         interested parties have also had the opportunity to comment on the additional
         drawing during the appeal, though none did. I am therefore satisfied that there
         would be no procedural or substantive unfairness arising from my accepting the
         additional drawing, and I have proceeded on that basis.
4.       On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
         Framework (“the Framework”). While the new Framework included substantial
         changes from the previous version, the effect of the provisions most relevant to
         this appeal was not altered significantly. I therefore consider that there has been
         no need for me to seek submissions on the revised Framework, and am satisfied
         that no party’s interests have been prejudiced by my taking this approach.
         References to the Framework here are to the current August 2026 version.
Main Issue
5.       The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
         appearance of the Camden Broadway Conservation Area (“the CBCA”).
Reasons
6.       The appeal site is within the CBCA, and I have a statutory duty to pay special
         attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance
         of the conservation area. As heritage assets are irreplaceable, the Framework
         states that they should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance,
         and that any harm or loss requires clear and convincing justification (Policy HE4).
         It goes on to say that substantial weight should be given to the conservation of a
         designated heritage asset, and that any harm to its significance should be weighed
         against any public benefits resulting from the proposal (Policy HE6).
7.       The CBCA was designated in September 2005, and covers a small area of
         commercial and residential properties a short way north-east of Camden Town
         centre. The development of the conservation area began in earnest in the 1820s;
         its built form is predominantly characterised by short three- and four-storey brick
         terraces, some with white stucco finish or details. The variety of commercial uses
         in the area, and the busy roads – including Royal College Street – and the railway
         viaduct which pass through it, give the CBCA it a noisy and bustling character. The
         significance of the conservation area, insofar as it relates to this appeal, is
         primarily derived from its cohesive early 19th century identity and its vibrant mixed
         residential and commercial urban character.

1
    Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin)
2
    Bernard Wheatcroft Ltd v SSE [JPL 1982 P37]


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6007562


8.       The appeal property is within the middle of a three-storey terrace block on the
         eastern side of Royal College Street. The block has a formal street elevation, with
         brick arch surrounds to the upper floor windows. The appeal property has a
         shallow hard-surfaced forecourt with an inset grille, which has side railings but
         which is open to the footway along the street boundary. The ground floor is in
         commercial use, with associated storage and other ancillary areas in the
         basement, while the first and second floors are residential, a pattern of use
         common on Royal College Street and Camden Road within the CBCA. The block
         between Nos 168 and 178A Royal College Street which includes the appeal
         property is identified in the Council’s 2009 CBCA Appraisal and Management
         Strategy (“the AMS”) as making a positive contribution to the conservation area, as
         is the shopfront of No 172.
9.       The proposed development is the formation of an open lightwell, with steel railings
         and gate, and the installation of an external stairway giving access to the
         basement. This would replace the existing hard forecourt area. The creation of an
         open lightwell would be something of an anomaly within the appeal property’s
         block, the only other example being at No 168. However, there are others in the
         immediate vicinity, including at Nos 197, 199, 201, 211 and 213 Royal College
         Street, so they are to some extent an established part of the street character.
         There are also several more examples elsewhere in the CBCA, especially on
         Camden Road north of the railway bridge. The development would not therefore in
         itself be of an alien or unexpected type within its surroundings.
10. I acknowledge that there is considerable variability in the quality of the design and
    execution of lightwells and railings within the CBCA, though I also recognised that
    some of these works may have pre-dated the conservation area being designated.
    In particular, examples which appear to have formed part of schemes converting
    commercial premises to residential use are often not especially sympathetic to the
    character or appearance of the CBCA, whether because of poor design or choice
    of materials, or simply through work not having been well carried out. I am not
    therefore persuaded that all the examples cited by the appellant – or some others
    that I saw during my site visit – make the positive contribution to the quality of the
    townscape suggested in their Design and Access Statement.
11. Here though, the proposed lightwell would be relatively shallow and inobtrusive,
    and the character and appearance of the existing shopfront – as well as its active
    commercial use, which makes some contribution to the vibrancy and vitality of the
    area – would be retained. Furthermore, the submitted drawings show that the
    railings to the frontage would be of a traditional design with an arrowhead-type
    finial, which would complement some of the retained railings already found within
    the CBCA. In this respect, I note the AMS sets out support for replacement of
    poor-quality boundary treatments with historically-appropriate railings. Overall, I
    am satisfied that this particular proposed development would be acceptable both in
    terms of its type and its details.
12. An appeal was allowed in 2010 for a development at No 174 Royal College Street
    which related to a change of use but which also included “new access via stairs in
    front lightwell and associated alterations to shop front” 3. I was not provided with a
    full copy of that appeal decision, nor with details of the approved scheme, and the
    planning permission has expired without being implemented. Given the lack of

3
    PINS Ref: APP/X5210/A/10/2131682


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007562


       information before me, the 2010 appeal decision is not a significant factor in my
       decision either way, notwithstanding that my overall conclusion is evidently in line
       with that of my predecessor.
13. I also note that the development plan has been updated since the 2010 appeal
    decision. The Council drew my attention to specific references to lightwells, and
    whether they may be appropriate with reference to the character of the
    streetscape, in the supporting text to Policy A5 of the 2017 Camden Local Plan
    (“the CLP”). That policy was not referred to in the Council’s reasons for refusal but,
    in any event, for the reasons I have set out in paragraphs 9 and 11 above, I
    consider that the proposed development would be acceptable in these respects.
14. Taking all of the above points together, I am satisfied that the character and
    appearance of the CBCA would be preserved. The proposal would therefore
    comply with Policies D1 and D2 of the 2017 Camden Local Plan (“the CLP”) which,
    among other things, seek to secure high quality design which respects local
    context and character, and to preserve and enhance designated heritage assets
    including conservation areas.
15. The Council’s statement referred to its emerging local plan which will, in due
    course, replace the existing CLP. The supporting text to draft Policy D6 in that
    emerging plan contains a similar wording in respect of lightwells to that in current
    Policy A5 which I have referred to in paragraph 13 above. There is little information
    before me about the precise stage of preparation of the emerging local plan,
    including when it may be adopted, and the weight I give to it is therefore limited. In
    view of my findings set out above, however, there is nothing to suggest that it
    would justify my reaching a different overall conclusion here.
16. The proposal would also comply with the requirements of the Framework relating
    to conserving and enhancing the historic environment. As I do not find that the
    proposal has caused harm to or loss of heritage assets, it is not necessary to apply
    the public benefit test set out in Policy HE6 of the Framework.
Conditions
17. In addition to the standard time limit condition (1), I have specified the approved
    plans and other documents so as to provide certainty (2). In order to protect the
    character and appearance of the CBCA I have also included a condition requiring
    materials to match those of the existing building, where these have not already
    been specified (3).
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



M Cryan
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
