Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 July 2026
by D Wilson BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6007373
Car Park Between Castle Mews And 7 Castle Road, Castle Road, North Finchley,
Barnet, London N12 9EE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Sansprine Limited against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Barnet.
•   The application Ref is 25/0632/FUL.
•   The development proposed is redevelopment of the Site to provide 20 residential dwellings (Use
    Class C3); together with landscaping, access, cycle parking and other associated works.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for redevelopment of the
   Site to provide 20 residential dwellings (Use Class C3); together with landscaping,
   access, cycle parking and other associated works at Car Park Between Castle
   Mews And 7 Castle Road, Castle Road, North Finchley, Barnet, London N12 9EE
   in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/0632/FUL, subject to the
   conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2. During the appeal determination, a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was adopted on 17th August 2026. The main parties were given an
   opportunity to comment on the new Framework, and I have taken any comments
   received into account.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
       •   the character and appearance of the area,
       •   the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with regard to outlook, and

       •   whether adequate provision of disabled persons parking spaces would be
           provided.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007373


Reasons
Character and appearance
4. The appeal site is a car park which is associated with offices near to the appeal site.
   The site is predominantly surrounded by residential properties and their gardens
   with the site itself being laid to hardstanding. Dwellings are mostly two-storey and
   the pattern of development is generally dense with most houses being terraced.
   Dwellings in the area tend to have small front gardens or parking areas as well as
   trees and landscaping dotted along the streets which results in an open character
   and appearance.
5. The proposed development would have a L-shaped design that follows the shape of
   the appeal site with a combination of two-storey terraced housing and cottages with
   a street running through the centre of the site. There are also two three-storey
   buildings proposed, one of which would front the appeal site with a stepped height,
   arched roof and set back which allows for landscaping and would provide an
   attractive entrance to the appeal site. While the proposal would predominantly be a
   large block, this would not be at odds with the mostly terraced houses nearby which
   combined with the gaps and landscaping proposed would not appear bulky in this
   context.
6. The appeal site is modest in size, however, as the scheme is proposed to be car
   free, the development would have a large pedestrian walkway and open spaces
   throughout which means that while there are 20 houses proposed, it would not
   appear as an overdevelopment of the modest appeal site. Instead, it would mirror
   the generally dense pattern of development nearby but also allow for landscaping
   and foliage which would be in keeping with the open character and appearance of
   the wider area.
7. The proposed design would be contemporary, and while it would deviate from the
   uniform design of other dwellings nearby it draws on elements of design patterns
   from nearby dwellings such as using similar materials but also seeks to create
   visual interest through a mix of fenestration, large and differing shaped windows as
   well as parapets and lintels. The overall result is a scheme that sits well within the
   wider area, would not appear bulky and would preserve the open character and
   appearance of the area.
8. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would not harm the character
   and appearance of the area. I find no conflict with Policy D3 of the London Plan
   2021, Policy CDH01 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036 Adopted March 2025 (LP)
   and guidance contained within the Local Plan Supplementary Planning Document:
   Residential Design Guidance October 2016 (Residential SPD). Amongst other
   things, these seek to ensure that developments respond sensitively to the distinctive
   local character and design, building form, patterns of development, scale, massing,
   roof form and height of the existing context.
Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
9. The proposed development would be located close to those properties along Castle
   Road and Stanhope Road. However, the development has been designed to soften
   the impact by the use of a barrel-vaulted roof that would slope towards the boundary
   of the site. Furthermore, lighter bricks and recessed patterns for the windows can be
   secured by a suitably worded planning condition.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007373


10. I acknowledge that built form would be located close to the gardens of properties
    along Castle Road and Stanhope Road, however, the gardens for these properties
    have a generous depth which would mitigate against the harm. I also note that
    many gardens also have large outbuildings to the rear which provide a degree of
    screening and separation which would further mitigate the impact of the proposed
    development. In regard to the properties along Castle Mews, these would be
    located a suitable distance away from the appeal site to not result in any harm to
    outlook.
11. The design of the proposed development incorporates numerous aspects such as
    creating notches in the elevations, use of differing materials, creating visual interest
    and differing roof heights. These in combination would mean that the building would
    not have a bulky or overly long appearance and would therefore not result in an
    unacceptable means of enclosure for the occupiers of neighbouring properties and
    for the same reasons would not result in an unacceptable overbearing development.
12. l therefore conclude that the proposed development would not harm the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers with regard to outlook. I find no conflict with
    Policy D3 of the London Plan, Policy CDH01 of the LP and guidance contained
    within the Residential SPD and Local Plan Supplementary Planning Document:
    Sustainable Design and Construction October 2016. Amongst other things, these
    seek to ensure that development allows for acceptable levels of outlook for
    adjoining and nearby users impacted by the development.
Disabled persons parking spaces
13. The proposed development would be car free and would be secured by a planning
    obligation that would prevent future occupiers from obtaining parking permits and
    thereby parking on the surrounding streets.
14. Notwithstanding the above, Policy T6.1 of the London Plan requires that disabled
    persons parking should be provided for new developments delivering ten or more
    units at a percentage of 3% of dwellings. To meet this minimum requirement two
    disabled persons parking spaces were originally proposed at the entrance to the
    appeal site. However, these were later removed at the request of the Council due to
    their being no room within the appeal site for the spaces and those shown outside
    resulting in issues with deliveries and emergency vehicles.
15. The car free aspect of the proposed development would be appropriately controlled
    through the planning obligation. However, the obligation would not prevent blue
    badge holders from applying for a parking permit which means that should future
    occupiers require blue badge parking they would still be able to, and based on the
    evidence before me there is suitable availability for on-street parking close to the
    appeal site.
16. Notwithstanding the above, adequate disabled persons parking would not be
    provided as part of the proposed development and as such, the proposal would
    conflict with Policy T6.1 of the London Plan and TRC03 of the LP which amongst
    other things, seek to ensure adequate disabled persons parking spaces. The
    magnitude of harm from this conflict would be limited due to the availability of
    parking permits for blue badge holders and on-street parking.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007373


Other Matters
17. I note that concerns have been raised with regard to parking provision in the area,
    that inadequate living conditions would be provided for future occupiers and that
    there would be a loss of light, privacy and unacceptable noise for the occupiers of
    neighbouring properties. However, the development proposed is car free and the
    Council have also found no harm to highway safety, that adequate living conditions
    would be provided for future occupiers and there would be no loss of sunlight,
    daylight, privacy or unacceptable noise impacts for the occupiers of neighbouring
    properties for which I have no reason to conclude against.
18. It is suggested that local schools, dentist and doctors are overwhelmed, however,
    there is no evidence before me to suggest that this is the case. I am also satisfied
    that inclusive design and accessibility requirements can be secured by a suitably
    worded planning condition.
Planning Balance
19. I have found that the proposed development would not provide adequate disabled
    persons parking, however, due to the availability of parking permits and on-street
    parking the magnitude of harm would be limited.
20. The proposed development would be contrary to Policy T6.1 of the London Plan
    and TRC03 of the LP. These Policies are generally consistent with the Framework
    in seeking to provide sufficient parking for blue badge holders. The conflict with
    these Policies should therefore be given significant weight.
21. There is no dispute between the parties that the appeal site is underutilised
    brownfield land and the use of the land for housing is acceptable in principle. In this
    regard, Policy L2 of the National Planning Policy Framework August 2026 (the
    Framework) gives substantial weight to making better use of vacant and
    underutilised land such as the appeal site. Policy S4 of the Framework also states
    that development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects.
22. Taking the above matters into account, the limited harm from the availability of
    disabled persons parking would be outweighed by the substantial weight attributed
    to the use of underutilised brownfield land, the site’s location within a settlement and
    the affordable housing secured by a Unilateral Undertaking. Accordingly, while the
    proposal would conflict with the development plan in this case, Policy S4 of the
    Framework is a material consideration which indicates that the benefits of the
    scheme substantially outweigh its adverse effects. In this respect, that justifies a
    decision other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conditions
23. Condition 1 is the standard condition that relates to the commencement of
    development and condition 2 specifies the approved plans for the avoidance of
    doubt. Conditions 3, 4 and 5 require details of a construction management and
    logistics plan, construction drawings of the surface water drainage network and
    registration of Non-Road Mobile Machinery which are necessary to protect the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers and to prevent flooding.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007373


24. Conditions 6, 7 and 8 require details of a preliminary risk assessment,
    implementation of temporary tree protection and an overheating assessment which
    are necessary to protect the character and appearance of the area and ensure
    adequate living conditions are provided for future occupiers. Condition 9 and 10
    require details of tree planting pits and landscape and ecological management plan
    which are necessary to protect the character and appearance of the area.
25. Conditions 11, 12 and 13 require demonstration that the buildings can achieve full
    secured by design accreditation, details of external materials and hardstanding and
    storage of bins which are necessary to protect the character and appearance of the
    area. Conditions 14, 15, 16 and 17 require details of cycle parking and storage, a
    delivery and servicing management plan, details of the maintenance and
    management of the sustainable drainage scheme and confirmation the sustainable
    drainage scheme has been completed in accordance with the approved details.
    These are necessary in order ensure sustainable means of transport, highway
    safety and to prevent flooding.
26. Conditions 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 require details of boundary treatments and
    privacy screens, subdivision of amenity areas, obscured windows, details of hard
    and soft landscaping as well as the green roof and a landscape management plan.
    These are necessary to protect the character and appearance of the area and
    protect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. Conditions 25, 26 and 27
    require details of low impact lighting, a biodiversity enhancement plan and
    installation of hedgehog highways which are necessary in the interests of
    biodiversity and ecology.
27. Conditions 28, 29 and 30 require details of photovoltaic panels, construction of
    dwellings with water saving and efficiency measures and carbon dioxide emission
    reduction measures which are necessary in the interests of climate change.
    Conditions 31, 32 and 33 require some of the dwellings to be constructed to
    accessibility and adaptability for house design, the Japanese knotweed remediation
    to be carried out and ensure that noise from air source heat pumps is at an
    acceptable level which are necessary to ensure adequate living conditions are
    provided for future occupiers and the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers are
    protected.
28. Conditions 34, 35 and 36 require a piling method statement if piling is required,
    ensure the development is carried out in accordance with the provisions of the
    approved fire statement and prevent the flat roofs being used as balconies or other
    amenity areas which are necessary to ensure adequate living conditions for future
    occupiers and protect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. I have also
    found is exceptionally necessary to remove certain permitted development rights
    through condition 37 which is reasonable in this context given the density of built
    development, proximity to other buildings and the site’s backland location.
29. The appeal proposal is subject to statutory biodiversity net gain (BNG). However, it
    is not necessary to impose the Council’s suggested condition requiring the
    submission of a biodiversity gain plan (BGP) because the deemed biodiversity gain
    condition, under paragraph 13 of Schedule 7A to the Town and Country Planning
    Act 1990 (as amended), ensures that the development cannot commence until a
    BGP has been submitted to and approved by the local planning authority.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007373


Conclusion
30. The proposed development would be contrary to the development plan but material
    considerations, including the presumption in the Framework outweigh this conflict.
    Therefore, for the reasons given, the appeal should be allowed.



D Wilson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007373




                                           Schedule of Conditions

    1. This development must be begun within three years from the date of this
       permission.

    2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans:

         Site Location Plan CAST_P_070 (REV P02)
         Existing Site Plan CAST_P_090 (REV P01)
         Ground Floor GA CAST_P_100 (REV P08)
         First Floor GA CAST_P_110 (REV P07)
         Second Floor GA CAST_P_120 (REV P07)
         Roof GA CAST_P_130 (REV P07)
         Landscape Plan CAST_P_150 (REV P03)
         Existing Elevations 01-04 CAST_P_300 (REV P02)
         Existing Elevations 05-08 CAST_P_301 (REV P02)
         Proposed Elevations 01-02 CAST_P_310 (REV P07)
         Proposed Elevations 03-04 CAST_P_320 (REV P07)
         Proposed Elevations 05-06 CAST_P_330 (REV P07)
         Proposed Elevations 07-09 CAST_P_340 (REV P07)
         Proposed Elevations 10-11 CAST_P_350 (REV P07)
         Proposed Elevations 12-15 CAST_P_360 (REV P07)
         Schedule of Accommodation (dated 20.08.2025)

    3. a) No development or site works shall take place on site until a 'Construction
       Management and Logistics Plan' has been submitted to and approved in writing
       by the Local Planning Authority. The Construction Management and Logistics
       Plan submitted shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
       i. details of the routing of construction vehicles to the site, hours of access,
       access and egress arrangements within the site and security procedures;
       ii. site preparation and construction stages of the development;
       iii. details of provisions for recycling of materials, the provision on site of a
       storage/delivery area for all plant, site huts, site facilities and materials;
       iv. details showing how all vehicles associated with the construction works are
       properly washed and cleaned to prevent the passage to mud and dirt onto the
       adjoining highway;
       v. the methods to be used and the measures to be undertaken to control the
       emission of dust, noise and vibration arising from construction works;
       vi. a suitable and efficient means of suppressing dust, including the adequate
       containment of stored or accumulated material so as to prevent it becoming
       airborne at any time and giving rise to nuisance;
       vii. noise mitigation measures for all plant and processors;
       viii. details of contractor’s compound and car parking arrangements;
       ix. details of interim car parking management arrangements for the duration of
       construction;
       x. details of a community liaison contact for the duration of all works associated
       with the development. For major sites, the Statement shall be informed by the
       findings of the assessment of the air quality impacts of construction and
       demolition phases of the development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         7
Appeal Decision 6007373




         b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
         measures detailed within the statement.

    4. a) Prior to the commencement of development, construction drawings of the
       surface water drainage network, associated sustainable drainage components
       and flow control mechanisms and a construction method statement shall be
       submitted and agreed in writing by the local planning authority.

         b) The scheme shall then be constructed as per the agreed Sustainable
         Drainage Assessment (Ref: 84926R3 dated 25 July 2025) and remaining in
         perpetuity for the lifetime of the development unless agreed in writing by the
         Local Planning Authority. No alteration to the agreed drainage scheme shall
         occur without prior written approval from the Local Authority.

    5. Prior to the commencement of the development, evidence of site registration at
       http://nrmm.london/ to allow continuing details of Non-Road Mobile Machinery
       (NRMM) and plant of net power between 37kW and 560 kW to be uploaded
       during the construction phase of the development shall be submitted to and
       approved by the Local Planning Authority.

         Evidence that all plant and machinery to be used during the demolition and
         construction phases of the development shall meet Stage IV (and Stage V for
         generators) of EU Directive 97/68/ EC for both NOx and PM emissions shall be
         submitted to the Local Planning Authority.

         During the course of the demolitions, site preparation and construction phases,
         an inventory and emissions records for all Non-Road Mobile Machinery (NRMM)
         shall be kept on site. The inventory shall demonstrate that all NRMM is regularly
         serviced and detail proof of emission limits for all equipment. All documentation
         shall be made available for inspection by Local Authority officers at all times until
         the completion of the development.

    6. Part 1
       Before development commences other than for investigative work:
       a) A desktop study (Preliminary Risk Assessment) shall be carried out which
       shall include the identification of previous uses, potential contaminants that
       might be expected, given those uses, and other relevant information. Using this
       information, a diagrammatical representation (Conceptual Model) for the site of
       all potential contaminant sources, pathways and receptors shall be produced.
       The desktop study (Preliminary Risk Assessment) and Conceptual Model shall
       be submitted to the Local Planning Authority. If the desktop study and
       Conceptual Model indicate no risk of harm, development shall not commence
       until approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
       b) If the desktop study and Conceptual Model indicate any risk of harm, a site
       investigation shall be designed for the site using information obtained from the
       desktop study and Conceptual Model. This shall be submitted to, and approved
       in writing by, the Local Planning Authority prior to that investigation being carried
       out on site. The investigation must be comprehensive enough to enable: - a risk
       assessment to be undertaken, - refinement of the Conceptual Model, and - the
       development of a Method Statement detailing the remediation requirements.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007373


         The risk assessment and refined Conceptual Model shall be submitted, along
         with the site investigation report, to the Local Planning Authority.
         c) If the risk assessment and refined Conceptual Model indicate any risk of
         harm, a Method Statement detailing the remediation requirements, using the
         information obtained from the site investigation, and also detailing any post
         remedial monitoring shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local
         Planning Authority prior to that remediation being carried out on site.

         Part 2
         d) Where remediation of contamination on the site is required completion of the
         remediation detailed in the method statement shall be carried out and a report
         that provides verification that the required works have been carried out, shall be
         submitted to, and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority before the
         development is occupied.

    7. No site works (including any temporary enabling works, site clearance and
       demolition) or development shall take place until the temporary tree protection
       shown on the Tree Protection Plan ref. 24115-2, by Barrell Tree Care, approved
       under this condition has been erected around existing trees on site. This
       protection shall remain in position until after the development works are
       completed and no material or soil shall be stored within these fenced areas at
       any time. The development shall be implemented in accordance with the tree
       survey and Arboricultural Method Statement dated 7th February 2025, ref.
       24115-AIA-CA, as approved under this condition.

    8. No development (except site clearance and enabling works) shall take place
       until an overheating assessment carried out by suitably qualified consultant
       which assesses the likely impacts of overheating within the development,
       alongside a final detailed scheme of mitigation for overheating aligning with and
       taking account of technical acoustic considerations, has been submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The report shall include all
       calculations and baseline data and be set out so that the Local Planning
       Authority can fully audit the report and critically analyse the content and
       recommendations. The measures approved in accordance with this condition
       shall be implemented in their entirety prior to the commencement of the use/first
       occupation of the development and retained as such thereafter.

    9. Prior to the commencement of the development, details of the tree planting pits
       shall be provided that include sufficient rooting space for the x 10 lime trees and
       soft landscape to establish and grow to a height that would normally be expected
       for the species. There are many suitable preparatory treatments to achieve the
       required rooting space below the proposed access road known as modular
       structural soil cell systems. Details of these systems can be found within the
       Trees and Design Action Group publication Trees in the Hardscape.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007373


    10. No development shall take place (including any ground works, site, or vegetation
        clearance), until Landscape and Ecological Management Plan (LEMP) has been
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority addressing:
        Creation and enhancement of habitats in accordance with the statuary
        Biodiversity Gain Plan and completed Statutory Metric toolkit with allocated
        offsite units, including proof of purchase of the required registered offsite
        Biodiversity Units.
        The LEMP will include the following:
        a) works.
        b) Purpose and conservation objectives for the proposed ecological design
        Detailed design(s) to achieve stated objectives.
        c) Extent and location/area of proposed works on appropriate scale maps and
        plans.
        d) Type and source of materials to be used where appropriate, e.g. native
        species of local provenance.
        e) Timetable for implementation, including the planting of new trees prior to first
        use of the development.
        f) g) h) i) j) Persons responsible for implementing the works. Details of initial
        aftercare. Aims and objectives of management. Prescriptions for management
        actions. Preparation of a work schedule (including an annual work plan capable
        of being rolled forward over a five-year period)
        k) Habitat monitoring provisions to be submitted to the LPA at monitoring interval
        set out within the LEMP.
        l) Details of the individual, body or organisation(s) responsible for
        implementation of the plan.

         The LEMP will be implemented in accordance with the approved details and all
         features shall be retained in that manner thereafter.

    11. Prior to the commencement of the development, details shall be submitted to,
        and approved, in writing, by the Local Planning Authority to demonstrate that the
        buildings can achieve full 'Secured by Design' Accreditation and 'Secured by
        Design' accreditation shall be obtained for the approved development. The
        development shall only be carried out in accordance with the approved details.

    12. a) Prior to their installation, details of the materials to be used for the external
        surfaces of the building(s) and hard surfaced areas hereby approved shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
        b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
        materials as approved under this condition prior to occupation and retained as
        such thereafter.

    13. a) Notwithstanding the approved plans, before the development hereby
        permitted is first occupied, details of enclosures and screened facilities for the
        storage of recycling containers and wheeled refuse bins or other refuse storage
        containers where applicable, together with a satisfactory point of collection shall
        be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
        b) The development shall be implemented in full accordance with the details as
        approved under this condition prior to the first occupation and retained as such
        thereafter.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6007373


    14. a) Notwithstanding the approved plans, before the development hereby
        permitted is first occupied cycle parking spaces and cycle storage facilities shall
        be provided in accordance with a scheme to be submitted to and approved in
        writing by the Local Planning Authority.
        b) The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance with the
        details as approved under this condition and the spaces shall be permanently
        retained thereafter.

    15. Prior to first occupation of the permitted development, a Delivery and Servicing
        Management Plan (including waste storage and collection arrangements) shall
        be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
        permitted development thereafter shall only be operated in accordance with the
        approved plan.

    16. The development hereby approved shall not be first occupied until details of the
        maintenance and management of the sustainable drainage scheme have been
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
        drainage scheme shall be implemented prior to the first occupation of the
        development hereby approved and thereafter managed and maintained in
        accordance with the approved details in perpetuity. The Local Planning Authority
        shall be granted access to inspect the sustainable drainage scheme for the
        lifetime of the development. The details of the scheme to be submitted for
        approval shall include:
        I. a timetable for its implementation,
        II. details of SuDS features and connecting drainage structures and maintenance
        requirement for each aspect
        III. a management and maintenance plan for the lifetime of the development
        which shall include the arrangements for adoption by any public body or
        statutory undertaker, or any other arrangements to secure the operation of the
        sustainable drainage scheme throughout its lifetime.

    17. Upon completion of the surface water drainage system, including any SuDS
        features, and prior to the first occupation of the development; a survey and
        report from an independent surveyor shall be submitted to and approved in
        writing by the Local Planning Authority. The survey and report shall demonstrate
        that the surface water drainage system has been constructed in accordance with
        the details approved pursuant to conditions 4 and 16. Where necessary, details
        of corrective works to be carried out along with a timetable for their completion,
        shall be included for approval in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
        Any corrective works required shall be carried out in accordance with the
        approved timetable and subsequently re-surveyed with the findings submitted to
        and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

    18. a) The site shall not be brought into use or first occupied until details of the
        means of enclosure, including boundary treatments, have been submitted to and
        approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
        b) The treatment of boundaries should be permeable to species such as
        hedgehogs (Erinacaeus europaeus) and common toad (Bufo bufo), with the
        introduction of a minimum of 1no 13 x 13cm ground level access 'hedgehog
        hole’ between the application site and each neighbouring piece of land to enable
        connections and prevent the fragmentation of habitat


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6007373


         c) The development shall be implemented in accordance with the details
         approved as part of this condition before first occupation or the use is
         commenced and retained as such thereafter.

    19. Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, the sub-division of
        the amenity areas shall be implemented as shown on the approved plan:
        Proposed Ground Floor Plan CAST_P_100 Rev P08 and retained as such
        thereafter.

    20. a) Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, details of privacy
        screens to be installed shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority.
        b) The screens shall be installed in accordance with the details approved under
        this condition before first occupation or the use is commenced and retained as
        such thereafter.

    21. Prior to occupation, all proposed windows at first floor on the eastern elevation to
        Units 04-07 and southern elevation of 09-12 & 18 facing onto the Castle Road
        properties shall be glazed with obscure glass only and shall be permanently
        retained as such thereafter and shall be permanently fixed shut with only a
        fanlight opening.

    22. a) A scheme of hard and soft landscaping, including details of existing trees to
        be retained and size, species, planting heights, densities and positions of any
        soft landscaping, shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority prior to the occupation of the hereby approved development.
        b) All work comprised in the approved scheme of landscaping shall be carried
        out before the end of the first planting and seeding season following occupation
        of any part of the buildings or completion of the development, whichever is
        sooner, or commencement of the use.
        c) Any existing tree shown to be retained or trees or shrubs to be planted as part
        of the approved landscaping scheme which are removed, die, become severely
        damaged or diseased within five years of the completion of development shall be
        replaced with trees or shrubs of appropriate size and species in the next planting
        season.
        d) Provide an updated Urban Greening Factor (UGF) assessment based on the
        final landscape design.

    23. a) Prior to the first occupation of the hereby approved development, details of
        the proposed green roof shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority.
        b) The green roof shall be implemented in accordance with the details approved
        by this condition prior to the commencement of the use or first occupation of the
        development and retained as such thereafter. Should part of the approved green
        roof be removed, die, become severely damaged or diseased within five years of
        the completion of development, it shall be replaced in accordance with the
        details approved by this condition.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6007373


    24. a) Prior to the occupation of the hereby approved development, details of a
        Landscape Management Plan for all landscaped areas for a minimum period of
        25 years shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority.
        b) The Landscape Management Plan shall include details of long-term design
        objectives, management responsibilities, maintenance schedules and
        replacement planting provisions for existing retained trees and any new soft
        landscaping to be planted as part of the approved landscaping scheme.
        c) The approved Landscape Management Plan shall be implemented in full in
        accordance with details approved under this condition prior to occupation of the
        proposed development.

    25. Prior to the occupation of development, details of a Low Impact Lighting scheme
        shall be submitted to and approved by the local planning authority. Any artificial
        lighting scheme designed for development including off street lighting, shall be in
        accordance with Bats Conservation Trust Guidance Note 08/23 Bats and
        artificial lighting in the UK Bats and the Built Environment series. The approved
        details shall be implemented in accordance with the details approved by this
        condition prior to occupation and retained as such thereafter.

    26. Prior to occupation of the development the details of a Biodiversity Enhancement
        Plan shall be submitted to and approved by the local planning authority. The
        document shall contain the location, height, orientation, specification of all
        ecological enhancement feature including 1 x integrated bat roost box
        (Woodstone or similar alternative); 1 x swift brick nest box; and 1 x Woodstone
        Build-in House Sparrow Nest Box; to be installed in line with guidance 'Designing
        for Biodiversity A technical guide for new and existing buildings (RIBA)'. Details
        for submission shall also include all biodiverse soft landscaping features to be
        installed on site including species rich and native planting, 2 x insect hotels, and
        2 x hedgehog homes. The approved details shall be implemented in full prior to
        occupation and retained as such thereafter.

    27. Prior to occupation at least 3 x hedgehog highways (13cm x 13cm gaps) at the
        base of the boundary fencings are to be installed at the base of the boundary
        fencings. The hedgehog highways must be installed in the base of the boundary
        fencing to ensure continued access for commuting hedgehogs and other wildlife
        through the residential gardens and on and offsite and retained as such after.

    28. Prior to the erection and installation of photovoltaic panels, details of the size,
        design and siting of all photovoltaic panels to be installed as part of the
        development shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority. The development shall be carried out and constructed in accordance
        with the approved details and retained as such thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6007373


    29. Prior to the first occupation of the new dwellinghouse(s) (Use Class C3) hereby
        approved they shall all have been constructed to have 100% of the water
        supplied to them by the mains water infrastructure provided through a water
        meter or water meters and each new dwelling shall be constructed to include
        water saving and efficiency measures that comply with Regulation 36(2)(b) of
        Part G 2 of the Building Regulations to ensure that a maximum of 110 litres of
        water is consumed per person per day with a fittings based approach should be
        used to determine the water consumption of the proposed development. Any use
        of grey water and/or rain water systems needs to be separate from the potable
        (wholesome) water system and needs to meet the requirements and guidance
        set out in Part G of the Building Regulations. The development shall be
        maintained as such in perpetuity thereafter.

    30. Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby approved it shall be
        constructed incorporating carbon dioxide emission reduction measures which
        achieve an improvement of not less than 75.1% in carbon dioxide emissions
        when compared to a building constructed to comply with the minimum Target
        Emission Rate requirements of the 2021 Building Regulations. The development
        shall be maintained as such in perpetuity thereafter.

    31. Prior to the first occupation of the new dwellinghouses (Use Class C3) permitted,
        with the exception of units 2, 3, 17-20, they shall have been constructed to meet
        and achieve all the relevant criteria of Part M4(2) of Schedule 1 to the Building
        Regulations 2010 (or the equivalent standard in such measure of accessibility
        and adaptability for house design which may replace that scheme in future) and
        10% constructed to meet and achieve all the relevant criteria of Part M4(3) of the
        abovementioned regulations. The development shall be maintained as such in
        perpetuity thereafter.

    32. The development shall be implemented in full accordance with the remediation
        strategies outlined within the Japanese knotweed survey report (Inspectas Land
        Remediation, 28th September 2024), as approved under this condition.

    33. (i) The level of noise emitted from the Air Source Heat Pumps (ASHP) plants
        hereby approved shall be at least 5dB(A) below the background level, as
        measured from any point 1 metre outside the window of any room of a
        neighbouring residential property. If the noise emitted has a distinguishable,
        discrete continuous note (whine, hiss, screech, hum) and/or distinct impulse
        (bangs, clicks, clatters, thumps), then it shall be at least 10dB(A) below the
        background level, as measured from any point 1 metre outside the window of
        any room of a neighbouring residential property.
        (ii) An acoustic consultant shall be appointed during the detailed design stage, to
        ensure that the above Air Source Heat Pump plant noise criteria will be achieved
        once the ASHPs have been specified and installed.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6007373


    34. If piling is required, no piling shall take place until a Piling Method Statement
        (detailing the depth and type of piling to be undertaken and the methodology by
        which such piling will be carried out, including measures to prevent and minimise
        the potential for damage to subsurface sewerage infrastructure, and the
        programme for the works) and piling layout plan including all Thames Water
        wastewater assets, the local topography and clearance between the face of the
        pile to the face of a pipe has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
        Local Planning Authority in consultation with Thames Water. Any piling must be
        undertaken in accordance with the terms of the approved piling method
        statement and piling layout plan.

    35. The development must be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the
        approved Fire Statement Issue 3 (dated 11/02/2025) prepared by Alt Fire unless
        otherwise approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

    36. Except for the dedicated balconies indicated on the Proposed First Floor Plan
        CAST_P_110 Rev P07 and Proposed Second Floor Plan CAST_P_120 Rev
        P07, all other approved flat roofs shall only be used in connection with the repair
        and maintenance of the building and shall at no time be converted to or used as
        a balcony, roof garden or similar amenity or sitting out area.

    37. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
        Permitted Development) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-enacting that
        Order with or without modification), no development otherwise permitted by any
        of Classes A-G of Part 1 of Schedule 2 of that Order shall be carried out within
        the area of each residential curtilage hereby approved.


                                           End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     15
