Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007391
3 and 5 Montpellier Street, Harrogate HG1 2TQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant full planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by ATC Properties Limited against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01921/FUL.
•    The development proposed is rebuilding of derelict cottages to form 1 no. retail unit and 1no.
     apartment.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of the development in the above banner heading has been taken
       from the original application form. The description of development on the decision
       notice includes the removal of an external fire escape to form 1no. balcony off
       western elevation of the building; erection of external access off eastern elevation
       of the building; and erection of gates. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
3.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
       amendments against the December 2024 version. Although there have been
       significant amendments made, the changes relevant to this appeal are not
       substantive or determinative to the outcome of my decision. I have therefore not
       gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues of the appeal are:
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance
                of the surrounding area, including whether it would preserve or enhance the
                character or appearance of the Harrogate Conservation Area (CA) and
                preserve the setting of the adjoining non-designated heritage asset, 15-18
                Montpellier Parade (No 15-18); and
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of existing
                occupiers of No 15-18 and the future occupiers of the apartment with regard
                to privacy and outlook.
Reasons
Character and appearance

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007391


5.     The appeal site relates to the rear of No 15-18 Montpellier Parade on Montpellier
       Hill within the area of Harrogate town centre known as Montpellier Quarter. There
       are a range of shops and services in the immediate area as well as residential
       uses above shops and commercial uses. There is rubble located on site which
       represents the remains of built form understood to have been two derelict
       cottages. This is attached to the existing outrigger to the rear of No 15-18. The
       appeal site is accessed via Montpellier Mews to the rear of the site that connects
       to Montpellier Street to the east which is a popular tourist spot with many shops
       and services. The appeal site is visible on approaches along Montpellier Street
       and is viewed in this context and against the rear of the properties fronting onto
       Montpellier Parade and the smaller scale businesses along the Mews.
6.     The proposed development seeks consent for the rebuilding of derelict cottages to
       form 1 no. retail unit and 1 no. apartment. The scheme would be erected on the
       footprint of the former cottages with one small retail space to be created on the
       ground floor of the building and one two-bedroom apartment split over two floors
       on the upper floors of the building.
7.     As set out, the site is located within the CA and lies in Character Area A: Town
       centre, Low Harrogate & the Victoria Park Estate of the Harrogate Conservation
       Area Character Appraisal (HCACA). 1-35 Montpellier Parade are mentioned in the
       HCACA as buildings of local interest & merit.
8.     I therefore have a duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (PLBCAA) to pay special attention to the desirability
       of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA. I have also had
       regard to Policy HE5 of the Framework which explains that assessments of the
       potential effects of development proposals on the significance of heritage assets
       (including through effects on their setting) should identify whether proposals would
       be likely to: a. have a positive effect, which is where the significance of a heritage
       asset would be enhanced, or better revealed; or b. have no effect on the
       significance of a heritage asset; or c. result in harm to the significance of a
       heritage asset, either from work affecting the asset itself or from development
       within its setting. This policy explains that the degree of harm should be identified.
       Policy HE6 of the Framework explains that when considering the potential effect of
       a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
       substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation (and the more
       important the asset, the greater the weight should be). This is irrespective of
       whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm,
       or total loss of its significance.
9.     I have also had regard to Policy HE7 of the Framework which explains that where
       a development proposal would harm the significance of a non-designated heritage
       asset, this should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced
       judgement made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the
       significance of the non-designated heritage asset. Policy HE9 specifically covers
       CAs explaining that development proposals within or affecting the significance of
       CAs should: a. retain and conserve buildings and other features which make a
       positive contribution to the character or appearance of the CA where possible; and
       b. consider the area’s special architectural or historic interest (as identified as part
       of the designation of the CA) in the design of development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007391


10. The HCACA explains that the character of central Harrogate derives much more
    from its unity in terms of the scale, materials and overall quality of its buildings
    than from their individual noteworthiness. It is explained that the majority of
    buildings, therefore, make a positive contribution to the character of the CA.
    Because it has comparatively few listed buildings, the character of Harrogate CA
    relies to a much greater extent on its wealth of unlisted buildings.
11. The HCACA describes the area as having a varied mix of uses, with high-quality
    shops being found in the Montpellier Quarter. I found the Quarter to be
    characterful with a quaint Victorian appearance which positively contributes
    towards the character and appearance of the area. It is recognised as having
    heritage value and plays an important role in constructing the image and history of
    Harrogate. As mentioned, 1-35 Montpellier Parade are mentioned in the HCACA
    as buildings of local interest & merit. There is a general presumption that buildings
    of local interest within the CA will be protected, and the Council will be especially
    vigilant when considering applications for alterations or extensions.
12. The HCACA explains that changes in level and the general layout of the town give
    rise to a number of notable views including from Montpellier Hill towards the Crown
    roundabout and the buildings surrounding it in Low Harrogate, and vice versa
    towards the War Memorial. Also mentioned is West Park Stray’s role in providing
    the setting for Montpellier Hill, allowing all the buildings to be viewed at a distance
    and their group value to be fully appreciated.
13. The appeal site is concealed behind Montpellier Parade and does not therefore
    form part of this view. However, it is still highly visible from Montpellier Street
    which is an attractive through road with a number of high-quality tourist and local
    required shops along it. As set out, the appeal site is viewed in this context and
    against the rear of the properties and the smaller scale businesses along the
    Mews.
14. When viewed from Montpellier Street, the rear of the terrace of properties along
    Montpellier Parade provides for a sense of history and uniformity with a very
    traditional design and sense of merit. I noted that additions to the rear were
    modest and there was a degree of openness which allows the character of the
    buildings to be appreciated within its wider and characterful surrounds. This
    contributes to the overall character and appearance of the area. Development at
    the appeal site could therefore influence how such properties and their setting are
    experienced and their significance understood.
15. As referred to earlier, there is rubble located on site which represents the remains
    of built form understood to have been two derelict cottages although there is no
    exact planning history to pinpoint the exact use of this land. Notwithstanding the
    dispute regarding the use and form of the buildings including access
    arrangements, I am sufficiently persuaded by the appellant’s historical evidence
    and mapping that two buildings did indeed occupy the site, and these were known
    as No 3 and 5 Montpellier Street.
16. A photograph dated 1960 shows the two buildings but of a lower height and more
    modest in scale and form than those which front onto Montpellier Parade. The
    appellant does not dispute that the buildings were indeed more modest.
17. While a mock-up has been provided showing how the appeal site may have looked
    if it was not demolished, I cannot be certain of this based on the evidence before

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007391


       me and can only assess the scheme based on its design and how it fits within the
       site and surrounding area. To this end, I appreciate that the scheme seeks to
       replicate the scale of the cottages, but these have long since been demolished and
       I must determine the scheme based on its own merits with the history of the site
       forming a material consideration only.
18. The proposed building would be lower than those fronting onto Montpellier Parade,
    but it would still appear excessive in scale to the rear of the terrace and its
    surroundings. It would read as a bulky addition and not be reflective of the rhythm
    of the built form of buildings within this part of the CA. The proposed design would
    be over-fenestrated which would exacerbate the visual harm and dominate the
    rear of the site to the detriment of the buildings significance and value within the
    CA. The use of dormer windows would detract from the character of other
    elements of the rear of Montpellier Parade which are for the greater part
    characterised by the use of modest conservation rooflights. At my site visit, I did
    observe two other dormer windows to the rear of the terrace of properties which
    appeared to be recent additions located further west. However, the proposed
    dormer windows would be read differently to these. This is because there would be
    four dormer windows within a single building, located in very close proximity to one
    another, which I find excessive. They would be located closer and lower to the
    street scene by virtue of the location of the site which would be highly prominent. I
    do not dispute that there are dormer windows located in the vicinity, but these
    were few and far between, more modest, set back in their buildings roof space and
    I did not find them to dominate the character of the area.
19. I appreciate that the appearance of the existing structure has no architectural merit
    and is a detraction from the appearance of this part of the CA. Nonetheless, its
    small massing means that it does not draw the eye to the extent that the proposed
    building would. While some of the elements of the design would be compatible
    with the surrounding built environment such as materials and retail unit frontage
    design, the proposed development overall would unacceptably draw the eye and
    would be an overbearing and dominant building in this setting. Its historical
    background including any previous permissions relating to the height of the
    outrigger does not alter my findings on this as I must consider the design as a
    whole and how the development would fit within the surrounding context.
20. The Council has mentioned that the proposed balcony off the side elevation is not
    reflective of this part of the CA. At my site visit, I observed many black railing
    balconies and fire escapes. I do not therefore find this element to be an
    uncharacteristic feature in this setting, and this is of lesser concern to me.
21. Overall, and despite my findings on the balcony element, the proposed
    development would unacceptably harm the character and appearance of the
    surrounding area. It would fail to preserve the character or appearance of the CA
    and would fail to preserve the setting of the non-designated heritage asset, No 15-
    18. This would result in harm to the significance of those heritage assets. Given
    the scale and prominence of the proposals, the extent of harm would be at the
    higher end of the spectrum.
22. Policy HE4 of the Framework explains that any harm to, or loss of, the significance
    of a designated heritage asset (including from development within its setting)
    should have a clear and convincing justification. Policy HE6 explains that any harm
    to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007391


       weight. It goes on to explain that where a development proposal would harm the
       significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
       significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
       proposal. Similarly, Policy HE7 requires harm to the significance of a non-
       designated heritage asset, to be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and
       requires a balanced judgement to be made.
23. There would be public benefits associated with the scheme including the provision
    of housing in a town centre location at a time when the Council cannot
    demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites. Chapter 6 of the
    Framework relates to delivering a sufficient supply of homes where the objective is
    to support the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes, by
    ensuring that a sufficient amount and variety of land can come forward where
    needed. Substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes
    which will contribute towards meeting housing needs.
24. Additionally, there would be benefits associated with the provision of a retail unit,
    improved energy efficiency, tidying up the site, economic activity and the repaving
    of the private mews to the front of the site. The Framework also supports
    remediating derelict land and making better use of vacant and underutilised land
    and buildings. The Framework confirms that substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of improving the energy efficiency of existing buildings and to
    proposals that make more effective use of land and buildings. Taking all these
    matters into account, I attach substantial weight to the public benefits of the
    proposal in carrying out the overall planning balance.
25. The proposed development would result in a high level of harm to the significance
    of the CA. In accordance with the Framework, this harm is afforded substantial
    weight. The harm to the non-designated heritage asset, No 15-18 adds further
    weight overall. Whilst the benefits of the proposal also attract substantial weight,
    the magnitude of those benefits taking into account the nature and scale of one
    small retail and residential unit is not sufficient to outweigh the identified heritage
    harm, to which considerable importance and weight must be given. The harm is
    not therefore justified having regard to Policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework.
    Consequently, the planning balance weighs against the proposal.
26. Within the context of my statutory duties in the PLBCAA, I conclude that the
    proposal would unacceptably harm the character and appearance of the
    surrounding area. It would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance
    of the CA and would fail to preserve the setting of No 15-18. This would be
    contrary to the PLBCAA and Policies HP2 and HP3 of the Harrogate District Local
    Plan 2014-2035, 2020 (LP). Such policies together, amongst other matters, seek
    to ensure that proposals affecting a heritage asset, or its setting, protect or
    enhance those features which contribute to its special architectural or historic
    interest. For the same reasons, the proposed development would also be contrary
    with chapters 14 and 20 of the Framework relating to achieving well-designed
    places and conserving and enhancing the historic environment as well as the
    HCACA.
Living conditions
27. There are a number of windows to the rear of No 15-18 which would face out onto
    the rear elevation of the proposed development. Based on my observations on site


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007391


       and the plans provided, the remains of the built form at the site does obscure
       some of the outlook from windows to the rear. It does not however remove it
       completely where outlook is still possible either to the side of the stone walling or
       above. The proposed development would further reduce outlook for a number of
       windows with the most affected window being the window serving the flat to the
       rear of No 15 Montpellier Parade which would be fully obscured by the
       development. The appellant explains that this window is not a main habitable use,
       but it would still require an appropriate level of outlook. While some views of the
       sky may be possible given the roof slope, its main outlook would be onto the rear
       wall of the building which would be in very close proximity and would be worse
       than at present where it is only partially obscured by the wall. This would have an
       enclosing feeling for occupiers of that room which I find to be unacceptable. Other
       windows would still benefit from outlook albeit some reduced, and thus those other
       windows would be of lesser concern to me but would not overcome the harm
       identified for the window which would be fully obscured by the development.
28. Prior to demolition, the presence of previous built form may have obscured outlook
    for occupiers. I do not however know the specific arrangements that existed at that
    time, and I cannot be confident of any previous harm caused. Even if there was
    harm to No 15-18, that harm is no longer apparent and development should seek
    to improve amenity and promote health and well-being rather than reduce outlook
    further.
29. The scheme includes the creation of a balcony off the apartment’s kitchen area.
    This balcony is in close proximity to the rear elevation of 17-18 Montpellier Parade
    (No 17-18). This would allow for overlooking and the feeling of being overlooked
    from the proposed apartment into the neighbouring upper-floor windows along the
    rear of No 17-18. The most affected window would be the one located at first-floor
    level closest to the balcony. I appreciate that the balcony is to replace a metal fire
    escape but a balcony serving a fire escape route is different to a balcony being
    used for amenity space. I observed that some of the windows to the rear of No 17-
    18 were obscure glazed, but I also noted that the window which would be most
    affected as referred to above, did indeed open upwards where direct views into the
    window would be possible from the balcony area. It would not be reasonable to
    expect occupiers to mitigate their experience of privacy generated by the site, by
    closing their windows.
30. The sketch provided by the appellant marks some of the windows within the rear
    elevation of No 17-18 as serving retail uses and whilst a lower expectation of
    privacy may be apparent for such a use, I am not sufficiently satisfied that this
    would justify the proposals which would lead to a harmful loss of privacy. I also did
    not find the staircase at my site visit to cause such a visual obstruction for
    neighbouring windows of No 17 Montpellier Parade as to benefit from the
    proposed scheme.
31. In town centres, closer relationships are more common given the tighter grain of
    development, but the relationship that exists in the particular circumstances of this
    case means that the impact would indeed be more than what would often be
    tolerated/expected in such environments. It would therefore be harmful to an
    unacceptable degree.
32. The proposed apartment would be located on a narrow access that serves a
    number of commercial properties with outside bin storage area for all the buildings.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007391


       The entrance to the apartment and some of the windows open onto this access.
       The front of the building would be close to the elevation of the jewellery shop
       opposite and is understood to be less than the minimum separation distance set
       out in the House Extensions and Garages Design Guide, 2005. That said, the
       proposed apartment would be located at first and second floor which would not
       look directly out onto the building at the front or the commercial bins. The appellant
       has confirmed that the windows are positioned above the eaves of the building
       opposite and based on my observations on site, I have no reason to disagree with
       this. Outlook would largely be over the roof of the buildings opposite and would not
       therefore be compromised to an unacceptable degree nor have an enclosing
       effect.
33. The jewellery business has windows facing the appeal site including
    office/workshop, but the buildings angles to one another, level differences and
    window positions would prevent direct overlooking. The proposed bathroom
    windows would also be obscure glazed which would minimise opportunities for
    overlooking. In terms of the access route, it is not uncommon for access to be had
    from busy serviced areas in the town centre, and I do not find the proposed
    arrangements in this case to be detrimental to future occupiers. A lack of harm in
    this respect would not however overcome the other harm I have identified.
34. For the above reasons, I conclude on this issue that whilst I do not share some of
    the Council’s concern in relation to privacy and outlook particularly future
    occupiers of the development, the proposed development would still unacceptably
    harm the living conditions of existing occupiers of No 15-18 with regard to privacy
    and outlook. It would therefore be contrary to Policy HP4 of the LP which explains
    that development proposals should be designed to ensure that they will not result
    in significant adverse impacts on the amenity of occupiers and neighbours. For the
    same reasons, the proposed development would also be contrary to chapter 14 of
    the Framework relating to achieving well-designed places and the guidance
    contained within the House Extensions and Garages Design Guide, 2005.
Other Matters
35. I appreciate that changes have been made to the scheme from earlier revisions,
    but this would not alter my findings on the scheme I am considering. A lack of
    objection or comments from statutory consultees does not mean that the
    development would not be harmful.
36. The appellant claims that without the benefit of planning permission, the site will
    remain in its current derelict state, and I note the financial information provided.
    This would not however be a sufficient reason to justify harmful development. I am
    also not persuaded that the derelict state of the site cannot be improved by other
    means or through an appropriate management/maintenance scheme.
37. The officer’s report raises concern over natural light to the windows to the rear of
    No 15-18. Such matters did not however form part of the reasoning for refusal, so
    it would only be necessary to consider such matters were there a favourable
    outcome for the appeal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
38. The proposed development would unacceptably harm the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area. It would fail to preserve the character or

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007391


       appearance of the CA and would also fail to preserve the setting of the non-
       designated heritage asset, No 15-18. In addition to this, the proposed development
       would also harm the living conditions of existing occupiers of No 15-18 with regard
       to privacy and outlook. I attribute substantial weight to such matters.
39. Policy S3 of the Framework explains that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4 sets
    out that development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
40. Considering my findings above, the benefits of the proposed development would
    be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects identified, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
41. Bringing everything together, the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan when considered as a whole. There are no material
    considerations, either individually or in combination including the provisions of the
    Framework, that would outweigh the identified harm and associated plan conflict. I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
