Appeal Decision
Site visit made 11 August 2026
by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007128
17-19 Parkstone Road, Poole, BH15 2NN
    •       The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
            against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •       The appeal is made by 17-19 PR Ltd against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and
            Poole Council.
    •       The application Ref is P/25/05261/FUL.
    •       The development proposed is to build a block of 20 HMOs, with associated cycle rack, bins and
            amenity space.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Planning permission has been granted for both a single storey flat roof rear
   extension and conversion to 21 bedspace House in Multiple Occupation (HMO)
   (reference P/25/00884/FUL) and a two-storey building in the rear courtyard
   (reference P/25/00654/FUL). During my visit I noted that the rear extension was
   under construction with the shell complete but awaiting windows, I saw no sign that
   the separate two-storey building had been commenced. I shall take this context into
   account in my decision.
3. The appellant refers to the Draft Core Strategy and its reference to the Urban
   Intensification Zone, providing support for the proposal. Nonetheless, the Council
   inform that this document was withdrawn at an early stage and is therefore afforded
   no weight in this decision.
4. The Council, in applying the Government’s Housing Delivery Test rule book,
   explains it has ascribed a count of 4 residential units, to the proposed communal
   living scheme, for the purpose of housing land supply considerations. I see no
   reason, based on the submitted evidence, to disagree with this assertion.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
        •     The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area,
        •     The effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
              neighbouring properties, especially with respect to outlook, sunlight and
              daylight,



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007128


      •     Whether the proposal would provide suitable living conditions for future
            occupiers with regard to outlook and provision of external space,
      •     The effects of the proposal on highway safety with regard to the use of the
            shared access route,
      •     The effect on the integrity of the Dorset Heathland Special Protection Area
            (SPA) and Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), and
      •     The effect of the proposal on the integrity of the Poole Harbour SPA and
            Ramsar site.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6. Parkstone Road is an urban street within the town centre. The street consists of
   various commercial and residential uses, with buildings of various styles, although
   largely traditional in form. The predominant building height is two-storeys, but
   several more recent additions are substantially higher, such as the block of flats
   recently completed opposite the site with heights of around 5-6 stories. Behind the
   appeal site building is a car parking area, shared with the adjacent plot of No’s 21
   and 23. Similar to other rear areas to the west these areas, whilst hard-surfaced
   these are generally open and absent built form, creating a sense of openness.
7. The appeal site is a two-storey traditional building, with consent to be used as a
   HMO. It occupies most of the width of the site, save for a narrow driveway access
   on one side. Its frontage is hard-surfaced and matches most local plots, having
   parking provision provided here. As such, the site makes a positive contribution to
   the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
8. The proposed scheme would be five stories with the top floor being within the roof-
   space, incorporating a crown roof. Due to its height, the building would be much
   higher than buildings along the north side of Parkstone Road. It would be likely to be
   seen from views along the highway over roofs and between gaps of existing
   buildings. Furthermore, the proposal would be highly visible to pedestrians using
   Sandpit Lane and visitors and staff of the adjacent hospital. As such, due to its scale
   and prominence the proposal would be out of character with surrounding
   development and erode the existing sense of spaciousness noted on the site.
9. The effect of the proposal would be substantially greater than that caused by the
   approved two-storey building to the rear of the plot due to its increased height and
   oppressive scale.
10. The proposal would include some articulation of the south elevation, with a small
    projection, and includes modest dormer windows within the roofscape that add
    interest to the top level. The building is proposed to use materials that would be in
    keeping with nearby development. Nonetheless, despite the mass of the top floor
    being reduced through a stepped design, the overall scale of the building would
    remain substantive. As such, whilst taking the merits of the design into
    consideration, these are of only modest merit and do not outweigh the substantial
    adverse visual effect of the proposal.
11. Although a multi-storey car park of seven stories is noted behind the site, this is a
    building of substantially different design and forms part of the adjacent hospital

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007128


    buildings. Accordingly, whilst the multi-storey car park contributes to the local
    townscape, the proposal would stand as an isolated feature within an open area
    causing a different and harmful relationship with its surroundings.
12. Consequently, the proposal would not comply with policies PP27 and PP28 of the
    Poole Local Plan [2018] (LP) with respect to effect on character and appearance.
    These seek, among other matters, for development to reflect the local pattern of
    development and only supports plot severance where there is sufficient land to
    enable a type, scale and layout of development in a manner which would preserve
    or enhance the area’s character.
Living conditions - existing
13. The proposed south elevation shows obscure glazing to all first, second, third and
    fourth floor windows. This would prevent overlooking towards the rear of the existing
    building. Nonetheless, the proposed building would be around 12 metres from the
    rear elevation of the extended existing building. Due to the width and height this
    would appear to loom over the rear elevation. This effect would be oppressive to
    occupiers of the existing HMO causing harm to their outlook.
14. In terms of access to daylight and sunlight, the proposed development would be
    located to the north of the existing HMO causing no material loss of sunlight. Also,
    whilst the proposal would have an adverse effect on outlook, it would not be of such
    proximity to materially erode access to daylight.
15. Although the appellant suggests that the proposed relationship of the proposal to
    local built form is typical of development in an urban setting, no examples have
    been provided to justify this assertion, and such proximity does not seem especially
    typical even allowing for the higher density forms of development generally noted in
    urban areas.
16. Accordingly, whilst the proposal would not affect sunlight or daylight it would have a
    significant adverse effect on the outlook of existing occupiers. Consequently, the
    proposal would conflict with LP policy PP27 and PP28, in considering the effect on
    living conditions. These require development to be compatible with surrounding
    uses and not result in a harmful impact upon amenity of local residents and to
    protect an area’s residential character.
Living conditions – proposed
17. Units 2 and 3 have a rear aspect, looking over a short space towards cycle racks.
    Whilst all four units at ground floor have glass doors providing access onto patio
    areas, these would be unlikely to provide pleasant spaces due to the extent of
    pedestrian activity anticipated by occupiers in accessing the cycle stands. The
    adverse effects of such frequent and invasive activity would be exacerbated for
    occupiers of units 2 and 3 as these would overlook the cycle stands where users
    could congregate when collecting their cycles. Accordingly, ground floor occupiers,
    especially those of units 2 and 3, would experience substantial noise and
    disturbance through users accessing the cycle stands- potentially at anti-social
    hours.
18. The appellant suggests that this relationship is typical of HMOs in the area but has
    provided no comparable examples to demonstrate where such a similar relationship



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007128


    exists. In any event, the harmful effects noted in this relationship would cause a
    poor living environment for future occupiers and cannot therefore be supported.
19. LP Policy PP27 (1-d) states that new development will be permitted provided it
    would include satisfactory external and internal amenity space for new and existing
    occupiers. It is noted, in agreement with the appellant’s assertion, that the Council
    does not have numerical standards in this regard- which ultimately means that
    assessment is a matter of planning judgement. The proposed ground floor plan
    shows the layout of the site, which incorporates bin stores and pockets of
    landscaping. However, the space would largely be hard surfaced, with space mostly
    provided for circulation and cycle parking, to the rear of the site. As such, there
    would be extremely limited space available for future occupiers to benefit from
    external space for recreation.
20. Nonetheless, the site is within an urban setting where occupiers would benefit from
    the range of goods and services in a highly accessible location. Furthermore, Poole
    Park is within easy walking distance of the site providing future occupiers with
    decent access to open space. As such, the absence of useful external recreation
    space on site is of limited weight against the scheme.
21. Consequently, the proposal would result in a poor outlook for future occupiers of
    units 2 and 3. Consequently, it would conflict with LP policies PP27 and PP28 with
    respect to effect on future living conditions, whose objectives have been set out
    above.
Highway safety
22. The proposal would be accessed by pedestrian future occupiers via the shared
    driveway to the side of the existing frontage building. Taking into account the
    extension under construction, the rear car park would still provide parking for around
    6 vehicles without the proposal, unless the extant approval was constructed.
    Moreover, the access is shared with the adjacent plot, No’s 21 and 23, where
    parking provision appears to be for a further 18 spaces. No’s 21 and 23 seems to
    consist of two ground floor commercial units (including a hair salon) and one or two
    flats above. As such, currently the rear car parking areas would experience modest
    levels of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
23. The proposed scheme would replace the 6 spaces with the 20 bedroom HMO. This
    would result in future occupiers accessing the site as both walkers and cyclists only
    as no rear parking is proposed. This additional activity would mix with the reduced
    vehicular activity and pedestrian activity associated with the retained car park for
    No’s 21 and 23. The access is narrow and at points would prevent cyclists or
    pedestrians passing any vehicles using the access way in an opposing direction.
    However, the use of the retained part of the car park would be likely to be infrequent
    and there is space, at either end of the identified pinch-point, for pedestrians and
    cyclists to wait safely until the way is clear. As a result, the scope for conflict is
    modest only and the risk to pedestrians and cyclist would be negligible.
24. Accordingly, the proposal would not result in the creation of an unsafe activity and
    thus would not materially effect highway safety. Consequently, the proposal would
    comply with LP policy PP35, requiring development to provide a safe access to the
    highway and contribute to the creation of safe, convenient and accessible places.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007128


Dorset Heathland and Poole Harbour SPAs
25. The appeal site is in the zone of influence of the Dorset Heathland SPA and SSSI
    and the Poole Harbour SPA (the European sites). Regulation 63 of the
    Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (Habitat Regulations)
    require an appropriate assessment to ensure that the development would not
    adversely affect the integrity of the SPA.
26. The Dorset Heathland SPA and SSSI provides habitats which are susceptible to
    disturbance by human activity. The additional dwellings proposed, whilst modest in
    scale, would contribute to an increased population in combination with other plans,
    projects, and developments in the area. The Dorset Heathland Planning Framework
    requires a contribution from the proposal towards the fund for Strategic Access
    Management and Monitoring (SAMM). This proposal requires such a contribution,
    without which it would not satisfy the appropriate assessment required by the
    Habitat Regulations.
27. Furthermore, as the proposal would result in a net increase in dwellings. It cannot
    be ruled out that occupiers would not visit the Poole Harbour SPA and Ramsar site
    creating a further recreational impact. As such, a contribution towards the Poole
    SAMM would also be required.
28. Given the proximity of the development to the SPAs, it is likely that its contribution to
    the increase in population could lead to an increase in visitor and recreational
    pressure within these SPAs.
29. There is no scheme of mitigation before me to consider, although the Council state
    a financial obligation in line with its established mitigation strategies, would be
    appropriate. The appellant has provided a completed financial obligation form, dated
    19/12/25. This sets out the required sums, towards Dorset Heathland SAMMs and
    the Poole Harbour Recreation SAMMs, to mitigate the adverse effects. However, in
    the absence of a legal mechanism to secure such sums, the financial form alone
    does not provide the required certainty that the sums would be secured.
    Furthermore, these sums cannot be adequately secured by the imposition of
    planning conditions.
30. As such, I cannot be satisfied that the proposal would not adversely affect the
    integrity of the Heathland SPA and Poole Harbour SPA, causing conflict with LP
    Policies PP32 and PP39. These require development, among other matters, to
    secure mitigation for the Dorset Heathlands to mitigate the adverse effects and to
    avoid harm to Poole Harbour.
31. Furthermore, the Council informs that Poole Harbour has been designated as a
    nutrient sensitive catchment for both nitrogen and phosphorus. As a result,
    development must be supported with a nutrient neutrality calculator and developer
    credit purchases, identified through a Nutrient Neutrality Statement (NNS). Although
    the Council suggest that the appellant’s submitted NNS may not be fully accurate, it
    is nonetheless content that subject to minor changes this could be secured by a pre-
    commencement condition. This matter has not been explored further as I am
    dismissing for other reasons.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007128


Planning Balance and Conclusion
32. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with development plan LP policies
    PP27, PP28, PP32 and PP39. I give this conflict significant weight. Therefore,
    despite the benefits of the proposal and supportive policies of the Plan, it would
    conflict with the development plan when taken as a whole. Planning law requires
    that applications for planning permission be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
33. The National Planning Policy Framework (2026), at policy H07, requires substantial
    weight to be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards
    meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community. This is especially
    pertinent in a district where the Council is not meeting its required 5-year supply of
    housing land, with a provision of only 2.55 years. The appellant identifies that the
    proposal would help deliver much-needed single occupancy accommodation and
    would reduce pressure on existing housing stock.
34. Furthermore, Policy S03 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. Policy S04, for development within a settlement, states
    that such development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
35. The appeal site is within a settlement, and the proposal would provide the
    equivalent of 4 dwellings, in an accessible location. The site is within walking
    distance of Poole town centre and major bus routes. These sustainable locational
    benefits of the site are consistent with the Framework which seeks development to
    support sustainable patterns of movement, enabling good accessibility for different
    users and make the most of existing and proposed transport infrastructure, which
    weigh in favour of the scheme.
36. Nonetheless, the proposal would not be consistent with the overall streetscene, in
    conflict with policy L2(1)(d)(i) of the Framework. The scheme would also create poor
    living standards for existing and proposed residents, in terms of effect on outlook, as
    sought by the Framework’s policy L2(1)(d)(ii), resulting in the creation of
    unacceptable living standards for residents and neighbours. Furthermore, the
    adverse effects on the European sites would conflict with policy N6(1)(a)(i) which
    requires development that would affect habitat sites to be refused unless an AA has
    concluded that the proposal would note adversely affect the integrity of the site.
37. In this instance, the benefits of the proposed development, would be substantially
    outweighed by the identified adverse effects of the proposal, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. As such
    the presumption in favour of sustainable development would not apply. Accordingly,
    the identified conflict with the development plan would not be outweighed by the
    material considerations and the appeal is dismissed.
38. For the reasons given above the appeal is, therefore, dismissed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
