Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by J D Clark BA (Hons) DpTRP MCD DMS MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007323
Dale Brow, 59 Macclesfield Road, Prestbury, Cheshire East SK10 4BH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Martin James Gibson of GA Studio Ltd against the decision of Cheshire
     East Council.
•    The application Ref is 24/4506/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the demolition and erection of a replacement private house with
     basement, and demolition and erection of a replacement detached garage block.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. In the interests of natural justice and to ensure neither of the main
       parties were prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the changes to
       the Framework and have received comments which I have taken into account in
       my determination of the appeal. Any reference to the Framework in this decision is
       to the 2026 publication.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on: -
            •    the character and appearance of the surrounding area; and
            •    a protected species, in particular bats.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
4.     Macclesfield Road is a main route into Prestbury village from the south and this
       section is characterised by its winding, hilly road, grass verges and stone walls,
       mature trees and well established vegetation with large dwellings set back from
       the road. To the east, dwellings have a more open appearance with varying styles
       but are generally one or two stories in height.
5.     The appeal site comprises a large detached house, a detached garage, gardens
       and driveway accessed from a long and rising drive off Macclesfield Road. The
       existing house sits in an elevated position at the crest of a high area of land which
       drops in levels on all sides but most noticeably to the west and east.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007323


6.     The proposal would demolish the existing house and garage and build a new
       house and garage block. The appellant describes alterations to the design of the
       proposed house since it was originally submitted to the Council and I note matters
       such as limiting the amount of excavated land whilst incorporating basement
       accommodation, reducing the size of dormers, simplifying the design to emphasise
       symmetry together with creating a central projecting feature have been
       incorporated to keep the roof at the same or similar height to the existing house
       and addressing the various points made by the Council’s planning officer.
       Nevertheless, the Council has refused permission based on its scale, massing and
       design, taking into consideration the elevated position of the house.
7.     The proposed house would be a large detached ‘manor’ style dwelling. Its design
       gives the outward appearance of a two-storey dwelling with a crown roof inset with
       dormer windows with a single storey element with a similar roof/dormer windows
       design. It would provide four levels of living accommodation including a basement
       with a swimming pool, gym and other entertainment facilities. A detached garage,
       matching the design of the house, would provide space for three cars, a plant
       room and living accommodation above.
8.     The scale and design of the house would not be out of place in this area where
       large detached houses feature. The appellant refers to large replacement
       dwellings at Nos 54, 58 and 63 Macclesfield Road. I can see from the submitted
       information that these are large and the proposal at 54, Marsden Manor, is
       undoubtably substantial. I note the appellant’s comments about the general
       topography of the area which is certainly hilly, with undulating land sloping down
       towards the River Bollin to the east.
9.     The proposed house would be well set back from the road but the elevated
       position would mean it was particularly prominent. Whilst I have some information
       about the other approved houses, I have no evidence which directly compares
       their location to the appeal site, in particular due to the elevated land.
10. Due to the topography, the existing house can be seen from the surrounding areas
    and I was able to see it from various points to the east of the appeal site on
    Willowmead Drive and Highfield where there are a mix of dwellings but generally
    appear low-rise, including bungalows or dwellings that appear so from the road,
    with the appeal site clearly noticeable behind them.
11. I agree that the appeal site is not in an isolated location but whilst it forms part of a
    wider townscape with a varying range of house types, sizes, ages and styles, due
    to its scale, bulk and massing and overall prominence, the proposed house would
    be visually intrusive. It would be visible from the surrounding roads and despite the
    appellant’s assertions that these would be limited, the proposed house would be
    intrusive due to its scale and bulky appearance. Although the proposed house
    would be in a similar position and of a similar height to the existing house, it would
    appear much larger. It would be wide and deep with a large flat expanse of roof
    which would be particularly prominent due to the topography.
12. I also agree the area is characterised by large houses and the proposed house
    would sit within its plot. It would have a substantial front garden, driveway and
    parking area with a sloping/terraced rear garden. The design has taken into
    consideration the levels insofar as excavating part of the land and incorporating a



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007323


       whole floor at a subterranean level but this would still introduce a much larger, and
       bulkier house in a very elevated position.
13. I appreciate that the house has been designed by an award winning designer and
    would create a high quality level of accommodation. It would incorporate high
    standards of energy efficiency and would be of a standard expected in this part of
    Cheshire. However, the elevated position of the appeal site is a significant factor
    and although measures have been taken into account to address this, I still find
    the proposal unduly intrusive in the townscape.
14. In conclusion, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area contrary to Local Plan Strategy1 Policies
    SE 1, SE 4 and SD 2 and Site Allocations and Development Policies Document
    (SADPD)2 Policy GEN 1 as well as the Cheshire East Borough Design Guide
    (SPD)3. Collectively these seek to secure design solutions that recognise and are
    sensitive to the character of the area, enhance the urban landscape and reinforce
    local distinctiveness. The SPD provides detailed guidance of all aspects of design
    providing advice and checklists as appropriate to the proposal, the topography and
    the surrounding area.
15. Furthermore, Chapter 14 of the Framework seeks to achieve well designed places
    and Policy DP3 sets out key principles. Amongst other things, these include
    ensuring development proposals respond to their context so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings. Given the topography of the appeal site, the
    position, design, scale, bulk and massing of the proposed house would not
    respond positively to its context and therefore would conflict with the Framework in
    this regard.
Bats
16. The appeal documents include an ecological appraisal (dated 2024) which found
    that the site has a low level of ecological interest and the main dwelling offers low
    potential to support roosting bats. However, the appraisal recommends a further
    survey in order to establish the status of roosting bats and inform mitigation
    requirements. In particular, a minimum of one dusk emergence survey should be
    carried out. This has not been carried out but the appellant has submitted a Bat
    Technical Note, dated February 2026. This records an internal inspection of the
    building but states that although there is no evidence of bats, the potential roost
    features previously recorded means that bat presence cannot be fully excluded.
    Amongst other things, it concludes that in the absence of an emergence survey,
    risk can be managed through the implementation of Reasonable Avoidance
    Measures. These are set out in the report.
17. Circular 06/20054 states that it is essential that the extent that protected species
    may be affected is established before planning permission is granted. Whilst it may
    not be reasonable to require a developer to undertake surveys for protected
    species unless there is a reasonable likelihood of the species being present and
    affected by the development, the appellant’s own report recommends an additional

1
  Cheshire East Council – Cheshire East Local Plan – Local Plan Strategy 2010-2030 July 2017.
2
  Cheshire Council – Cheshire East Local Plan – Site Allocations and Development Policies Document, Adopted December 2022
(SADPD).
3
  Cheshire East Council – The Cheshire East Borough Design Guide A Supplementary Planning Document Volume 2: Residential
Guidance – Creating Quality, Adopted 2nd May 2017.
4
  Circular 06/2005: Biodiversity and Geological Conservation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             3
Appeal Decision 6007323


       survey. I appreciate that such surveys are time sensitive and the appellant has
       produced a report setting out Reasonable Avoidance Measures. However, this
       whole dwelling and its garage would be demolished and the necessity for a
       nocturnal survey is not an excessive requirement.
18. In conclusion, the evidence submitted is insufficient to ensure that appropriate
    mitigation can be secured to safeguard a protected species, in particular bats. This
    would conflict with Local Plan Strategy Policy SE 3 which seeks to protect
    biodiversity, amongst other things. Also, it would conflict with the objectives of
    Policy N2 of the Framework to improve the natural environment, including
    minimising any adverse effects on threatened species such as bats.
Other Matters
19. There is no dispute that the proposal would meet the Framework’s aims to
    promote sustainable development and no conflict with Policy S3 would occur.
    However, Policy S4 of the Framework supports development proposals within
    settlements unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    the adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision making policies
    in the Framework. This proposal would replace an existing house and whilst the
    proposed house would provide a larger and more luxurious dwelling than the one it
    replaces, this does not overcome the adverse effects of the proposal I have set out
    above.
20. The occupiers of neighbouring properties have expressed various concerns
    including harm to their living conditions through overlooking and poor outlook.
    Whilst the appellant and the Council are in agreement that no harm would occur in
    this regard, any harm or lack of it is not a determining factor in this case and given
    my conclusions on my main issues is not a matter I need to consider further and it
    does not add weight in either case.
21. An executed Section 106 Unilateral Undertaking has been submitted to ensure
    that the dwelling would satisfy the regulations for self-build and Biodiversity Net
    Gain (BNG) but given my conclusions on my main issues there is no need for me
    to consider this further.
Conclusion
22. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Consequently, for the above reasons, the appeal should be dismissed.



J D Clark
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
