Appeal Decision
Inquiry held on 11 August 2026
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by Bhupinder Thandi BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6007651
Land to the south of Harbury Lane and east of Vickers Way
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by McCarthy and Stone Retirement Lifestyles Ltd against the decision of
    Warwick District Council.
•   The application Ref is W24/1099.
•   The development proposed is erection of retirement living apartments with associated access, car
    parking, landscaping, ancillary facilities and associated works.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of
   retirement living apartments with associated access, car parking, landscaping,
   ancillary facilities and associated works at land to the south of Harbury Lane and
   east of Vickers Way in accordance with the application W24/1099 subject to the
   conditions set out in the schedule to this decision.
Preliminary Matters
2. Following determination of the planning application the appellant has produced
   additional information in the form of an updated Financial Viability Assessment
   (FVA) and a Technical Memorandum on Noise (TMN). In my judgement this
   information does not represent a substantial difference or a fundamental change to
   the scheme. I have, therefore, paid regard to this information in assessment of the
   appeal. Having regard to the Holborn Studios judgement1 which follows on from
   Wheatcroft2 I am satisfied that no interested parties have been prejudiced by my
   approach.
3. Upon receipt of this information and following a review of their case Warwick
   District Council (WDC) confirmed that viability matters had been addressed and
   noise risk reduced such that they no longer wish to defend the reasons for refusal3.
   I have borne this in mind in coming to my decision.
4. Following conclusion of the Inquiry a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published. My decision is made in the context of this revised
   Framework, and I am satisfied that no interested party has been prejudiced by my
   approach.



1
  Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin)
2
  Bernard Wheatcroft Ltd v Secretary of State for the Environment [JPL, 1982, P37]
3
  Warwick District Council Addendum to Statement of Case (CD-B6a)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007651


Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
         •    Whether the proposal makes adequate provision for infrastructure contributions
              arising from the development; and
         •    Whether the proposed development would provide satisfactory living conditions
              for future occupiers with regard to noise.
Reasons
Infrastructure contributions
6. The Warwick District Local Plan (2017) (WDLP) sets out that new development
   places pressure on existing infrastructure and therefore it is important that
   proposals provide for, or contribute towards investment in infrastructure including
   schools, open space, health and community facilities.
7. WDLP Policy DM2 states that developments will be expected to comply with other
   policies in the local plan, including policies that refer to the provision and funding of
   infrastructure, unless it can be demonstrated that the policies will result in the
   development being unviable. In order to do so proposals must be accompanied by
   a viability assessment which will be independently reviewed.
8. In simple terms, viability is assessed by comparing the Residual Land Value (RLV)
   with the Benchmark Land Value (BLV). Where the RLV exceeds the BLV, the
   scheme generates a surplus and is considered viable. Where the RLV is lower than
   the BLV, the scheme shows a deficit and is considered unviable.
9. The RLV is calculated by taking the Gross Development Value and deducting
   development costs, including developer profit and any planning obligations. The
   BLV is established by reference to the site’s Existing Use Value, together with an
   appropriate return to the landowner, or by reference to a policy-compliant
   Alternative Use Value scheme.
10. The appellant’s FVA identifies a RLV of around £0.168 million. After allowing for a
    BLV of around £0.435 million, the scheme would show a deficit of around £0.267
    million. On that basis, the FVA concludes that the proposed development is not
    viable and could not support contributions towards affordable housing or other
    infrastructure as required by the WDLP.
11. WDC commissioned an independent review of the appellant’s FVA. That review
    confirms that the appeal scheme would not generate a surplus from which planning
    contributions could be funded. WDC has stated that it is therefore satisfied that the
    absence of planning contributions has been justified4.
12. Although there are some differences in professional opinion between the
    appellant’s and WDC’s experts on sales assumptions, some construction costs and
    the RLV, both the assessment and the independent review conclude that the
    scheme is not viable. On the available evidence, I can only reach the same
    conclusion. There is nothing before me that would lead me to reach a different one.



4
    Warwick District Council Planning Proof of Evidence (CD-E6)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6007651


13. Accordingly, it has been satisfactorily demonstrated that the development as
    proposed is not viable and cannot provide for, or contribute towards affordable
    housing or other infrastructure in the district.
14. As such, there would be no conflict with WDLP Policies DM1 and DM2 which,
    amongst other things, require contributions towards measures to make
    development acceptable in planning terms or infrastructure unless it can be
    adequately demonstrated that they would make the scheme unviable.
Living conditions for future occupiers
15. The appeal site forms part of the Heathcote urban extension. It lies between
    Harbury Lane; a busy thoroughfare and a local centre containing retail and
    commercial uses.
16. The noise assessment submitted with the planning application was undertaken in
    2024. Because the monitoring equipment was positioned along the perimeter, the
    assessment used a conservative distance-loss methodology to predict noise levels
    at the façade.
17. At the Inquiry, I was advised that the gold standard is to position monitoring
    equipment at the façade, as the distance-loss assumption methodology carries a
    margin of error. I was also told that noise assessments of this type generally have a
    shelf life of around 18 months.
18. Given the length of time that has passed since the original assessment further
    noise measurements were taken with the monitoring equipment positioned at the
    proposed façade. Consistent with the earlier assessment, the TMN identifies road
    traffic as the main source of noise, although at lower levels than previously
    recorded. Even so, the measured levels would still exceed recommended
    maximum noise levels published by the World Health Organization. In response,
    the appellant proposes mitigation comprising an acoustic barrier along Harbury
    Lane, to be positioned behind the proposed soft landscaping, together with acoustic
    glazing and a Mechanical Ventilation with Heat Recovery (MVHR) system.
19. Taking account of the most up-to-date measurements and the proposed mitigation,
    acceptable noise levels for the outdoor amenity area and ground-floor apartments
    would be achieved. Residents on the upper floors would experience higher noise
    levels. However, the use of acoustic glazing and the MVHR system would mitigate
    those effects to a degree.
20. In this regard, residents of upper-floor apartments facing Harbury Lane may
    experience higher noise levels at certain times of the day if windows are open.
    However, that would not be particularly unusual for developments located close to
    busy roads or commercial premises and would not amount to serious annoyance
    based on the recorded measurements. Occupiers would also be able to choose
    whether to use the MVHR system or open windows for ventilation or fresh air or to
    control noise.
21. In reaching my decision, I have had regard to WDC’s withdrawal of its objection to
    the proposal in respect of noise citing that the most up-to-date evidence suggests
    that the effects would be reduced from “significant adverse” to “adverse” subject to
    the proposed mitigation being secured by condition.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007651


22. As such, I am satisfied that the proposed development would provide adequate
    living conditions for future occupiers with regard to noise. It would accord with
    WDLP Policy BE3 which, amongst other things, requires development to provide
    acceptable standards of amenity for future users and occupiers.
Other Matters
23. The appellant’s written evidence5 draws together information from the Coventry and
    Warwickshire Joint Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2013) and the Coventry
    and Warwickshire Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (2022)
    and which indicate that at a local level there is an evidenced need for housing for
    older people which is likely to become more acute given that Warwick has an
    ageing population and which is projected to substantially increase in the future.
24. This need is compounded by a shortfall of older persons housing and
    notwithstanding the presence of other developments and unsold properties nearby I
    am satisfied that demand for retirement apartments exists in the local area.
25. Whilst comments have been made that the site should be preserved for
    recreational, community or town centre uses my attention is focused upon the
    development proposals before me. It is not for me to speculate on what alternative
    uses may or may not be acceptable. In addition, I am not aware that there is an
    obligation upon the appellant to promote or market the site for alternative uses.
26. I understand that the extant planning permission for offices on the site was for a
    specific end-user rather than a speculative development. They have since moved
    into offices in Warwick and no longer require office space in this location.
    Accordingly, there is no certainty that the site would come forward for an alternative
    employment use. Furthermore, the proposed development would generate
    temporary jobs during the construction phase and permanent employment
    opportunities. Occupiers would also support local businesses through increased
    expenditure. Therefore, there would be economic benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
27. Notwithstanding the comments received regarding its environmental impact the
    appellant details6 that the proposed development has been designed to be net zero
    in operation utilising a fabric first approach and green and renewable technologies
    and water efficiency measures. In addition, it would result in a net gain in
    biodiversity. Furthermore, the vegetation along Harbury Lane would be retained
    and managed rather than removed.
28. There is no substantive evidence before me to suggest that future residents would
    be exposed to unacceptable levels of air pollution.
Conditions
29. In the event of the appeal being allowed, the Council suggested that 23 conditions
    would be necessary to make the scheme acceptable. I have considered the
    suggested conditions in light of the Framework and the Planning Practice
    Guidance. In the interests of precision and clarity I have undertaken some
    rewording of the conditions suggested.


5
    Housing for Older People: Needs and Supply Assessment (CD-A11)
6
    Energy Statement and Policy NZC3 Response (dated 23.07.2024) (CD-A9)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              4
Appeal Decision 6007651


30. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have imposed a condition
    specifying the approved plans as this provides certainty. A condition restricting the
    occupancy of the units to those aged 55 and over is necessary.
31. To protect the living conditions of nearby occupiers and the safe and efficient
    operation of the local highway network a condition for submission of a construction
    management plan has been imposed.
32. Conditions for samples of the external facing materials, hard and soft landscaping,
    site levels, tree and hedgerow protection and external lighting have been imposed
    so as to ensure the satisfactory appearance of the development.
33. In the interests of minimising flood risk and promoting sustainability conditions for
    details of a surface water drainage system, embodied carbon reduction, water
    efficiency and electric vehicle charging points have been imposed.
34. To ensure satisfactory living conditions for future occupiers and the safe operation
    of the development, conditions are necessary in relation to refuse and recycling
    storage, noise mitigation, limits on noise from the MVHR system, unexpected land
    contamination, and adequate water supplies and hydrants for firefighting.
35. Conditions for parking, turning areas and cycle storage are necessary in the
    interests of the safe and efficient operation of the local highway network.
Conclusion
36. For the reasons set out above the appeal succeeds.



B Thandi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007651


APPEARANCES
FOR THE APPELLANT:
John Barrett of Counsel instructed by Carla Fulgoni-Rowe
Christopher Butt                       The Planning Bureau
Stephen Gosling                        24 Acoustics
Andrew Murphy                          Atitlan Consulting


FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:
Sioned Davies of Counsel instructed by Uraw Matloob
Matthew Shirley                        Environmental Health Officer
Erin Weatherstone                      Principal Planning Officer




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          6
Appeal Decision 6007651


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:


           MI-2895-02-AC-001                   Location Plan
           MI-2895-02-AC-003 Rev A*            Site Plan
           MI-2895-02-AC-004 Rev A*            Ground Floor Plan
           MI-2895-02-AC-005 Rev A*            First Floor Plan
           MI-2895-02-AC-006 Rev A*            Second Floor Plan
           MI-2895-03-AC-007 Rev A             Roof Plan
           MI-2895-02-AC-008 Rev A*            Material Elevations 1 of 2
           MI-2895-02-AC-009 Rev A*            Elevations 2 of 2
           MI-2895-03-AC-0010 Rev A*           Proposed Street Scene
           MI-2895-03-LS-001 101 Rev           Landscape Layout
           A*
           MI-2895-03-LS-002 201 Rev A         Planting Plan
           2084-KC-XX-YTREE TCP01              Tree Constraints Plan
           Rev 0
           2084-KC-XX-YTREE-TPP01              Tree Protection Plan
           Rev 0
           MI-2895-03-EN-001-P02               Finished Levels and Retaining Walls
           MI-2895-03-EN-002-P02               Outline Drainage Strategy
           MI-2895-03-EN-004-P02               Exceedance Flow Paths
           MI-2895-03-EN-005-P02               Proposed Surface Water Catchment
                                               Areas
           EV - 5814 - 04 - AC - 9109 -        Refuse Store Plans
           C01 -G Rev C01
                                               Mobility Scooter Store Plans (Store
                                               PS48.50 model)


     3)       Before any development takes place, and before any equipment, machinery
              or materials are brought on to the site, the tree and hedgerow protection
              scheme as shown on the Tree Protection Plan (TPP) Drawing number: 2084-
              KC-XX-YTREE-TPP01 Rev0 shall be established in accordance with the
              details shown on the TPP. The scheme of tree and hedgerow protection shall
              remain in place until completion of the development. Nothing shall be stored
              or placed in any area fenced in accordance with this condition, and the
              ground levels within those areas shall not be altered, nor shall any
              excavation be made.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007651


     4)       No development shall take place until a Construction Management Plan
              (CMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The CMP shall provide for: the parking of vehicles of site
              operatives and visitors; site working hours and delivery times; the loading
              and unloading of plant and materials; the storage of plant and materials used
              in constructing the development; the erection and maintenance of a security
              hoarding including decorative displays and facilities for public viewing where
              appropriate; wheel washing facilities and other measures to ensure that any
              vehicle, plant or equipment leaving the site does not carry mud or deposit
              other materials onto the public highway; measures to control the emission of
              dust and dirt during construction, together with any details in relation to noise
              and vibration; and a scheme for recycling / disposing of waste resulting from
              demolition and construction works. The development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved CMP.
     5)       No development shall take place until a hard and soft landscaping scheme
              has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              Details of hard landscaping works shall include boundary treatment, including
              full details of the proposed boundary walls, railings and gates to be erected,
              specifying the colour of the railings and gates; footpaths; and hard surfacing,
              which shall be made of porous materials or provision shall be made for direct
              run-off of water from the hard surface to a permeable or porous area. The
              hard landscaping works shall be completed in accordance with the approved
              details within three months of the first occupation of the development hereby
              permitted; and all planting shall be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details in the first planting and seeding seasons following first
              occupation. The soft landscaping scheme shall identify the full species, size
              and location of any soft landscaping.
              Any tree(s) or shrub(s) which within a period of five years from the
              completion of the development dies, is removed or becomes in the opinion of
              the local planning authority seriously damaged, defective or diseased shall
              be replaced in the next planting season with another of the same size and
              species as that originally planted. All hedging, tree(s) and shrub(s) shall be
              planted in accordance with British Standard BS4043 - Transplanting Root-
              balled Trees and BS4428 - Code of Practice for General Landscape
              Operations.
     6)       No development shall take place until a detailed surface water drainage
              scheme for the site, based on sustainable drainage principles has been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              scheme shall subsequently be implemented in accordance with the approved
              details before the development is first occupied. The scheme to be submitted
              shall:
              Limit the discharge rate generated by all rainfall events up to and including
              the 1 in 100 year (plus an allowance for climate change) critical rain storm to
              the QBar Greenfield runoff rate of 2l/s for the site in line with the approved
              surface water drainage strategy (ref: MI-2895-03-EN-002, revision P01,
              dated 12/12/24).
              Where the drainage scheme proposes to connect into a third party asset, for
              example a public sewer, further information should be provided regarding the
              ownership, purpose, location and condition of this asset along with

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007651


              confirmation of the right to connect into it. This could take the form of land
              ownership plans showing riparian ownership, land drainage consent, flood
              risk activity permit or agreement under Section 106 of the Water Industry Act
              (1991). Evidence of a CCTV survey should be submitted demonstrating the
              condition/exact location of the existing public sewers and the drainage to the
              south of the site.
              Provide drawings / plans illustrating the proposed sustainable surface water
              drainage scheme. The strategy agreed to date may be treated as a minimum
              and further source control SuDS should be considered during the detailed
              design stages as part of a ‘SuDS management train’ approach to provide
              additional benefits and resilience within the design.
              Provide detail drawings including cross sections, of proposed features such
              as attenuation features, flow controls and outfall structures. These should be
              feature-specific demonstrating that such the surface water drainage
              system(s) are designed in accordance with ‘The SuDS Manual’, CIRIA
              Report C753.
              Provide detailed, network level calculations demonstrating the performance
              of the proposed system. This should include: Suitable representation of the
              proposed drainage scheme, details of design criteria used (incl. consideration
              of a surcharged outfall), and justification of such criteria where relevant.
              Simulation of the network for a range of durations and return periods
              including the 1 in 2 year, 1 in 30 year and 1 in 100 year plus 40% climate
              change events
              Results should demonstrate the performance of the drainage scheme
              including attenuation storage, flows in line with agreed discharge rates,
              potential flood volumes and network status. Results should be provided as a
              summary for each return period.
              Evidence should be supported by a suitably labelled plan/schematic
              (including contributing areas) to allow suitable cross checking of calculations
              and the proposals.
              Provide plans such as external levels plans, supporting the exceedance and
              overland flow routeing provided to date. Such overland flow routing should:
              Demonstrate how runoff will be directed through the development without
              exposing properties to flood risk.
              Consider property finished floor levels and thresholds in relation to
              exceedance flows. The LLFA recommend FFLs are set to a minimum of
              150mm above surrounding ground levels.
              Recognise that exceedance can occur during any storm event due to a
              number of factors therefore exceedance management should not rely on
              calculations demonstrating no flooding.
     7)       No development shall take place until a further Energy Statement which
              addresses the requirements of Policy NZC3 has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The statement shall
              demonstrate how the embodied carbon of the proposed materials to be used
              in the development has been considered and reduced where possible,
              including with regard to the type, life cycle and source of materials to be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6007651


              used. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              details.
     8)       No development shall be carried out above slab level until details of the
              finished floor levels of all buildings, together with details of existing and
              proposed site levels on the site and the relationship with adjacent land and
              buildings, have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved details.
     9)       No development shall be carried out above slab level until samples of the
              materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The development shall be carried out
              in accordance with the approved samples.
     10)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the car parking
              and manoeuvring areas indicated on the approved drawings have been laid
              out and thereafter those areas shall be kept marked out and available for
              such use at all times.
     11)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until details of cycle
              parking facilities have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The cycle parking facilities shall be implemented prior to
              first occupation and made available for use in accordance with the approved
              details and thereafter those facilities shall remain available for use at all
              times.
     12)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a scheme for
              the provision of adequate water supplies and fire hydrants necessary for
              firefighting purposes at the site, has been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The approved scheme shall be
              implemented prior to first occupation and maintained thereafter for the
              lifetime of the development.
     13)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a Verification
              Report for the installed surface water drainage system for the site based on
              the approved Drainage Strategy Report (HLW-AJP-XX-XX-RP-C-0900, dated
              25/2/25) has been submitted in writing by a suitably qualified independent
              drainage engineer and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
     14)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a detailed, site
              specific drainage maintenance plan has been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority, The development shall be carried out
              in accordance with the approved details.
     15)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until three 7kWh
              (minimum) electric vehicle recharging points have been installed in
              accordance with details first submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. Once the electric vehicle recharging points have been
              installed, the following verification details shall be submitted to and approved
              in writing by the local planning authority: (1). Plan(s)/ photograph(s) showing
              the location of the electric vehicle recharging points; (2). A technical data
              sheet for the electric vehicle recharging point infrastructure; and (3).
              Confirmation of the charging speed in kWh. The electric vehicle recharging


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6007651


              points shall be thereafter retained in accordance with the approved details for
              the lifetime of the development unless being upgraded.
     16)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until details of
              refuse and recycling storage areas for the development including, the size,
              location and the materials and heights of any enclosures have been
              submitted to an approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              refuse and recycling storage areas shall be constructed in accordance with
              the approved details and made available for use by the occupants of the
              development. Thereafter those areas shall be kept free of obstruction and be
              available at all times for the storage of refuse and recycling associated with
              the development. Refuse and recycling storage containers must be stored
              within the refuse and recycling storage area shown on the approved plans,
              unless when being presented on street for collection.
     17)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a scheme
              showing how a water efficiency standard of 110 litres per person per day
              based on an assumed occupancy rate of 2.4 people per household (or higher
              where appropriate) will be achieved has been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. No unit shall be first occupied until the
              works within the approved scheme have been completed in accordance with
              the approved details and thereafter retained and maintained in accordance
              with manufacturer's specifications.
     18)      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the scheme to
              protect residents of the development from road traffic noise entering
              habitable rooms, as detailed in 24 Acoustics technical report R10673-1 Rev 3
              dated 8th August 2024 (glazing and MVHR ventilation) and technical memo
              R10673-2 Rev 0 dated 2nd July 2026 (noise barrier) has been implemented.
              The measures shall be retained and maintained thereafter for the lifetime of
              the development.
     19)      In the event that contamination is found at any time when carrying out the
              approved development that was not previously identified it must be reported
              in writing immediately to the local planning authority. An investigation and risk
              assessment must be undertaken, and where remediation is necessary, a
              remediation scheme must be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. Following completion of measures identified in the
              approved remediation scheme a verification report must be prepared, which
              is subject to the approval in writing of the local planning authority.
     20)      No external lighting or illumination of any part of the building or the site shall
              be installed or operated until details of such measures shall have been first
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. Such
              works, and use of that lighting and/or illumination, shall be carried out and
              operated only in accordance with the approved details.
     21)      Apart from the requirements of Policy NZC3 which are secured by condition
              8, the development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the details set out in the approved Energy Statement by Focus dated October
              2025.
     22)      Each apartment hereby permitted shall only be used and occupied as
              independent self-contained C3 use retirement accommodation for a person
              or persons who have a minimum age of 55 years of age


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    11
Appeal Decision 6007651


     23)      Noise from the mechanical ventilation system installed pursuant to this
              planning permission shall not exceed Noise Rating NR25 in any non-
              communal habitable room, as measured using the procedures in the ANC
              guideline document “Measurement of Sound in Buildings” dated June 2020.


                                           END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
