Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007217
Camden Road, outside No. 57, near Rail Bridge, London, NW1 9EU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2025/5806/P.
•    The development is the proposed deployment of a Street Hub 3 Unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6007216
Camden Road, outside No. 57, near Rail Bridge, London, NW1 9EU
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2025/5841/A.
•    The advertisement is the proposed deployment of a Street Hub 3 Unit.


Decisions
1.     Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for the proposed
       deployment of a Street Hub 3 unit at Camden Road, outside No. 57, near Rail
       Bridge, London, NW1 9EU, in accordance with the terms of the application,
       Ref 2025/5806/P, subject to the conditions set out in the attached Appeal A
       Schedule of Conditions.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and express consent is granted for the proposed deployment
       of a Street Hub 3 unit at Camden Road, outside No. 57, near Rail Bridge, London,
       NW1 9EU, in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 2025/5841/A. The
       consent is for five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five
       standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations, and the
       additional conditions set out in the attached Appeal B Schedule of Conditions.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a BT Street Hub
       Unit (Hub). Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display
       advertisements on the Hub. I have considered each on its individual merits,
       however, as they raise similar issues I have combined both decisions into a single
       decision letter.
4.     With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007216 and 6007217


       based solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I
       have taken the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account,
       they have not been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
5.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
       comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on (i) the character and appearance of the area, including the
       Camden Broadway Conservation Area (CA), (ii) highway safety, (iii) community
       safety and security, and (iv) adequate maintenance provision.
7.     The main issue in relation to Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisements
       on the amenity of the area, having regard to the CA.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
8.     The appeal site comprises of a pedestrian footpath outside No. 57 Camden Road,
       a four storey commercial premises with residential uses above in a prominent
       corner position at the junction of Camden Road and Royal College Street. It is
       located at a busy road interchange, dominated by the adjacent overhead Camden
       Town overground bridge, surrounded by a range of retail and commercial units
       within the CA, that provides a busy and vibrant commercial character to the area.
9.     The broad and open pavement in the vicinity of the appeal site, where an existing
       BT InLink Unit sits, is occupied by a range of street furniture and other features,
       including cycle racks, traffic lights, lamp posts and a street tree. A further BT InLink
       Unit is situated a short distance away on the opposite side of Camden Road.
10. The new Hub would replace the existing InLink Unit and would be positioned close
    to the edge of the pavement broadly in line with the existing cycle racks, lamp
    posts and street tree. The proposed Hub would be marginally wider, deeper and
    taller than the existing InLink Unit, extending slightly further into the footway but no
    closer to the carriageway. Its overall footprint would remain broadly comparable,
    resulting in only modest changes in its profile in street views. The surrounding
    streetscene is already visually varied, with busy vehicle and pedestrian
    movements, commercial activity and other items of street furniture. In this context,
    the slight increase in massing would not materially alter the established character
    of the area, nor introduce a visually intrusive presence.
11. Although the double-sided display screen integrated with the Hub would introduce
    slightly larger illuminated digital advertisements to the area, its effect would be
    read within the context of the illuminated signage displayed on the adjacent
    commercial units and nearby BT InLink Unit, which already forms part of the visual
    baseline. The Hub’s contemporary design and modest footprint would sit
    comfortably within this setting, with the dominant railway bridge, intervening street
    tree and other features providing a noticeable visual break in the streetscene. In


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6007216 and 6007217


       this context, I am not persuaded that the proposals would result in an
       unacceptable proliferation of digital advertisements or street clutter.
12. Given the location of the appeal site within the CA, special attention must be paid
    to considering the impact of the development on the significance of the designated
    heritage assets and to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of the CA. The historic and architectural significance of the CA with its
    older more traditional 18th and 19th Century three and four storey buildings in the
    nearby streets can be readily appreciated within the immediate vicinity of the site.
13. Given the scale, siting and design of the proposed Hub and advertisements would
    be of broadly comparable to the existing InLink unit and noting the established
    varied visual baseline and urban character of the CA, I consider that the proposals
    would not draw undue attention or detract from the area’s visual qualities.
    Consequently, I do not find harm in relation to this aspect and the significance of
    the CA would be preserved.
14. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposals would not harm the character and
    appearance of the area, including the CA, for the purposes of Appeal A, nor visual
    amenity for the purposes of Appeal B. Insofar as they are material considerations
    relevant to the appeals, the proposals would accord with Policies D1, D2 and D4 of
    the Camden Local Plan 2017 (CLP), which, amongst other things, seek to ensure
    that developments are designed and sited so as to respect the local character and
    amenity of the area; preserve or enhance the historic environment and the
    significance of designated heritage assets and their settings; and resist advertising
    that contributes to street clutter in the public realm. The advertisements subject to
    Appeal B would also accord with the relevant provisions of the 2007 Regulations.
Appeal A - Highway Safety
15. The proposed Hub would be positioned close to the edge of the wide pavement
    broadly in line with the existing cycle racks, lamp posts and street tree. Camden
    Road is a busy and wide commercial street, and it was apparent from my site visit
    on a weekday that pedestrian footfall on the footpath was relatively busy.
16. Whilst I acknowledge the potential for higher footfalls in this location at certain
    times, particularly at peak times and weekends, given the modest increase in the
    width of the proposed Hub as compared to the existing InLink Unit, it would leave a
    sizeable gap of around 3.3m of clear space in front of the adjacent commercial
    premises. This would be in line with the minimum effective footway width of least
    3.3m sought by the Transport for London’s ‘Pedestrian Comfort Guidance for
    London’ for ‘high flow areas’.
17. In any event, I observed the existing InLink Unit did not significantly interrupt any
    obvious desire line for pedestrians along the footpath and the mature tree and
    cycle racks either side of the appeal site are an equally significant constraint on
    the width of the footway at this location. I am therefore satisfied that the proposed
    Hub would not have any additional significant impact in this respect and would, in
    my view, leave ample room for the free and safe movement of pedestrians.
18. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed Hub would not have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular
    regard to the free and safe movement of pedestrians. Consequently, the proposal
    would accord with Policies G1, A1, C6 and T1 of the CLP, insofar as they relate to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6007216 and 6007217


        ensuring the delivery of high quality development that meets the highest
        practicable standards of accessible and inclusive design and prioritises walking
        (among other sustainable means of transport) by providing high-quality footpaths
        of adequate width for the number of people expected to use them.
Appeal A - Community Safety and security
19. The Council has described installations such as telephone kiosks and hubs as
    “crime generators” and focal points for anti-social behaviour. The Council state that
    they have experienced a rise in crime and anti-social behaviour as a direct result
    of the existing InLink kiosks in areas such as Camden. These activities include
    increased loitering, as well as the usage of the free calls facility at the InLink kiosks
    to coordinate drug dealing. This, however, is couched in general ‘area’ terms
    rather than specifically related to the appeal site.
20. The Metropolitan Police’s Crime Prevention Design Advisor commented that the
    locations around the existing InLink kiosks, often see higher levels of crime and
    anti-social behaviour and that the proposed Hub is larger than the previous InLink
    kiosks and as such would create a larger space for possible concealment. They
    also noted that, due to the location of the new Hub close to the carriageway and
    the openness of the proposed Hub, it could offer opportunities for would-be
    criminals to observe people using or charging their phones at the location, where
    theft levels from person are high, and would be vulnerable to opportunistic phone
    thefts.
21. However, while I do not seek to downplay the harmful impacts of street crime and
    anti-social behaviour, there is limited substantive evidence before me, including
    recent site-specific crime data, to demonstrate that these issues would be
    increased as a result of the proposed Hub in this particular location. Indeed, as the
    proposed Hub would replace an existing InLink unit, and would provide a
    comparable range of services, I consider that it would be likely to be broadly
    neutral in this respect.
22. As such, there would be no significant adverse effect on community safety and
    security. I therefore find no conflict with Policy C5 of the CLP, which seeks to tackle
    crime and anti-social behaviour, and to promote safer streets and public areas.
Appeal A - Maintenance
23. I acknowledge the Council’s concern that a lack of maintenance for the proposed
    Hub could lead to it falling into disrepair and detracting from the quality of the
    streetscene. The Council considered that maintenance of the installation could only
    be achieved through a Section 106 agreement.
24. I note the other dismissed appeals in Camden that the Council has referred me to
    in which the matter of maintenance had been considered. In respect of a proposal
    for a telephone kiosk outside Nos 216-217 Tottenham Court Road1, the Inspector
    noted that the proposed maintenance regime would be likely to reduce the effects
    of anti-social behaviour. For the proposed Hub dismissed on appeal outside No 39
    Tottenham Court Road2, the Inspector commented that there is no legal
    mechanism in place to ensure that an appropriate maintenance plan is
    implemented in perpetuity.
1
    PINS Refs: APP/X5210/W/20/3253878 and APP/X5210/Z/20/3253540
2
    PINS Refs: APP/X5210/W/22/3297273 and APP/X5210/W/22/3297276


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decisions 6007216 and 6007217


25. I observed during my site visit that the existing InLink unit at the appeal site was
    operational and appeared clean and well-maintained. Nevertheless, I accept that
    there is a significant risk that such units may become neglected over time to the
    detriment of the streetscene and therefore consider that appropriate maintenance
    should be secured.
26. However, nothing which has been put before me indicates that this could only be
    secured by a planning obligation. The BT Street Hubs Beyond Connection
    Document (SHBC) and BT Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan
    (ASBMP) submitted by the appellant as part of the appeal, state that Street Hub
    units are visited every two weeks for cleaning and checked for damage, and that
    emergency visits can also be arranged in response to remote monitoring. In view of
    my conclusion on the preceding main issue, as well as my observations on site, I
    am satisfied that maintenance can be secured by a condition requiring compliance
    with the submitted details in the SHBC and ASBMP.
27. Subject to such a condition, I consider that adequate provision would be made for
    maintenance of the proposed Hub. As such, I find no conflict on this matter with
    Policies G1, D1, A1, C6 and T1 of the CLP, which among other things seek to
    manage the impact of development so as to protect quality of life in the borough,
    improve the pedestrian environment and public realm to allow access to all, ensure
    that development is of high quality, sustainable and durable construction, and is
    secure and designed to minimise crime and antisocial behaviour.
Other Matters
28. I have noted the other appeals drawn to my attention by the Council, that include
    advertisements, for kiosks and hubs dismissed in the area. However, I have not
    been provided the full details of these to know how directly comparable they are to
    the current proposals, which in turn limits the relevance of the highlighted appeals.
    In any event I have determined the appeals before me on their own merits.
Conditions
29. All advertisements granted express consent are subject to the five standard
    conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations.
30. The Planning Practice Guidance confirms that additional conditions can be
    imposed where they are supported by specific and relevant planning reasons. I
    have considered the conditions suggested by the main parties for both appeals
    against the requirements of the Framework and advice contained in the Planning
    Practice Guidance, amending or omitting them where necessary to ensure full
    compliance with those tests.
31. For Appeal A, conditions relating to the statutory time limit and a list of approved
    plans and documents are necessary in the interests of certainty. A condition
    requiring the proposed Hub to be operated in accordance with the submitted
    SHBC and ASBMP is necessary in the interests of community safety and
    preventing anti-social behaviour and crime. A condition specifying the surfacing
    materials and the removal of the proposed Hub after it is no longer required for
    telephone communication or electronic communication purposes are necessary to
    safeguard the character and appearance of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6007216 and 6007217


32. For Appeal B, in addition to the standard conditions of the 2007 Regulations,
    conditions are necessary to control the intensity of illumination, prevent moving
    images, visual effects, noises and advertisements resembling traffic signs, and
    securing a minimum display period between transitions, all necessary for amenity
    and public safety reasons. The appellant’s request for a 10‑year consent period is
    not supported by any substantive justification, and in the absence of compelling
    evidence to depart from the default 5‑year period set by the 2007 Regulations, I
    am not persuaded that such a condition would be reasonable.
33. I have not imposed the five standard conditions suggested by the Council for
    Appeal B, which duplicated those set out in the standard conditions and are not
    therefore necessary. I have also not imposed the suggested conditions relating to
    obstructing the footway or carriageway during installation and maintenance of the
    advertisement panels, as it has not been demonstrated that specific controls
    beyond those provided for in highways, street works and traffic management
    regulations would be necessary in this case.
Conclusion
34.     For the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal A and Appeal B should be allowed,
       subject to the conditions.

David Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6007216 and 6007217


Appeal A Schedule of Conditions
       1. The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
          the date of this decision.
       2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans: Site Location Plan 24007227_PLN_LOC_1.1; Site
          Plan 24007227_PLN_SI_2.1; and Elevation Plan 24007227_PLN_EL_3.1;
          Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan V 3; Street Hubs Beyond
          Connection V2.2; Street Hub Noise Management Plan V 2.1; PROPOSED BT
          STREETHUB 3 UNIT 1 of 1 and Planning, Design and Access Statement.
       3. The development hereby permitted shall at all times be operated in full
          accordance with the approved BT documents titled ‘Street Hubs Beyond
          Connection V2.2’ and ‘Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan
          Version 3’.
       4. All new or replacement surface materials should match as closely as possible
          the existing adjacent surface materials.
       5. The development hereby permitted shall be removed from the land on which it
          is situated as soon as reasonably practicable after it is no longer required for
          telecommunication or electronic communications purposes.

Appeal B Schedule of Conditions
       1. The advertisement display shall be statically illuminated and the intensity of
          the illumination of the digital signs shall not exceed 2000 candelas per square
          metre during the day and 600 candelas per square metre during the hours of
          darkness in line with the maximum permitted recommended luminance as set
          out by The Institute of Lighting Professional's 'Professional Lighting Guide 05:
          The Brightness of Illuminated Advertisements Including Digital Displays, 2023.
          The levels of luminance on the digital signs should be controlled by light
          sensors to measure the ambient brightness and dimmers to control the lighting
          output to within these limits.
       2. The digital display screens shall not display any moving, or apparently moving,
          images (including animation, flashing, scrolling three dimensional, intermittent
          or video elements).
       3. The minimum display time for each advertisement on the digital display
          screens shall be 10 seconds.
       4. The interval between advertisements shall take place over a period no greater
          than one second; the complete screen shall change with no visual effects
          (including fading, swiping or other animated transition methods) between
          displays and the display will include a mechanism to freeze the image in the
          event of a malfunction.
       5. No music or sound shall be emitted from the advertisements.
       6. No advertisement displayed shall resemble traffic signs, as defined in section
          64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
