Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026 by J Reed MPlan MRTPI
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007856
Existing Garages, Rear of 13 Morven Drive, Felling, Bill Quay, Gateshead
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr David Carr against the decision of Gateshead Metropolitan Borough
    Council.
•   The application Ref is DC/25/01337/FUL.
•   The development proposed is alteration to central section of existing garages.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a new National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). Having reviewed the changes to the Framework, I am
   satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues in the appeal.
   Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further
   consultation with the main parties.
4. From my site visit I saw that the development had been completed. The
   development appears to be in accordance with what is shown on the submitted
   plans, and I have dealt with the appeal on this basis.
5. The appeal site consists of three garages with the Council’s concerns relating to
   the central garage of this group and therefore this is what my recommendation is
   focused on below.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are the effect of the development on:
    -     the character and appearance of the area, and
    -    the living conditions of the occupants of 13 and 15 Morven Drive with particular
         regard to outlook.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007856


Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and appearance
7. The appeal site is situated within a group that forms two rows of single storey
   garages sitting opposite each other. The garages generally share commonality in
   their overall scale, massing, character and appearance due to their flat roofed
   design and modest proportions.
8. The alteration to the garage roof has resulted in a large, boxy and dominant
   addition to the street scene particularly as a result of its height and elevated siting.
   It appears as an overbearing addition which has adversely altered the existing
   garage’s simple character and design as part of a collective group. Although the
   new roof utilises materials which match the roofing materials of the surrounding
   garages, this is not sufficient to mitigate its prominence due to its height and
   irregular design. Furthermore, by virtue of its size and detailed design, the change
   in roof damages the existing quality of the area. It is clearly visible from the rear
   lane as well as the properties on Morven Drive due to it failing to harmonise with
   the flat roofed design of the surrounding garages. I note the appellant’s argument
   that there is limited visibility of the garage, however, this does not preclude a full
   assessment.
9. I note the presence of the two garages at the opposing end of the block which have
   an increased height in comparison to the other garages in the block aside from the
   appeal garage. Nonetheless, the design of these do not represent the prevailing
   character of the area, and I am mindful that each development must be assessed
   on its own merits. I am therefore satisfied that the references to these
   developments do not justify development that harms the character and appearance
   of the area.
10. The appellant has highlighted garages of varying designs in the local area as
    precedent. However, the examples highlighted are detached garages which are not
    read as part of a grouping like the appeal site, and I therefore do not consider them
    to be sufficiently comparable to the scheme before me.
11. In addition, the appellant has also made reference to a larger garage that the
    Council has approved elsewhere. However, I am not provided with the full details of
    this case to understand the particular planning and site circumstances present at
    the time it was approved. Consequently, I cannot be certain it is sufficiently similar
    to the appeal scheme and so the weight to be afforded is limited. Ultimately, I have
    considered the appeal on its own merits and against the planning policies and
    guidance in force.
12. I therefore conclude that the development is harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area. It fails to comply with Policy CS15 of the Planning for the
    Future Core Strategy and Urban Core Plan for Gateshead and Newcastle upon
    Tyne 2010-2030 (2015) and Policy MSGP24 of the Making Spaces for Growing
    Places Local Plan Document for Gateshead (2021). These seek amongst other
    things for proposals to be compatible with local character in their scale, height and
    massing.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007856


Living conditions
13. The appeal site is situated to the rear of Morven Drive and directly abuts the rear of
    15 Morven Drive (No 15) as well as being directly adjacent to 13 Morven Drive (No
    13). On my site visit I viewed the appeal site from the rear ground and first floor
    windows of No 13 and No 15 as well as from their respective gardens.
14. From No 15 the development is clearly visible due to its height and dark material
    palette. The resultant development dominates views from the rear of No 15 due to
    its blank featureless appearance and height. This visual dominance unacceptably
    reduces the quality of outlook gained from both the rear habitable room windows of
    No. 15 as well as its garden, to the detriment of the living conditions of the
    occupants of this property.
15. Turning to No 13, when viewing from the rear windows, a more oblique view of the
    development can be gained. However, notwithstanding this, rear garden users are
    subject to the inescapable dominance of the dark, bulky, tall form of the
    development which is highly overbearing.
16. The appellant has made reference to the guidance on separation distances set out
    in the Council’s Householder Alterations and Extensions SPD. However, these are
    specifically in regard to privacy which the Council have not outlined as a concern.
    The SPD does however outline as a general rule, that blank walls of two storey
    extensions should be at least 13m from the habitable room windows of facing
    dwellings. However as outlined by the appellant the development fails to comply
    with this guidance.
17. The appellant has also referred to other development within Gateshead which fails
    to accord with the above guidance set out in the Council’s SPD. However, in the
    absence of further details relating to these cases, I cannot be sure of their
    similarities to the development before me.
18. I also note the existing relationships outlined by the appellant on Morven Drive that
    there are varying distances separating dwellings/garages. Including between 19
    and 17 Morven Drive and a garage to their rear as well as 9 Morven Drive and ‘the
    Annex’. Nonetheless, such examples do not represent the prevailing character of
    the area, and I am mindful that each development must be assessed on its own
    merits. I am therefore satisfied that the references to these developments do not
    justify development that harms the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
19. I conclude that the development has an unacceptable effect on the living conditions
    of neighbouring occupiers with specific regard to outlook for occupiers of 13 and 15
    Morven Drive. As such, the development fails to comply with the residential amenity
    requirements of Policy MSGP17 of the Site Allocations and Development
    Management Policies Local Plan Document for Gateshead (2021). Which seeks to
    prevent negative impacts on residential amenity including outlook.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007856


Other Matters
20. I note the appellants case that the works at the appeal site have been carried out
    due to structural reasons and to improve the site with the appeal scheme being the
    only way to achieve this. However, whilst this is noted I am not persuaded that an
    improvement at the site could not have been achieved through a scheme that does
    not harm the character and appearance of the area or the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers.
21. The appellant has made reference to an AI response outlining the usable size of
    garages in Gateshead. However, in the absence of the source of this information
    this limits the weight I can afford this matter.
22. I acknowledge the comments that interested parties feel the appellant has
    improved the site and that others should do the same. However, a degree of
    support does not obviate the need for a full assessment of the main issues.
    Regarding the appeal scheme removing a vehicle from the highway, whilst this
    might be the case, it does not outweigh the harm in regard to the main issues.
23. The appellant also states that the scheme has improved security at the site and
    could help in lowering crime. However, no evidence has been put before me
    demonstrating that the appeal site has been affected by any of the crimes
    highlighted. Also, it has not been demonstrated that the plot is especially vulnerable
    to such crime in comparison to neighbouring sites. Furthermore, there is also
    nothing before me demonstrating how the development forms a preventative
    measure if said crimes had indeed occurred at the appeal site. As a result, I give
    this limited weight.
24. Policy S4 of the National Planning Policy Framework (The Framework) states that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework. The
    appellant has set out the benefits of the scheme as allowing them to have a place
    to store their motorhome which they can maintain. However, the benefits before me
    have limited weight and they are substantially outweighed by the adverse effects
    when considered against the decision making policies of the Framework which
    include a requirement that developments respond to their context and integrate and
    enhance their surroundings.
25. In addition, the appellant has also made reference to the Framework’s support for
    upwards extensions. However, the Framework states that development will not be
    supported if it results in substantial harm to the character of a building and its
    surroundings. This is the case with the appeal development as outlined above and
    therefore the scheme does not benefit from this support.
26. The appellant has outlined that there are no suitable garages in the wider area that
    could accommodate their needs. However, I do not have any substantive evidence
    before me demonstrating how this is the case and therefore afford this limited
    weight.
27. I appreciate the appellant’s concerns about the Council’s handling of the original
    application; however, this would not be a reason to allow the appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007856


Conclusion and Recommendation
28. The development therefore fails to accord with the development plan, when taken
    as a whole, and there are no material considerations of sufficient magnitude to
    indicate that the appeal should be determined other than in accordance with it. I
    therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Reed
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
29. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
