Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Nick Davies BSc(Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007466
Land at Penstraze, Chacewater, Truro, Cornwall TR4 8JP
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Selven Homes Ltd against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•      The application Ref is PA25/09003.
•      The development proposed is construction of up to 9 dwellings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (the
         PPG) advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
         is suitable in-principle, and the second (technical details consent stage), is when
         the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
         of these two stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
         permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.       An applicant can apply for permission in principle for a range of dwellings by
         expressing a minimum and maximum number of dwellings as part of the
         application. In this instance, permission has been sought for a minimum of nine
         and a maximum of nine dwellings.
5.       On 17 August 2026, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework). Both parties have had the opportunity to comment
         on its implications for their respective cases. I have considered the new
         Framework in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issue
6.       The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
         regard to its location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development.



1
    The PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007466


Reasons
7.       Policy 2 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030 (adopted 2016)
         (the Local Plan) sets out the spatial strategy for development. It seeks to maintain
         the dispersed development pattern of Cornwall, providing homes and jobs based
         on the role and function of each place. Based on this strategy, Policy 3 defines
         how development will be accommodated, with growth focussed on identified main
         towns. However, it also supports housing growth within or adjoining smaller
         settlements through the identification of sites through Neighbourhood Plans; rural
         exception sites; rounding off; development of previously developed land (PDL); or
         infill schemes that fill a small gap in an otherwise continuous built frontage.
8.       Paragraph 1.68 of the Local Plan explains that Neighbourhood Plans can provide
         detailed definition on which settlements are appropriate for infill, and boundaries
         within which the policy will operate. The Truro and Kenwyn Neighbourhood
         Development Plan (the Neighbourhood Plan) establishes an Urban Extent
         Boundary for Truro, together with development boundaries for Threemilestone and
         Shortlanesend, within which Policy H1 supports proposals that meet local housing
         need. The appeal site is not within these boundaries, and is not otherwise
         identified for development within the Neighbourhood Plan. Furthermore, the
         proposal has not been submitted as a rural exception site.
9.       Rounding off, infill, or development of PDL are only supported by Policy 3 of the
         Local Plan within or immediately adjoining a settlement. There is no definition of a
         settlement in the Policy or its supporting text, but advice is provided in the Chief
         Planning Officer’s Advice Note: Infill/Rounding off (the CPOAN). The CPOAN
         advises that a settlement is a place where people collectively live in permanent
         buildings, and which has a form and shape and clearly definable boundaries. The
         continuous line of dwellings on the opposite side of the A390 falls within this
         description. In one of the appeal decisions2 cited by the Council, the Inspector
         concluded that this row of buildings was a settlement, and I see no reason to
         disagree. The site does not lie within the settlement, but case law3 has held that an
         intervening road does not prevent land from being immediately adjacent to a
         settlement. Consequently, for the purposes of Policy 3, the site adjoins the
         settlement of Penstraze.
10. The appeal site has a road frontage that extends to approximately 175 metres, and
    there are no buildings near to its eastern boundary. Consequently, having regard
    to the definition at paragraph 1.65 of the Local Plan, the proposal could not
    reasonably be described as infill. The site comprises two undeveloped fields,
    containing two small structures, which are described as redundant agricultural
    buildings in the Planning Statement that accompanied the application. The site
    does not therefore comprise PDL, so is not supported by Policy 3 in this regard.
    Consequently, the location of the site would only be suitable for the development
    under Policy 3 if the proposal met the criteria for rounding off.
11. Paragraph 1.68 of the Local Plan describes rounding off as development on land
    that is substantially enclosed, but outside the urban form of the settlement, and
    where its edge is clearly defined by a physical feature that also acts as a barrier to
    further growth (such as a road). It should not visually extend building into the open
    countryside. In this case, the site does have roads to its northern and western
2
    Appeal Reference APP/D0840/W/22/3312887
3
    William Corbett v Cornwall Council v Dympna Wilson [2022] EWCA Civ 1069


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6007466


       boundaries, and an access track to the east. It also has hedges and trees
       enclosing it on all four sides. However, apart from the dwelling on the opposite
       side of the road to the west, the land to the south of the A390 is largely
       undeveloped agricultural fields, in marked contrast with the continuous row of built
       development on the north side of the road. As the boundary hedges are perforate
       in nature, the dwellings would be readily visible. The amount of development
       would be a significant intrusion into the undeveloped land to the south of the road.
       The resultant visual extension of built form into the countryside means that the
       proposal would not constitute rounding off. It would not, therefore, comply with
       Policy 3.
12. Policy 21 of the Local Plan encourages the best use of land in sustainable
    locations, through the use of PDL, contaminated land, or by increasing building
    density. In this case, the land is not contaminated or PDL, and the proposal would
    introduce entirely new development, rather than increasing building density.
    Consequently, the proposal does not derive support from Policy 21.
13. Paragraph 2.33 of the Local Plan defines open countryside as the area outside of
    the physical boundaries of existing settlements. Whilst I have acknowledged that
    the site is adjacent to a settlement, it does not lie within its physical boundaries. I
    am also mindful of the nearby strategic allocation of land at Langarth. However,
    that land lies to the north of the A390, so land on the southern side of the road will
    not be subsumed by the extended settlement. Policy 7 of the Local Plan says that
    development of new homes in the countryside will only be permitted where there
    are specified special circumstances. None of these apply to the proposal, so it
    would be contrary to Policy 7. Consequently, the location and land-use proposed
    would conflict with the spatial strategy set out in Policies 2, 3, 7 and 21 of the Local
    Plan, and Policy H1 of the Neighbourhood Plan.
14. Although the site is adjacent to the settlement, it is visually separated from the built
    development by the wide, busy road, and the boundary hedgerow. Consequently,
    it appears to be a part of the surrounding undeveloped landscape that extends
    away to the south, and which provides an attractive rural setting for Penstraze.
    The introduction of this amount of built development into the countryside would
    result in harm to the natural beauty of these surroundings. However, the level of
    harm would be moderate as, in most views, the site is seen in the context of the
    existing settlement. Furthermore, the site is not prominent in the wider landscape
    due to the topography and to the hedgerows on all boundaries. Nevertheless, the
    moderate harm results in conflict with Policy 23 of the Local Plan, Policy C1 of the
    Climate Emergency Development Plan Document 2023 (the CEDPD), and Policy
    E6 of the Neighbourhood Plan, which seek to maintain and enhance Cornwall’s
    distinctive natural environment, and the settings of its settlements.
15. The location of the site is approximately midway between Three Burrows to the
    west and Threemilestone to the east. These are the two nearest settlements that
    contain public services and facilities, and they are approximately 1.5 kilometres
    from the site. Consequently, occupants of the development would not be within
    easy walking distance of the services necessary for everyday life. There is,
    however, a segregated cycleway adjacent to the A390, and it is on the same side
    of the road as the site, so occupants would not have to cross the busy carriageway
    to use it. The terrain in the locality is relatively level, so cycling to the nearby
    settlements would be a genuine option for residents.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007466


16. There is also a bus stop on the same side of the road, within 100 metres and
    accessible along the cycle track. This provides a sustainable alternative for
    westward bound trips. The easterly bus stop on the opposite side of the road is
    less accessible to occupants of the site, as it would involve crossing the busy
    A390, which is unlit at this point. Whilst there is a central refuge, it does not lead to
    a pavement on the north side of the road. Consequently, there would be a
    significant deterrent to using this bus stop, particularly in the hours of darkness. As
    a result, there would be likely to be some reliance on the private car to access
    services. However, the settlements providing these services are not distant, and
    there is a park and ride facility for Truro within two kilometres, so car borne
    journeys would not need to be lengthy.
17. Overall, therefore, the location of the site is relatively sustainable, given the
    proximity of the nearest settlements and the ease of accessing them by bicycle
    and, to a lesser extent, by bus. The proposal would, therefore, accord with Policies
    C1 and T1 of the CEDPD and Policies E1, E4(a) and T2 of the Neighbourhood
    Plan, which seek to maximise opportunities for sustainable transport.
18. The site is located within the Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape World
    Heritage Site (the WHS), which was inscribed in 2006, and comprises ten areas
    across Cornwall and West Devon that were heavily influenced by copper and tin
    mining in the period 1700 to 1914. The Statement of Outstanding Universal Value
    (OUV) identifies that the remains of mines, engine houses, smallholdings, ports,
    harbours, canals, railways, tramroads, and industries allied to mining, along with
    new towns and villages reflect an extended period of industrial expansion and
    prolific innovation. It adds that the ten areas form a unified, coherent cultural
    landscape and share a common identity. Mineworkers’ smallholdings are identified
    as one of seven attributes through which the OUV of the WHS is expressed.
19. The appeal site comprises two fields that were enclosed from downland in the mid-
    19th century, either for smallholders still in the mining industry, or by former miners
    who had become reliant on their tenanted land as the mining industry declined.
    Either way, the patchwork of small fields on the site and surrounding land is a
    physical remnant of the mining era that can still be discerned today, and
    contributes positively to the significance of the WHS.
20. A Heritage Impact Assessment (the HIA)4 was submitted with the appeal. It
    concludes that the legibility of the historic smallholding system would be harmed
    through the loss of the current agricultural character of the enclosures. The HIA
    indicates that, as the pattern of smallholdings in the immediate vicinity has been
    fragmented, and the roadside boundary of the site is of recent origin, the impact
    would be minor, and at the lower end of the range of harm. Nevertheless, Policy
    HE4 of the Framework says that any harm to the significance of a heritage asset
    should have a clear and convincing justification, and Policy HE6 says that
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
21. The HIA contends that the densely vegetated boundaries would mitigate the visual
    impact of the development on the historic landscape, and that they could be
    retained and strengthened. It is also suggested that the detailed design of the
    housing could reference the traditional scale and character of smallholding
    cottages and terraces. However, the amount of development proposed would
4
 Statement Heritage - Land at Penstraze, Chacewater, Truro, TR4 8JP - Heritage Impact Assessment within a World Heritage Site
Ref: SH Ref CHACE0226_v0.0


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decision 6007466


       permanently overwrite the historic landscape such that, even with retention of the
       boundaries, the relic smallholdings, and their relationship with the others nearby,
       would no longer be legible. Whilst this would only affect a small part of the overall
       WHS, this argument could be repeatedly made for individual proposals, resulting in
       further cumulative harm to the significance of the heritage asset.
22. Paragraph 4 of Framework Policy HE6 says that, where a development proposal
    would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset
    and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from
    the proposal.
23. Nine dwellings would be a public benefit in view of the insufficient supply of
    housing land in the area. There would also be short term economic benefits due to
    employment during construction, and an ongoing benefit from future occupants
    supporting local businesses and services. However, these benefits are not specific
    to this site, so could be achieved elsewhere, without harm to the WHS. I will return
    to the relative weight to be given to the harms and benefits of the proposal in my
    overall planning balance, but for the purposes of Framework Policy HE6, the public
    benefits of the development do not outweigh the harm to the significance of the
    heritage asset. The proposal would, therefore, be contrary to Policy 24 of the Local
    Plan, which seeks to avoid harm to the authenticity and integrity of the OUV of the
    WHS.
Planning Balance
24. The proposal would conflict with the spatial strategy of the development plan,
    together with policies that seek to protect the distinctive natural environment of
    Cornwall and its designated heritage assets. The proposal would, therefore,
    conflict with the development plan as a whole. However, it is not disputed that the
    Council cannot currently demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing
    sites. The most recent evidence indicates that the supply is 3.9 years, so the
    shortfall is considerable. In these circumstances, the Framework’s approach to
    determining proposals for development outside settlements, as set out at Policy
    S5 1.j, is a material consideration of critical importance. This Policy advises that
    residential development that is physically well-related to an existing settlement,
    and is of an appropriate scale, should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
25. Paragraph 2 of Annex A of the Framework says that development plan policies
    should not be given reduced weight simply because they were adopted prior to
    publication of the Framework. The spatial strategy set out in Policies 2, 3 ,7 and 21
    of the Local Plan and Policy H1 of the Neighbourhood Plan is consistent with the
    Framework’s aims to direct development to the most appropriate and sustainable
    locations. However, it is not delivering a sufficient supply of homes in accordance
    with the other aims of the Framework. Consequently, I can only afford moderate
    weight to the conflict with the development plan policies that govern the spatial
    location of housing.
26. Policy 23 of the Local Plan, Policy C1 of the CEDPD, and Policy E6 of the
    Neighbourhood Plan are generally consistent with the Framework’s aims to
    achieve well-designed places and to conserve and enhance the natural
    environment. The proposal would result in moderate harm to the character and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007466


       appearance of the area. I am mindful, however, that meeting the shortfall in
       housing provision is unlikely to be achieved without some visual impacts. In this
       case, the site does not lie within a protected landscape, and there is scope to
       minimise the harm through the technical details consent process. Consequently, I
       give limited weight to the conflict with these Policies.
27. Policy 24 of the Local Plan is consistent with the Framework’s aim to secure the
    long-term future of World Heritage Sites and support the conservation of their
    significance and OUV. In accordance with Policy HE6, I give substantial weight to
    the harm to the significance of the WHS and the consequent conflict with this
    Policy.
28. Set against the harm that I have identified, there would be benefits associated with
    the development. It would support the Framework’s objective of delivering a
    substantial increase in the supply of homes. In view of the current evidenced
    unmet need for housing, Policy HO7 of the Framework requires that substantial
    weight should be given to this benefit.
29. There would also be economic benefits associated with the development, through
    the creation of jobs during the construction phase, and residents thereafter
    contributing to the local economy through ongoing spending and support for local
    services. The scale of the development means that these benefits carry modest
    weight.
30. Whilst I attach substantial weight to the delivery of additional housing, particularly
    given the absence of a five-year housing land supply, I must also give substantial
    weight to the identified harm to the heritage asset. Having regard to the scale and
    permanence of the development, and the international importance of the WHS, I
    conclude that when assessed against the policies in the Framework, taken as a
    whole, the adverse impacts of the proposal significantly and demonstrably
    outweigh the benefits. Therefore, there are no material considerations to indicate
    that a decision should be made contrary to the provisions of the development plan.
31. In arriving at my decision, I have had regard to the appeals and planning decisions
    that have been drawn to my attention. The appeal example at Appendix 2 to the
    appellant’s statement did not lie within the WHS. In the appeals at Appendices 3
    and 4, no harm to the OUV of the WHS was found. The planning permission
    identified at Appendix 5 was for keyworker housing, and there is no evidence to
    indicate that there was any harm to the OUV of the WHS. The example at
    Appendix 6 lay to the north of the A390, within the settlement of Penstraze.
    Consequently, none of these examples is directly comparable to the case before
    me, so they do not lead me to a different conclusion.
Conclusion
32. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.



Nick Davies
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
