Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007601
Upper Sent Cottages, The Barn, Okewood Hill, Surrey RH5 5PT
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Georgia Darlington against the decision of Mole Valley District Council.
    The application ref is MO/2025/02511.
    The development proposed is change of use of ground for the temporary siting of a static caravan for
     a temporary rural workers dwelling.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    I observed on my visit that the temporary static caravan was already in situ and
      reflected what was shown on the evidence before me. I have determined the
      appeal on this basis.
3.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
      August 2026. Having reviewed the changes, I am satisfied that it does not affect
      the substantive matters of the appeal and that proceeding without further
      consultation with the main parties would not be prejudicial to their respective
      cases.
Main Issues
4.    The main issues are:
          whether there is an essential need for a dwelling in the countryside to
           accommodate a rural worker;
          accessibility to facilities and services; and
          the effect on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
Essential need
5.    The site contains a static caravan and forms part of an existing equestrian
      enterprise. The appellant’s evidence sets out that the business is in a formative
      stage which they intend to continue expanding and describes it as being within a
      growth phase.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007601


6.    Policy HO11 paragraph 1.a. of the Framework sets out that development
      proposals for isolated homes in the countryside should only be supported where
      there is an essential need for a rural worker to live permanently at or near their
      place of work in the countryside.
7.    Essential need is not defined in the development plan or the Framework, however
      case law has been referred to by the parties on the matter. Embleton Parish
      Council v Northumberland CC [2013] EWHC 3631 sets out that the test in the
      Framework simply requires a judgment of whether the proposed agricultural
      enterprise has an essential need for a worker to be at or near the enterprise, in
      particular the judge did not accept that this includes a test of whether the proposal
      is economically viable.
8.    The appellant has also referred to a legal judgement which they contend relates to
      essential need1. However, this case relates to the interpretation of ‘specific needs’
      as referred to by a development plan policy within a different local authority area. I
      therefore do not consider this judgement directly relevant to the appeal and the
      consideration of essential need in the context of the Framework. In any case, I still
      acknowledge the appellant’s overarching point that in relation to essential need,
      ‘the need must be essential, not merely convenient, and absence must seriously
      undermine the enterprise’2 is a helpful consideration in assessing whether the
      dwelling is essential.
9.    Furthermore, the PPG3 contains guidance of considerations that may be relevant
      to take into account when applying the test set out in the Framework. This includes
      evidence of the effective operation of an enterprise, for instance, where farm
      animals or agricultural processes require on-site attention 24-hours a day and
      where otherwise there would be a risk to human or animal health or from crime, or
      to deal quickly with emergencies that could cause serious loss of crops or
      products.
10. I have been provided with a list of potential medical complications which could
    happen to the horses kept at the site. In addition, I also acknowledge the
    responsibilities of the appellant under the Animal Welfare Act (2006) which states
    it is an offence to cause unnecessary suffering to any animal and includes a Duty
    of Care. Whilst the nature of these health complications is unpredictable and could
    happen outside of normal working hours, I have no substantive evidence before
    me detailing how frequently these events have occurred or would likely occur in
    the future, instead it is merely stated that it could happen. Without such
    substantive evidence detailing matters such as the frequency and likelihood of the
    horses needing urgent medical attention that could only be provided by a worker
    living on the site, I am not convinced that the occurrence of these events would be
    so frequent and of such a continuous risk that a permanent on-site presence is
    essential.
11. In relation to the existing and proposed breeding operations, no substantive
    evidence has been provided regarding the number of horses and the frequency at
    which they are or would be in foal. It therefore follows that I cannot be certain
    whether the proposed breeding operations would require a permanent presence at
    the site to look after the horses in foal. In any case, the evidence before me sets

1
  Maidstone BC v SSE & Dunn [1995] HC CO/2349/94
2
  Closing Submissions P.1
3
  Paragraph: 010 Reference ID: 67-010-20190722


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6007601


       out the gestation period of horses is approximately 11 months. Therefore, it is very
       unlikely that the additional management and care for these horses required near
       the time of birth would be required year-round through a permanent presence on
       site.
12. In relation to security, I have no evidence before me demonstrating that
    alternatives such as surveillance systems or security fencing could not be utilised
    or would be ineffective at deterring theft or attack of the horses. There is
    insufficient evidence to demonstrate an essential need on this basis.
13. Regarding the employment generated by the enterprise, the appellant sets out it
    currently creates the equivalent of 3.21 full-time workers. However, the full-time
    labour requirement is not the same as an essential need for a worker to live at the
    enterprise. The generation of full time work by the enterprise does not provide
    essential justification for a worker to live at the site.
14. The PPG sets out that it can be appropriate in the case of new enterprises to
    consider granting permission for a temporary dwelling for a trial period, this is to
    provide confidence that a viable business can be established before permitting a
    permanent dwelling. No substantive evidence has been provided regarding the
    economics of the existing business or the plans of its proposed growth. It therefore
    follows that I cannot conclude a dwelling is required on this basis. In any case, this
    also does not negate the need to demonstrate the essential need for the dwelling
    based on the activities undertaken at the site.
15. I recognise the commitment of the appellant to the enterprise in maintaining high
    standards of animal welfare and their desire to be available on site at all times.
    However, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that this continuous on-
    site presence is essential and not more than a convenience. Therefore, it follows
    that I cannot conclude that there is an essential need for a rural worker to live at
    the site.
16. The Council’s associated reason for refusal does not refer to a policy in the Mole
    Valley Local Plan (2024) (LP) relating to the essential need of a rural workers
    dwelling. Nevertheless, the proposal conflicts with Policy HO11 of the Framework
    which only supports isolated homes in the countryside in specific circumstances
    which are not met by the proposal.
Accessibility to services and facilities
17. The appeal site is situated within the countryside, near to the village of
    Oakwoodhill, which is defined as an other rural community in the LP. The
    settlement has very limited facilities to meet the daily needs of the occupiers of the
    property. In addition, the road outside of the site is unlit with no public footpaths
    meaning occupiers are required to walk on the carriage which given the rural
    nature of the road is not comfortable, convenient and perceived as a safe
    alternative method of transport for occupiers. Therefore, the proposal has
    introduced an unsustainable development, for a temporary period, where
    occupiers are highly dependent on the private vehicle to travel beyond
    Oakwoodhill to meet their daily needs resulting in environmental harm.
18. The proposal therefore conflicts with Policy INF1 and S1 of the LP. These policies,
    amongst other matters, seeks to ensure that development maximises the use of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007601


         sustainable modes of transport and contributes positively to the environmental
         enhancement of Mole Valley.
Character and appearance
19. The appeal site is situated outside of a defined settlement within the countryside
    and an Area of Great Landscape Value (AGLV). I observed on my visit that the
    area was characterised by low density sporadic development primarily comprising
    large detached dwellings set back into plots surrounded by areas of open space
    and rolling fields bound by hedgerows and woodland. Overall, there was a rural
    and verdant appearance to the distinctive character and scenic beauty of the
    AGLV and countryside.
20. The appeal site, prior to the development taking place would have positively
    contributed to the character and appearance of the area through its presence as
    an open verdant space in part of the low-density area.
21. The development is set close to the front of the site and is of a utilitarian form,
    which is notably out of keeping with the informal pattern and rural form of
    development within the area. The presence of the development also diminishes
    what was once the positive open contribution of the appeal site to the low-density
    pattern of development. Whilst the mature vegetation bounding the site frontage
    provides some screening of the development, nevertheless, it still allows for views
    of the static caravan through the foliage where it is seen as out of keeping with the
    character and appearance of the area, including in immediate views within the
    AGLV landscape.
22. On this basis, whilst the proposal is temporary, it still results in considerable harm
    to the character and appearance of the area. The proposal therefore conflicts with
    Policies EN4 and EN8 of the LP. These policies, amongst other matters, seeks to
    ensure that development is of a high-quality design that makes a positive
    contribution to its local character and not harm the distinctive character and scenic
    beauty of the AGLV.
Other Considerations
23. I acknowledge the local support for the proposal, appellant and wider enterprise,
    along with the local cost of housing and desire for the appellant to remain within
    the local area. Nevertheless, this does not alter my findings on the evidence
    insufficiently demonstrating that there is an essential need for a worker to reside
    permanently at the site.
24. The appellant has referred to a court judgement4 relating to the approach to
    decision making. This judgement sets out decisions must be rational and enable
    the reader to understand why the matter was decided as it was and what
    conclusions were reached on the principal issues and disclose how any issue of
    fact or law was resolved. I have had due regard to the principles set out in the
    judgement in coming to my decision.
25. A range of appeal decisions have also been referred to by the appellant. However,
    I do not have all the evidence of these appeals, and it is not shown that the
    circumstances are directly comparable to the scheme before me. I must assess


4
    Fordent Holdings Ltd v SSCLG [2013] EWHC 2844 (Admin)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
Appeal Decision 6007601


       whether there is an essential need for a dwelling based on the evidence before
       me. For the reasons set out, the information provided fails to do so.
25. I am aware that the site is proximate to the Grade II listed building Okewood
    Manor. Mindful of the statutory duty set out in s66(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), I have had special regard to
    the desirability of preserving the setting of the listed building. It is also set adjacent
    to the Okewoodhill Conservation Area.
26. The rural countryside surroundings, which the appeal site falls within, positively
    contribute to the significance of both Okewood Manor and the Okewoodhill
    Conservation Area. Given the intervening vegetation and visual separation of the
    appeal site from the assets, I consider that the setting of this listed building and the
    contribution the setting makes to its significance is preserved and no harm arises
    to the setting of the conservation area. I note that the Council raised no objection
    in this regard either.
27. Policy S5 paragraph 3 of the Framework sets out isolated homes should not be
    approved other than in accordance with Policy HO11. The evidence does not show
    there is an essential need for a rural worker and therefore the proposal does not
    comply with Policy HO11 of the Framework. Therefore, the appeal does not benefit
    from the presumption in favour of sustainable development as set out in Policy S3
    of the Framework.
28. The equestrian enterprise provides socio-economic benefits to the local rural
    economy and community, along with to the wider equestrian industry. However,
    given it has not been demonstrated that there is an essential need for the
    proposed dwelling, the appeal proposal only carries very limited positive socio-
    economic benefits in supporting this rural enterprise. This does not outweigh the
    conflict with the development plan by virtue of the harm to the character and
    appearance of the area and introduction of a car-dependent rural dwelling.
Conclusion
29. The proposed development conflicts with the development plan, and the material
    considerations do not indicate that a decision should be made other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the
    appeal should be dismissed.



C Housden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
