Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 June 2026
by M Cryan BA(Hons) DipTP MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026

Appeal Ref: 6007927
47 Burma Road, Hackney, London N16 9BH
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Tauheed Ahmed against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
       of Hackney.
•      The application reference is 2025/1650.
•      The development proposed is a change of use from two flats to single dwelling house; erection of a
       three-storey rear extension at lower ground, ground and first floors; a new terrace at first floor;
       erection of mansard roof extension and alterations to rear windows.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       Planning permission was granted in May 2024 for a development at the appeal
         property described as “Erection of a lower ground floor rear extension; erection of
         a roof extension, roof terrace and raised chimneys; roof terraces at ground and
         first floor level; addition of a conservatory at first floor level; and associated
         alterations to rear elevation; to allow for the conversion of the property into 4 x
         residential units (2 x 1bed, 1 x 2bed and 1 x 3bed)” 1. There is no detail of that
         earlier permission before me, though it was stated in the Council’s officer report for
         this appeal proposal that it had not yet been implemented but remained valid.
3.       The planning application form for this appeal scheme indicated that it was intended
         that development would commence in December 2025 and would be completed by
         June 2026. The application was submitted in June 2025 so had not therefore been
         made “retrospectively”. It was apparent to me during my site visit that some works
         had recently been carried out so that the rear of the appeal property did not match
         either the “existing” or “proposed” drawings submitted for this scheme. A small
         protruding extension which I saw at the rear of “Bedroom 4” on the first floor was
         not shown in either set of plans, and there were also differences in respect of
         materials. Given the lack of other information before me, I do not know if these
         works are (in whole or in part) those allowed by the earlier permission.
4.       The planning application form for this appeal scheme had referred to external walls
         being constructed in “London stock brick or a high-quality matching alternative”,
         and the works I saw had been carried out in brick. However, the submitted
         drawings for this scheme showed the proposed extensions finished in a dark
         coloured cladding, and the Design and Access Statement (“the DAS”) referred to
         the use of both brickwork and cladding. The Council did not take issue with the
         proposed materials in its officer report, and did not submit an appeal statement,
1
    LPA reference: 2022/2140

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007927


       nor were the discrepancies I have identified here explained by the appellant’s
       statement (though they referred to the proposed use of brickwork). Nevertheless,
       for the avoidance of doubt, I have determined this appeal on the basis of the
       submitted drawings.
5.     On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (“the Framework”). I have had regard to the provisions of the new
       Framework; where I have referred to the Framework in this decision, policy and
       paragraph numbers are from the current August 2026 version.
Main Issue
6.     The single reason for which planning permission was refused related to the
       impacts of the design, form and appearance of the proposed rear extension. The
       main issue in the appeal is therefore the effect of the rear extension on the
       character and appearance of the area, including on the setting of the adjacent
       No 42 Clissold Crescent, a locally-listed building and non-designated heritage
       asset (“NDHA”).
Reasons
7.     No 47 Burma Road is a Victorian dwelling arranged over four storeys. It is of
       London stock brick, with a double-height front bay, timber sash windows, and
       decorative detailing – albeit relatively restrained – at the end of a terrace of
       properties with similar characteristics. The back of the terrace is simpler and with
       less regular features, though still broadly consistent in overall appearance. Much
       of the rear of the appeal property, and indeed of the terrace, is readily visible from
       Clissold Crescent and from the road giving access to the Burma Court Estate to
       the north.
8.     The neighbouring No 42 Clissold Crescent is a locally listed building; its status as
       an NDHA is not a matter of dispute between the main parties. It is a detached
       house of two storeys (plus basement and attic levels) which derives significance
       from its history as the residence of the eminent church architect James Brooks (a
       connection commemorated by a brown plaque on the building’s Clissold Crescent
       frontage), as well as its architectural quality. The building is of red brick, with a
       high hipped roof, and interesting decorative design features such as window
       openings with pointed arches. Its form and details make it visually distinct from its
       neighbours, while its position on a corner plot – three of its four elevations are
       clearly visible from Burma Road and Clissold Crescent – make it a prominent
       building in the local streetscape.
9.     The proposed extension to the appeal property would have substantial areas of
       glazing on its rear elevation. The largest of these would extend across the two full
       storeys of a double-height gallery on the lower ground and ground floors;
       alongside it would be a one-and-a-half storey area of glazing. The submitted
       drawings indicate that both of these would be doors which would open across their
       full height and width. Although the clear glazed areas might be no wider than the
       original windows above, the overall size and materiality of the glazed doors would
       make them obtrusive and inharmonious features, at odds with the generally
       smaller windows found along the rear of the terrace. They would also provide an
       unsympathetic backdrop to 42 Clissold Crescent, thereby detracting from the
       setting of that locally-listed building.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007927


10. The Council’s reason for refusal referred specifically to the solid-to-void ratio of the
    extension; in response (and, indeed, in the submitted drawings and DAS) the
    appellant had suggested that, at 24%, the ratio of glazing to cladding would
    “[ensure] the rear elevation reads as calm, traditional, and consistent with
    neighbouring properties”. However, that figure is based only on the areas of clear
    glazing, and does not include the rest of the area of the opening doors I have
    described in the previous paragraph. The calculation of that ratio also included in
    its denominator areas of the side walls of the extensions, much of which would be
    obscured from public views by neighbouring buildings. The visual impact of the
    window and door openings on the rear elevation would therefore be considerably
    greater, and rather more harmful, than the number presented suggests.
11. The appellant’s statement also referred to an earlier proposal for the site2, and
    suggested that the changes to the solid-to-void ratio from 40% to 24% would
    “[reinstate] a traditional sense of solidity that is characteristic of terraces in this
    area”. I have not been provided with details of that previous scheme but, as I have
    set out in the preceding paragraphs, have found that this one would be
    unacceptable on its own terms.
12. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would be harmful to the
    character and appearance of the area, including by way of its adverse effect on the
    setting of No 42 Clissold Crescent, an NDHA. It would therefore conflict with
    Policies LP1, LP4 and LP17 of the 2020 Hackney Local Plan, and Policies D3, D4
    and HC1 of the London Plan 2021. Together, and among other things, these
    policies seek to ensure that all development responds to local character and
    context and is compatible with the existing townscape, and that development
    proposals affecting NDHAs conserve or enhance and reveal the significance of
    such assets and their settings.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
13. I have found that the proposed development would cause harm to the character
    and appearance of the area, and to the setting of an NDHA. It would therefore
    conflict with the development plan taken as a whole.
14. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals
    within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
15. Policy DP3 of the Framework says, among other things, that development
    proposals should respond to their context (including through the use of materials
    and architectural features, and establish or maintain a strong sense of place; it
    goes on to say that development proposals should be refused if, without clear
    justification, they do not do this. Policy HE7 of the Framework says that where
    development would harm the significance of an NDHA, this should be weighed
    against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced judgement made having
    regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the NDHA.
16. Here, the appellant has suggested that the appeal scheme would have public
    benefits: that it would enhance housing quality, improve living conditions, and

2
    Appeal refused in October 2025; PINS reference APP/U5360/W/25/3370774, relating to LPA reference 2025/0698


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6007927


       would support sustainable use of urban land. I acknowledge that these could be
       considered public benefits; however, they would represent a very limited increase
       on such benefits which could be achieved without causing harm either to the
       setting of 42 Clissold Crescent, or to the character and appearance of the area
       more generally. I consider that these modest benefits would be clearly and
       substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, including the conflict with the
       policies of the Framework which I have set out in the preceding paragraph.
       Accordingly, the proposed development would not constitute sustainable
       development within the meaning of the Framework.
17. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 states that
    applications for planning permission, and therefore appeals, must be determined in
    accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. None of the material considerations identified, including those of the
    Framework, justify a decision other than in accordance with the development plan.
    The appeal is therefore dismissed.



M Cryan
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
