Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007139
Haverstock Hill, outside Haverstock School, London, NW3 2BQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2025/5804/P.
•    The development is the proposed deployment of a Street Hub 3 unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6007132
Haverstock Hill, outside Haverstock School, London, NW3 2BQ
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Camden.
•    The application Ref is 2025/5837/A.
•    The advertisement is the proposed deployment of a Street Hub 3 unit.

Decisions
1.     Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for the proposed
       deployment of a Street Hub 3 unit at Haverstock Hill, outside Haverstock School,
       London, NW3 2BQ, in accordance with the terms of the application,
       Ref 2025/5804/P, subject to the conditions set out in the attached Appeal A
       Schedule of Conditions.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and express consent is granted for the proposed deployment
       of a Street Hub 3 unit at Haverstock Hill, outside Haverstock School, London, NW3
       2BQ, in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 2025/5837/A. The
       consent is for five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five
       standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations, and the
       additional conditions set out in the attached Appeal B Schedule of Conditions.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a BT Street Hub
       Unit (Hub). Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display
       advertisements on the Hub. I have considered each on its individual merits,
       however, as they raise similar issues I have combined both decisions into a single
       decision letter.
4.     With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007132 and 6007139


       based solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I
       have taken the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account,
       they have not been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
5.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
       comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on (i) the character and appearance of the area (ii) highway safety,
       (iii) community safety and security, and (iv) adequate maintenance provision.
7.     The main issue in relation to Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisements
       on the amenity of the area.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
8.     The appeal site comprises of a footpath, with an existing BT InLink Unit positioned
       close to the pavement edge located outside the large three storey Haverstock Hill
       school building. This part of Haverstock Hill is characterised by the relatively wide
       pavements and a two-lane road with cycleways, framed by the adjoining tall,
       education, commercial and residential buildings that provides a fairly busy and
       vibrant mixed use character to the area.
9.     The pavement in the vicinity of the appeal site where the existing InLink Unit sits,
       is occupied by a limited range of street furniture and other features, including a bus
       shelter with a digital display, lamp posts and bin. A further existing bus shelter with
       a digital display is situated a short distance away along Haverstock Hill.
10. The new Hub would replace the existing InLink Unit and would be positioned close
    to the edge of the pavement. The proposed Hub would be marginally wider,
    deeper and taller than the existing InLink Unit, extending slightly further into the
    footway but no closer to the carriageway. Its overall footprint would remain broadly
    comparable, resulting in only modest changes in its profile in street views.
11. The surrounding streetscene is already visually varied, with the multi-coloured
    materials/cladding and extensive use of glazing along the road frontage of the
    adjacent tall Haverstock Hill school building, varying designs of buildings and other
    items of street furniture. In this context, the slight increase in massing would not
    materially alter the established character of the area, nor introduce a visually
    intrusive presence.
12. Although the double-sided display screens integrated with the Hub would introduce
    a slightly larger illuminated digital advertisements to the area, its effect would be
    read within the context of the illuminated signage displayed on the nearby bus
    shelters and commercial buildings, which already forms part of the visual baseline.
    The proposed Hub’s contemporary design and modest footprint would sit
    comfortably within this setting. In this context, I am not persuaded that the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6007132 and 6007139


       proposals would result in an unacceptable proliferation of digital advertisements or
       street clutter.
13. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposals would not harm the character and
    appearance of the area for the purposes of Appeal A, nor visual amenity for the
    purposes of Appeal B. Insofar as they are material considerations relevant to the
    appeals, the proposals would accord with Policies D1 and D4 of the Camden Local
    Plan 2017 (CLP), which, amongst other things, seek to ensure that development
    are designed and sited so as to respect the local character, preserve the character
    and amenity of the area and resist advertising that contributes to street clutter in
    the public realm. The advertisements subject to Appeal B would also accord with
    the relevant provisions of the 2007 Regulations.
Appeal A - Highway Safety
14. The proposed Hub would be positioned close to the edge of the wide pavement
    broadly in line with the existing bus shelter and lamp posts. Haverstock Hill serves
    the surrounding mixed uses in the area, and it was apparent from my site visit on a
    weekday that pedestrian footfall on the footpath was relatively limited and I
    observed that the existing InLink unit did not significantly interrupt any obvious
    desire line for pedestrians along the footpath.
15. Whilst I acknowledge the potential for higher footfalls in this location outside the
    school at certain times, particularly during school term times, given the modest
    increase in the width of the proposed Hub as compared to the existing InLink Unit,
    it would leave a sizeable gap of around 3.6m of clear space in front of the adjacent
    school building. This would exceed the minimum effective footway width of least
    3.3m sought by the Transport for London’s ‘Pedestrian Comfort Guidance for
    London’ for ‘high flow areas’. This when combined with the width and the use of
    the space available on the footpath and limited street furniture would, in my view,
    leave ample room for the free and safe movement of pedestrians in this location.
16. Whilst I note the Council’s comments that part of the footpath falls within the
    private ownership of Haverstock Hill school and is not part of the public highway,
    there was no obvious delineation or evidence to suggest that pedestrian access
    and use of the footpath would be restricted to members of the public at any time.
17. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed Hub would not have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular
    regard to the free and safe movement of pedestrians. Consequently, the proposal
    would accord with Policies G1, A1, C6 and T1 of the CLP, insofar as they relate to
    ensuring the delivery of high quality development that meets the highest
    practicable standards of accessible and inclusive design and prioritises walking
    (among other sustainable means of transport) by providing high-quality footpaths
    of adequate width for the number of people expected to use them.
Appeal A - Community Safety and security
18. The Council has described installations such as telephone kiosks and hubs as
    “crime generators” and focal points for anti-social behaviour. The Council state that
    they have experienced a rise in crime and anti-social behaviour as a direct result
    of the existing InLink kiosks in areas such as Camde. These activities include
    increased loitering, as well as the usage of the free calls facility at the InLink kiosks


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6007132 and 6007139


        to coordinate drug dealing. This, however, is couched in general ‘area’ terms
        rather than specifically related to the appeal site.
19. The Metropolitan Police’s Crime Prevention Design Advisor commented that the
    locations around the existing InLink kiosks, often see higher levels of crime and
    anti-social behaviour and that the proposed Hub is larger than the previous InLink
    kiosks and as such would create a larger space for possible concealment. They
    also noted that, due to the location of the new Hub close to the carriageway/
    cycleway and the openness of the proposed Hub, it could offer opportunities for
    would-be criminals to observe people using or charging their phones at the
    location, where robbery levels are high, and would be vulnerable to opportunistic
    phone thefts.
20. However, while I do not seek to downplay the harmful impacts of street crime and
    anti-social behaviour, there is limited substantive evidence before me, including
    recent site-specific crime data, to demonstrate that these issues would be
    increased as a result of the proposed Hub in this particular location. Indeed, as the
    proposed Hub would replace an existing InLink unit, and would provide a
    comparable range of services, I consider that it would be likely to be broadly
    neutral in this respect.
21. As such, there would be no significant adverse effect on community safety and
    security. I therefore find no conflict with Policy C5 of the CLP, which seeks to tackle
    crime and anti-social behaviour, and to promote safer streets and public areas.
Appeal A - Maintenance
22. I acknowledge the Council’s concern that a lack of maintenance for the proposed
    Hub could lead to it falling into disrepair and detracting from the quality of the
    streetscene. The Council considered that maintenance of the installation could only
    be achieved through a Section 106 agreement.
23. I note the other dismissed appeals in Camden that the Council has referred me to
    in which the matter of maintenance had been considered. In respect of a proposal
    for a telephone kiosk outside Nos 216-217 Tottenham Court Road1, the Inspector
    noted that the proposed maintenance regime would be likely to reduce the effects
    of anti-social behaviour. For the proposed Hub dismissed on appeal outside No 39
    Tottenham Court Road2, the Inspector commented that there is no legal
    mechanism in place to ensure that an appropriate maintenance plan is
    implemented in perpetuity.
24. I observed during my site visit that the existing InLink unit at the appeal site was
    operational and appeared clean and well-maintained. Nevertheless, I accept that
    there is a significant risk that such units may become neglected over time to the
    detriment of the streetscene; indeed, as the Metropolitan Police’s Crime Prevention
    Design Advisor commented, some graffiti had been on the existing InLink unit at
    the appeal site but had not been repaired. I therefore consider that appropriate
    maintenance should be secured.
25. However, nothing which has been put before me indicates that this could only be
    secured by a planning obligation. The BT Street Hubs Beyond Connection
    Document (SHBC) and BT Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan
1
    PINS Refs: APP/X5210/W/20/3253878 and APP/X5210/Z/20/3253540
2
    PINS Refs: APP/X5210/W/22/3297273 and APP/X5210/W/22/3297276


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decisions 6007132 and 6007139


     (ASBMP) submitted by the appellant as part of the appeal, state that Street Hub
     units are visited every two weeks for cleaning and checked for damage, and that
     emergency visits can also be arranged in response to remote monitoring. In view of
     my conclusion on the preceding main issue, as well as my observations on site, I
     am satisfied that maintenance can be secured by a condition requiring compliance
     with the submitted details in the SHBC and ASBMP.
26. Subject to such a condition, I consider that adequate provision would be made for
    maintenance of the proposed Hub. As such, I find no conflict on this matter with
    Policies G1, D1, A1, C6 and T1 of the CLP, which among other things seek to
    manage the impact of development so as to protect quality of life in the borough,
    improve the pedestrian environment and public realm to allow access to all, ensure
    that development is of high quality, sustainable and durable construction, and is
    secure and designed to minimise crime and antisocial behaviour.
Other Matters
27. I have noted the other appeals drawn to my attention by the Council, that include
    advertisements, for kiosks and hubs dismissed in the area. However, I have not
    been provided the full details of these to know how directly comparable they are to
    the current proposals, which in turn limits the relevance of the highlighted appeals.
    In any event I have determined the appeals before me on their own merits.
Conditions
28. All advertisements granted express consent are subject to the five standard
    conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations.
29. The Planning Practice Guidance confirms that additional conditions can be
    imposed where they are supported by specific and relevant planning reasons. I
    have considered the conditions suggested by the main parties for both appeals
    against the requirements of the Framework and advice contained in the Planning
    Practice Guidance, amending or omitting them where necessary to ensure full
    compliance with those tests.
30. For Appeal A, conditions relating to the statutory time limit and a list of approved
    plans and documents are necessary in the interests of certainty. A condition
    requiring the proposed Hub to be operated in accordance with the submitted
    SHBC and ASBMP is necessary in the interests of community safety and
    preventing anti-social behaviour and crime. A condition specifying the surfacing
    materials and the removal of the proposed Hub after it is no longer required for
    telephone communication or electronic communication purposes are necessary to
    safeguard the character and appearance of the area.
31. For Appeal B, in addition to the standard conditions of the 2007 Regulations,
    conditions are necessary to control the intensity of illumination, prevent moving
    images, visual effects, noises and advertisements resembling traffic signs, and
    securing a minimum display period between transitions, all necessary for amenity
    and public safety reasons. The appellant’s request for a 10‑year consent period is
    not supported by any substantive justification, and in the absence of compelling
    evidence to depart from the default 5‑year period set by the 2007 Regulations, I
    am not persuaded that such a condition would be reasonable.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6007132 and 6007139


32. I have not imposed the five standard conditions suggested by the Council for
    Appeal B, which duplicated those set out in the standard conditions and are not
    therefore necessary. I have also not imposed the suggested conditions relating to
    obstructing the footway or carriageway during installation and maintenance of the
    advertisement panels, as it has not been demonstrated that specific controls
    beyond those provided for in highways, street works and traffic management
    regulations would be necessary in this case.
Conclusion
33. For the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal A and Appeal B should be allowed,
    subject to the conditions.

David Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6007132 and 6007139


Appeal A Schedule of Conditions
       1. The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
          the date of this decision.
       2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans: Site Location Plan 24007232_PLN_LOC_1.1; Site
          Plan 24007232_PLN_SI_2.1; and Elevation Plan 24007232_PLN_EL_3.1;
          Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan V 3, Street Hubs Beyond
          Connection V2.2, Street Hub Noise Management Plan V 2.1, PROPOSED BT
          STREETHUB 3 UNIT 1 of 1 and Planning, Design and Access Statement.
       3. The development hereby permitted shall at all times be operated in full
          accordance with the approved BT documents titled ‘Street Hubs Beyond
          Connection V2.2’ and ‘Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan
          Version 3’.
       4. All new or replacement surface materials should match as closely as possible
          the existing adjacent surface materials.
       5. The development hereby permitted shall be removed from the land on which it
          is situated as soon as reasonably practicable after it is no longer required for
          telecommunication or electronic communications purposes.

Appeal B Schedule of Conditions
       1. The advertisement display shall be statically illuminated and the intensity of
          the illumination of the digital signs shall not exceed 2000 candelas per square
          metre during the day and 600 candelas per square metre during the hours of
          darkness in line with the maximum permitted recommended luminance as set
          out by The Institute of Lighting Professional's 'Professional Lighting Guide 05:
          The Brightness of Illuminated Advertisements Including Digital Displays, 2023.
          The levels of luminance on the digital signs should be controlled by light
          sensors to measure the ambient brightness and dimmers to control the lighting
          output to within these limits.
       2. The digital display screens shall not display any moving, or apparently moving,
          images (including animation, flashing, scrolling three dimensional, intermittent
          or video elements).
       3. The minimum display time for each advertisement on the digital display
          screens shall be 10 seconds.
       4. The interval between advertisements shall take place over a period no greater
          than one second; the complete screen shall change with no visual effects
          (including fading, swiping or other animated transition methods) between
          displays and the display will include a mechanism to freeze the image in the
          event of a malfunction.
       5. No music or sound shall be emitted from the advertisements.
       6. No advertisement displayed shall resemble traffic signs, as defined in section
          64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
