Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 September 2026
by David Reed BSc DipTP DMS MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007424
CPC4 Car Park, Capital Park, Cambridge Road, Fulbourn CB21 5XE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 16, Class A of
    the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
    amended).
•   The appeal is made by Cornerstone Telecommunications Infrastructure Ltd against the decision of
    South Cambridgeshire District Council.
•   The application Ref 25/04653/PRIOR, dated 1 December 2025, was refused on 23 January 2026.
•   The development proposed is the installation of a 20 m telecommunications pole supporting 6 no.
    antennas and 1 no. 0.3 m dish together with the installation of 2 no. equipment cabinets, 1 no. meter
    cabinet and associated ancillary development.

Decision

1. The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
   3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 16, Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for the installation of a
   20 m telecommunications pole supporting 6 no. antennas and 1 no. 0.3 m dish
   together with the installation of 2 no. equipment cabinets, 1 no. meter cabinet and
   associated ancillary development at CPC4 Car Park, Capital Park, Cambridge
   Road, Fulbourn CB21 5XE, in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   25/04653/PRIOR, dated 1 December 2025, subject to the following conditions:

           1) The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of
              five years from the date of this decision.

           2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
              100 Site Location Maps (Rev A) 01.12.2025
              201 Proposed Site Plan (Rev A) 01.12.2025
              301 Proposed Site Elevation (Rev A) 01.12.2025
Main Issue
2. The proposal is permitted development under Part 16 Class A of the 2015 Order but
   prior approval is required for its siting and appearance under paragraph A.3(3). The
   main issue is therefore the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance
   of the area including the Fulbourn Hospital Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons
3. The proposal is for a 20 metre high slimline monopole supporting six antennae and
   one 300 mm dish together with three ground level cabinets and ancillary equipment

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007424


    on part of the car park serving the office complex at Capital Park just south of
    Fulbourn Old Drift. The car park is just outside the boundary of the Fulbourn
    Hospital CA which includes the old 1850s County Asylum and later hospital
    buildings in a well treed parkland setting.
4. The appellant is in the process of building an upgraded 5G telecommunications
   network and requires a new mast site in a small search area centred on the car park
   but including the office building to the west and a short length of Fulbourn Old Drift.
   2G-4G services are currently provided from a shared 12.5 m high monopole sited
   next to Fulbourn Old Drift, but this cannot be upgraded to host the necessary 5G
   equipment. A taller and bulkier multi-head structure would be required which would
   be significantly more intrusive in the street scene and for which there is insufficient
   space. A new site is therefore required, but this must be close by to serve the same
   cell, hence the small search area. The Council do not dispute these points and
   agree that a rooftop stub mast on top of the two-storey office building would not be
   acceptable. The proposed 20 m monopole is the simplest suitable design and the
   minimum height to avoid interference and provide the required operational
   performance. The Council suggested two less intrusive locations for the monopole
   to the north of the office building, but one falls outside the search area and the other
   is impractical due to a gas pipe easement.
5. The current proposal, which would involve the loss of two car parking spaces, would
   site the 20 m monopole at the far eastern end of the car park, some distance from
   the office building, with a belt of trees up to about 15 m high close up to the site on
   three sides. This would mean the clearest view of the monopole and cabinets
   would be from the car park and office to the west, not a public viewpoint or in the
   CA. From Fulbourn Old Drift to the north and the curving bus lane linking this to the
   internal road within Capital Park, which are public viewpoints, the 20 m high
   monopole would be screened by the up to 15 m high trees immediately next to
   those two roads. This tree screen also forms the boundary of the CA and would
   screen views of the monopole from most of the CA, thus minimising the impact on
   its character and appearance. The current proposal can therefore be distinguished
   from two previously refused proposals1 which were sited within the CA on the grass
   verge alongside the bus lane, and thus in a more visible position within Capital Park
   and from the junction with Fulbourn Old Drift.
6. Whilst the monopole would project above the trees by some 5 m, this is inevitable to
   rise above surrounding tree and building ‘clutter’ which would otherwise interfere
   with the provision of 5G signal to the area to be served. This is demonstrated by
   the 360° panoramic views taken at 15 m, 17.5 m and 20 m. The latter shows the
   area from which the top of the monopole would be visible, in many cases long-
   distance views from the surrounding farmland and distant roads from where it would
   be hardly perceptible. There would be medium distance views from the new
   housing estate to the east but with intervening trees screening all but the top, also
   closer views from the less critical adjacent car park, office and internal road within
   Capital Park, but few if any from the open parkland within the CA. The monopole
   would also be visible from some upper floor windows in Victoria House, the original
   asylum buildings and a non-designated heritage asset, but only the top above trees
   and at some distance. Overall, the visual impact on the character and appearance
   of the area and the Fulbourn Hospital CA would be limited and the minimum

1
 23/00090/PRIOR and 24/03054/PRIOR. A third, 20/03567/TELDET, was located in Oslar’s Way in Fulbourn village well to the
east in a very different residential setting.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6007424


       necessary to provide 5G services to the cell concerned.
Conclusion
7. For these reasons the proposed monopole would only detract in a limited way from
   the character and appearance of the surrounding area and the CA. Overall, the
   level of harm to the character and appearance of the area generally and heritage
   harm to the Fulbourn Hospital CA would be relatively modest2 and substantially
   outweighed by the economic and social benefits of improved digital infrastructure
   which is strongly supported by government policy. The proposal would comply with
   Policies S/2, HQ/1, and NH/14 of the South Cambridgeshire Local Plan 2018 and
   Policies FUL/01, FUL/02 and FUL/3 of the Fulbourn Neighbourhood Plan 2023.
   These seek to ensure high-quality design, protect the character of the local urban
   and rural area and the landscape setting of Fulbourn specifically together with the
   conservation of heritage assets and their setting. Allowing the proposed monopole
   also complies with the legislative duty to have special regard to the desirability of
   preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
8. Having regard to the above the appeal should be allowed.

David Reed
INSPECTOR




2
    Particularly having regard to the modern office complex to the north of Victoria House within the original asylum grounds.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    3
