Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 June 2026
by Chris Mayes CMLI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007219
Breckon Hill, Lowgate, Northumberland NE46 2NL
 • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
   against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 • The appeal is made by Mr D Parfitt against the decision of Northumberland County Council.
 • The application reference is 25/03689/FUL.
 • The development proposed is described as ‘retrospective permission for the siting of an agricultural
   storage shed on land adjacent to Breckon Hill House’.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for an agricultural
   storage shed on land adjacent to Breckon Hill House at Breckon Hill, Lowgate,
   Northumberland NE46 2NL in accordance with the terms of the application,
   reference 25/03689/FUL, subject to the following conditions:

     1) The development hereby permitted shall be retained in accordance with the
        following approved drawing nos.: 01001 Rev P1; 24-79-07 Rev A; and 24-79-
        06.

     2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
        Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any Order that replaces or
        re-enacts that Order) (with or without modification) as they relate to the changes
        of use of agricultural buildings, the development hereby permitted shall only be
        used for agricultural purposes as defined by Section 336(1) of the Town and
        Country Planning Act 1990, and for no other purpose whatsoever.
Preliminary Matters
2. Since the appeal was lodged the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) has been updated. I am satisfied that the changes to the Framework
   do not alter the substance of the main issues in this appeal or prejudice either
   party.
3. The evidence indicates that the development was completed prior to the end of
   2022. I saw during my site visit that the building has been erected and is being
   used for storage. This appears to accord with the plans before me. I have therefore
   considered the appeal on the basis that the development has already taken place,
   as did the Council.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007219


Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
           •    whether the appeal development is inappropriate development in the Green
                Belt having regard to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
                Framework) and relevant development plan policies, including any relevant
                effects on the openness of the Green Belt;
           •    whether the appeal development represents an acceptable form of
                development in the open countryside;
           •    the effect of the appeal development on the character and appearance of
                the area; and,
           •    whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm,
                would be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the
                very special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether Inappropriate Development and Openness
5. The appeal site lies within the Green Belt, where the essential characteristics are
   its openness and permanence. Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out that
   development is inappropriate unless it falls within a number of listed exceptions,
   including buildings for agriculture.
6. The building subject to this appeal is described as an agricultural storage shed. The
   evidence before me, including what I saw at my site visit indicates that it is located
   on agricultural land, used in connection with nearby agricultural land and for the
   storage of a tractor, livestock feed, fencing materials and other equipment
   associated with the management of that land. The appellant has also provided
   evidence of livestock activity on the holding and sheep were present on the
   relevant land at the time of my visit.
7. The Council's principal concern is that, at the time of the application, the holding did
   not comprise an established agricultural enterprise and that agricultural activity was
   intended to develop further in the future. However, Policy GB7 of the Framework
   refers to buildings for agriculture. It does not require that such buildings serve an
   established agricultural business or enterprise. In this case, I have been presented
   with no substantive evidence to indicate that the building is used for any purpose
   other than that described by the appellant. Furthermore, the sole agricultural use of
   the building could be secured through a planning condition.
8. Although the scale of the agricultural activity appears modest and the building may
   not occupy the most functionally efficient location, those matters do not alter my
   finding that the building serves an agricultural purpose associated with the
   adjoining land. I therefore find that it constitutes a building for agriculture within the
   meaning of Policy GB7 of the Framework.
9. For these reasons, I conclude that the appeal development does not amount to
   inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Consequently, no conflict arises with
   Policy STP8 of the Northumberland Local Plan 2016-2036 (March 2022) (LP) which
   supports development that is not inappropriate in the Green Belt as defined in


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007219


     national planning policy. The appeal development also accords with Policy HNP1 of
     the Hexham Neighbourhood Plan 2020-2036 (July 2021) (HNP), which provides
     that development within the Green Belt should be determined in accordance with
     national Green Belt policy.
10. Given my findings that the appeal development is not inappropriate development,
    by definition it does not have an adverse impact on the openness of the Green Belt
    or the purposes of including land within it. Moreover, as the appeal development
    does not amount to inappropriate development, there is no requirement to assess if
    there are other considerations that amount to very special circumstances needed to
    justify the development.
Development in the Open Countryside
11. The appeal site also lies within the open countryside. Policy STP1 of the LP seeks
    to restrict development in such locations unless it satisfies one of several specified
    exceptions. These include, under criteria g(i) and g(ii), development which supports
    sustainable growth and expansion of existing business or the formation of new
    businesses in accordance with Policy ECN13 and diversification of agricultural and
    other land-based rural businesses in accordance with Policy ECN14.
12. For the reasons set out above, I have found that the appeal development
    comprises a building for agriculture serving the adjoining agricultural land. The
    Council argues that there is not an established agricultural business on the land
    and thus the appeal development would not gain support under either Policy
    ECN13 or ECN14.
13. While the agricultural activity appears relatively modest in scale, the evidence
    before me indicates that the building is used in connection with that activity and
    there is no substantive evidence that it serves any alternative purpose. Even so, I
    acknowledge that the nature of the development does not fit squarely within the
    criteria of either Policy ECN13 relating to employment or ECN14 relating to farm
    diversification.
14. Nevertheless, Policy STP1(h) states that other forms of development in the open
    countryside, other than those identified in criterion (g), will be permitted if they are
    supported in a made neighbourhood plan. As I have found that the proposal
    constitutes development that is not inappropriate in the Green Belt, it accords with
    Policy HNP1 of the HNP. Consequently, it is a form of development supported by a
    made neighbourhood plan for the purposes of criterion (h) of Policy STP1.
Character and Appearance
15. The appeal site lies within a pastoral landscape characterised by undulating
    landform and a pattern of rectilinear fields enclosed by hedgerows, trees and
    occasional field trees. The landscape is intersected by a small, wooded valley
    between Allendale Road and Breckon Hill. While predominantly rural in character,
    the landscape is influenced by several dispersed building groups and associated
    domestic and agricultural development.
16. Against that backdrop, the building is modest in scale and height and, while located
    on agricultural land, is experienced in the context of the existing group of buildings.
    Furthermore, the intervening landform, existing vegetation and additional planting
    around the site substantially limit its visibility from the surrounding area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007219


     Consequently, the building does not appear visually prominent, nor does it
     materially alter the established pattern of development within the landscape or the
     character of the wider landscape.
17. Taking these matters together, the appeal development does not result in harm to
    the character and appearance of the area. Accordingly, I conclude that the appeal
    development does not conflict with Policies QOP1, QOP2, QOP4, ENV1, ENV3
    and ENV4 of the LP, which seek among other things, to ensure development
    responds positively to local character, integrates appropriately with its surroundings
    and conserves important elements of landscape character and rural tranquillity.
    Likewise, the appeal development accords with Policy HNP2 of the HNP, which
    requires development to respond positively to local character through its scale,
    massing and landscaping.
Other Matters
18. Reference has also been made to the effect of the appeal development on the
    setting of the nearby listed Breckon Hill Farmhouse (Listed Building No. 1042635).
    Based on the evidence before me the significance of the listed building lies in its
    age and architectural composition and detailing. Having regard to intervening
    boundaries and vegetation, and the separation between the appeal site and that
    asset, I have no reason to conclude that the appeal development results in harm to
    its significance through effects on its setting. This matter therefore weighs neither
    for nor against the appeal development.
19. The evidence before me raises some question as to whether the building could
    have been located elsewhere, including within the curtilage of the host property or
    in closer proximity to the agricultural land it serves. However, I have assessed the
    appeal development on the basis of its siting as submitted and, for the reasons
    given above, I have found that its location does not result in material harm. This
    matter therefore does not alter my overall conclusions.
Conditions
20. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council having regard to the
    Planning Practice Guidance and the tests set out in the Framework. In addition to a
    condition identifying the approved plans, it is necessary to impose a condition
    restricting the use of the building to agricultural purposes. I have amended the
    legislative reference to the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
    Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended), as this is the means by which
    a potential change of use could otherwise be affected.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons given above the appeal development accords with the
    development plan when read as a whole and I have not identified any conflict with
    the national decision-making policies of the Framework. Therefore, there are no
    material considerations which indicate that a decision should be made otherwise.
    Accordingly, the appeal should be allowed.

Chris Mayes
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
