Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by B Astley-Serougi BA(Hons) LLM MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6007470
44 Ceres Road, Greenwich, Plumstead SE18 1HP
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by James Smith against the decision of Royal Borough of Greenwich.
•      The application Ref is 25/2568/F.
•      The development proposed is change of use from a single-family dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a
       7-bedroom, 7-person HMO (Sui Generis) with associated alterations including a rear dormer,
       rooflights and provision of cycle and refuse storage.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued
         on 17 August 2026. It has introduced policy lettering and numbers and separated
         plan-making policies from decision-making policies. Having considered the
         revisions and in light of the principles of natural justice, in this instance I do not
         consider it necessary to invite any submissions from the parties on the revised
         Framework.
Main Issue
3.       The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions
         of neighbouring occupants at 42 Ceres Road (No 42) with regard to noise and
         disturbance.
Reasons
4.       Number 44 Ceres Road (No 44) is a mid-terraced, two storey dwellinghouse and it
         is located in a predominantly residential area. It has a two-storey outrigger to the
         rear and benefits from an extant permission for a change of use to a six-person,
         six-bedroom House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) along with a rear dormer loft
         conversion1.
5.       The proposal would result in a seven-bedroom, seven person HMO which would
         be categorised as a large HMO. Given that No 44 is a mid-terraced dwelling, its
         main access is directly adjacent to the main access and bay window for No 42.
         The proposed development would likely increase the comings and goings above
         those expected from a single-family dwelling house given that residents in an HMO
         live as separate households. I acknowledge that there is an extant permission
         which would allow six individuals to live as a separate household. However, given

1
    Planning Application Ref: 25/0619/F

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007470


       that the appeal scheme would be sui generis and not Use Class C4 as outlined in
       the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended), a
       seven-bedroom HMO is a large HMO.
6.     Consequently, there is limited substantive evidence before me to adequately
       demonstrate that the appeal scheme would not result in a harmful increase in
       noise and disturbance. Accordingly, whilst the proposal would result in one
       additional occupant compared to the extant permission, it remains based on the
       evidence before me, that this would likely unacceptably intensify the coming and
       goings above that of a six-person HMO.
7.     Thus, on the balance of probabilities, the appeal scheme would, in my judgement,
       result in unacceptable harm to the living conditions of the occupants of No 42 with
       regard to noise and disturbance. Whilst I acknowledge, that the appeal scheme
       would not create two adjoining HMOs for the first time it remains to my mind that,
       given the proposed number of residents at No 42, the noise and disturbance would
       be further exacerbated by the nearby HMO at 46 Ceres Road which benefits from
       a permission for a seven-person HMO2.
8.     I am mindful of the extant permission for a six-person HMO at No 44 is a fallback
       position with a greater than theoretical possibility of being implemented. However,
       the appeal scheme would result in greater harm due to the increase in the number
       of proposed occupants when compared with the fallback position. Accordingly, I
       acknowledge that between Nos 44 and 46, when considering the extant
       permission, would result in 13 occupants. Nevertheless, it remains for the reasons
       given above that the fall-back position does not, in my judgement, justify the
       appeal scheme.
9.     I am not satisfied that a condition requiring additional sound insultation between
       Nos 44 and 42 would adequately address the harm I have identified regarding the
       living conditions of No 42 given the external noise and disturbance likely to be
       generated by the appeal scheme, especially when considered in conjunction with
       the location and relationship of the main access to Nos 42 and 44.
10. It follows therefore, that conditions regarding limiting the occupation of the
    property, a HMO Management Plan, and the provision and retention of refuse
    storage and cycle storage would not overcome the harm I have identified above
    regarding noise and disturbance.
11. Additionally, appeal decisions at 6 Saunders Road3 and 16 Montbelle Road4 have
    also been referenced in the evidence before me. I do not have the full
    circumstances of these appeal decisions and therefore cannot be certain that they
    are wholly comparable to the appeal scheme. Nevertheless, each application is
    determined on its own merits and notably a noise impact assessment was
    submitted as part of the evidence relating to 6 Saunders Road.
12. Moreover, whilst I acknowledge the existence of other HMOs on Ceres Road such
    as Numbers 35 and 70, they do not justify an appeal scheme which I have
    identified to result in harm given each application is determined on its own merits.



2
  Planning Application Ref: 25/0767/F
3
  Appeal Decision Ref: 6005200
4
  Appeal Decision Ref: 6000373


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007470


13. Accordingly, for the reasons given above, it remains that the appeal scheme would
    result in a harmful effect upon the living conditions of the neighbouring occupants
    at No 42 regarding noise and disturbance. The appeal scheme would therefore
    conflict with Policies D3 and D14 of the London Plan 2021 and Policy E(a) of the
    Royal Greenwich Local Plan: Core Strategy with Detailed Policies 2014 insofar as
    they seek to ensure that developments avoid significant adverse noise impacts on
    quality of life and deliver appropriate amenity for adjacent occupiers. It is for the
    same reasons it would fail to accord with the Royal Borough Greenwich Urban
    Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document 2023.
Other Matters
14. A lack of harm regarding accommodation standards, loss of a family dwelling,
    design, parking, highway safety, refuse, cycle storage are neutral factors in my
    determination of this appeal. Nor have these been raised as reasons for refusal by
    the Council.
Conclusion
15. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

B Astley-Serougi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
