Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by H Nicholls MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007941
Land between 75 and 99 Star Road, Caversham, Reading RG4 5BE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Virya Notting Hill Limited against the decision of Reading Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/1020.
•    The development proposed is construction of a terrace of four 3-bedroom 2.5 storey dwellings,
     parking, and hard and soft landscaping.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
      17 August 2026 and forms a material consideration for decision making purposes
      from the day of its publication. The parties have been provided with an opportunity
      to comment on the relevance of the revised Framework so as to avoid prejudice.
3.    The appellant submitted amended plans at the appeal stage which include smaller
      rear flat roof dormers. In the context of the Holborn Studio judgement1, I consider
      that these are relatively minor amendments and as the nature of concerns of those
      who would normally have been consulted are clear from consultation on the
      original set of plans, no prejudice would occur by my taking the amended plans
      into account. I shall therefore determine the appeal on the basis of the plans listed
      on the decision notice, as well as the amended plans.
Main Issues
4.    The main issues in the appeal are:
       •    whether the site is suitable for the proposed development, having regard to the
            risk of flooding, and whether future occupiers would be safe from flood events;
       •    whether the scheme would be well designed, having regard to the scale, bulk
            and appearance of the dwellings; the adequacy of amenity space; and the
            protection and/or provision of trees and landscaping;
       •    whether safe access and egress could be provided;
       •    whether the scheme would provide an adequate contribution towards
            affordable housing; and
       •    the effects of the scheme on biodiversity.


1.   Holborn Studios Ltd v CLBH [2017] EWHC 2823

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007941


Reasons
Flood Risks
5.       The River Thames is approximately 550m south of the site and thus, the appeal
         site lies within Flood Zone 3a which has a high probability of flooding. A residential
         use is classified as a ‘more vulnerable’ use in this context. The Framework
         indicates that development of the type proposed will only be appropriate in such
         locations subject to satisfying the sequential test and the exception test. I take
         each of these in turn below.
Sequential Test
6.       The aim of the sequential test is to steer new development to areas with the lowest
         risk of flooding from any source. The area to which the test is applied should not
         be greater than the anticipated catchment of the development in terms of its likely
         occupiers or users. In this case, the submitted Sequential Test2 extends to the
         Caversham ward of Reading (a suburb of the town). As a non-major housing
         scheme, the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) supports the search area being
         restricted to a specific area of a town or city in which the proposal is to be located.
         As such, the focus on the area of Caversham is acceptable in this instance.
7.       The submitted Sequential Test refers to a number of sites sourced from the
         Reading Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment 2024 (HELAA). The
         majority of the sites were discounted, largely owing to their incomparability at
         double or greater than the appeal site’s size at 0.06ha. This is understandable as
         disaggregation of the sites would be unlikely. Despite that HELAA site references
         CA002, CA003 and CA004 were discounted as not sequentially preferable, they
         are also all at least double the size of the site when a more appropriate range
         would be around 0.03 – 0.09ha in area.
8.       The potential alternative site identified through sales marketing databases at an
         address at Upper Warren Avenue in Caversham is comparable to the appeal site
         in size, at 0.07ha, and is within Flood Zone 1. The commentary of the Sequential
         Test explains the numerous policies and developability constraints that result in
         this site being discounted, despite its sequential preferability in flood risk terms. I
         concur that the findings in respect of this site are sound.
9.       The PPG suggests that Councils may wish to keep an up-to-date register of
         reasonably available sites clearly ranked in flood risk preference to provide
         certainty for developers and to save time. No such list appears to exist and the
         Council does not appear to have identified any reasonably available sequentially
         preferrable sites. As such, given the lack of cogent evidence to the contrary, there
         do not appear to be any alternative sites genuinely appropriate for the
         development within the search area which are reasonably available and at a lower
         risk of flooding. This means that the appeal scheme passes the Sequential Test.
         Exceptions Test
10. The Exception Test is to be informed by a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment
    (FRA) and involves demonstrating that the development would provide wider
    sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh the flood risk; would be safe
    for its anticipated lifetime in accordance; and would not increase flood risk
2
    STM Environmental, date 14/07/25


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6007941


         elsewhere (and, where possible, would reduce flood risk overall). I return to th
         wider sustainability benefits further below.
Safety Considerations
11. The proposed floor levels of the houses would be raised 300mm above the flood
    level to 38.00m Above Ordnance Datum (AOD). In addition to the raising of the
    floor levels, the following measures are proposed to make the development safe
    over its lifetime:
     • flood resistant construction materials and services placed as high as
        practicable to reduce impact of flooding;
     • occupants to sign up for Environment Agency (EA) Emergency Flood Warning
        Direct Service and utilise safe refuge on upper floors of the building when
        needed; and
     • creation of underfloor voids to minimise the flood plain displacement.
12. Much detail is provided about the means of construction to reduce the impacts of
    flooding with which I take no particular issue. The use of the EA Flood Warning
    Service would be logical. In a flood event, occupiers would need to decide whether
    to take refuge in higher areas of the dwellings (via internal staircases) or evacuate
    to safer areas beyond the flood, subject to risk levels and the flood event duration.
13. The submitted evidence details that occupants would be able to go to an area of
    Flood Zone 1 via a 5-minute walk north to Henley Road via Donkin Hill. The site
    and immediate surroundings would be subject to flood waters that constitute a
    ‘danger for most’ people and the flood hazard rating would therefore be
    ‘significant’. Beyond this area, occupants would need to pass through a similarly
    sized area at ‘danger for some’ at a moderate risk of flooding, and then into lower
    risk areas. However, limited information is provided on flood depths or durations to
    give an indication as to how long people may need to take refuge in preference to
    passing through flood waters and whether this would be practicable. Taking these
    aspects into account, I am not satisfied that the development would be safe for its
    intended occupiers over its lifetime.
Displacement of Flood Risks
14. In terms of the creation of underfloor voids, the ground level of the site ranges from
    36.51m AOD (northwest) to 36.91m AOD (southwest). The development would
    increase the built-up area by 282 square metres (sqm) and would therefore
    displace flood waters during the 1% annual exceedance probability event (AEP)
    with increased allowance for climate change (31%). The development would
    displace a total of 253.8 cubic metres of floodplain storage. The provision of
    compensatory flood storage on a level-for-level basis is explained as not being
    possible due to existing ground levels, hence the intention to use underfloor voids.
15. Appendix 2 of the Council’s Statement of Case is a response from the
    Environment Agency3 (EA). The EA justifies its support for two local schemes
    which utilised voids for compensatory storage in 2021 and 2022, prior to a change
    in the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) in August 2022 which was changed to
    indicate that: “[voids] should not normally be relied upon for compensating for any
    loss of floodplain storage. This is because voids do not allow water to freely flow

3
    Dated 3 June 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007941


         through them, trash screens get blocked, voids get silted up, they have limited
         capacity, and it is difficult to stop them being used for storing belongings or other
         materials4. This paragraph of the PPG has not changed since August 2022. This
         explains the alleged inconsistency of the EA. It was based on a material change in
         circumstance that occurred in August 2022 and it would be a retrograde step to
         revert to the use of such techniques without appropriate justification. No
         justification is offered in this instance.
16. Therefore, the use of voids is no longer an acceptable means of providing
    compensatory flood storage for sound reasons and, as a consequence, the
    development would increase flood risks elsewhere.
Flood Risk Conclusions
17. On this main issue, whilst I consider that the sequential test has been passed,
    there is insufficient evidence to indicate that the development would be safe over
    its lifetime and that it would avoid increasing the risk of flooding elsewhere. The
    proposal therefore conflicts with Policy EN18 of the Reading Borough Local Plan
    (2019) (Local Plan) and with the Framework and PPG.
Design
18. The plot is currently relatively open, albeit overgrowing with scrubby vegetation,
    within its close boarded, timber fence enclosure. The infilling of the plot with a form
    of development would erode its openness but, given the pattern of development in
    the area, this in itself may not cause harm. The acceptability of such a change is
    scheme specific.
19. In this case, the proposal is to construct a terrace of four dwellings across the site,
    with limited frontages for parking and access and main gardens to the rear. The
    ground floor levels would be elevated to provide the underfloor flood storage voids,
    so would provide stepped accesses. The accommodation would be built across
    three levels, with second floor accommodation set within the roof and constrained
    in height in some areas, particularly with the reduction of the sizes of the rear
    dormers. The dwellings would have a uniform appearance across the terrace and
    would share a limited palette of materials, including brick and tiles.
20. The terrace would extend the full width of the frontage of the site, would extend a
    large proportion of the depth of the sites at ground floor level and the terrace would
    be relatively tall taking account of its elevation relative to ground levels and three
    floors of accommodation. Taken together, the collective bulk and massing of the
    terrace would be ungainly relative to the modest size and configuration of the plot.
21. Whilst terraced forms of housing with general consistency of scale, materials and
    detailing feature in the area, the proposed dwellings would be inelegant and would
    be exacting replicas of one another. Rather than provide an attractive rhythm to
    the streetscape, the degree of repetition of and limited range of materials would be
    harmful to the character and appearance of the area. Furthermore, whilst the
    existence of relatively plain flank walls may feature elsewhere in the surrounding
    area, the large blank north flank wall would be a disappointing feature of this
    particular scheme which could have been relatively easily remedied, such as
    through the use of windows in the stairwell.

4
    Paragraph: 049 Reference ID: 7-049-20220825


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
Appeal Decision 6007941


22. It is alleged that the Council does not have precise policy standards on the amount
    of garden to be provided per dwelling, relative to number of bedrooms and type.
    However, the supporting text to Policy H10 of the Local Plan sets out that gardens
    should be around the same size as the gross footprint of the dwellings they would
    serve. The proposed gardens would not achieve the suggested proportions. The
    gardens of the northernmost dwelling and two mid-terraced houses would be
    particularly mean relative to the size of the houses that they would serve, hemmed
    in by the built form of the dwelling, the boundary fence and proposed internal line
    of trees intended to soften it. The largest garden of them all would serve a larger
    dwelling and its extra space would be within close proximity of evergreen trees in
    the adjoining garden. Whilst the existing trees would be capable of being protected
    through construction phase by way of a planning condition, there would be a
    degree of shading from the trees which would negate some of the quality of the
    extra space.
23. The planting of the trees against the rear garden boundary line would, if
    established to a reasonable height, provide some softening of the built form and
    between the relatively close back to back arrangement between the proposed
    terrace and neighbouring dwellings to the rear. This feature would be the only
    meaningful provision of soft landscaping. The degree of impact from shading and
    leaf litter from these trees would be species-dependant, but their incursion into the
    poorly-sized gardens would further detract from the available space and
    functionality.
24. In view of the above and having regard to the various contributing factors, the
    scheme would not be well designed and thus conflicts with, in particular, policies
    CC7, H10, and EN14 of the Local Plan. Collectively, these policies seek for
    development to be of a high design quality that maintains and enhances the
    character and appearance of the area; ensures that dwellings are provided with
    functional private or communal open space and that new development makes
    adequate onsite provision for tree retention, planting and maintenance.
Safe Access and Egress
25. The frontage of the site is relatively tight and cars often park along the street, and
    on the footway on the frontage to the site. The street is subject to a 30mph speed
    restriction. The scheme proposes individual parking spaces to the front of each
    dwelling.
26. A comprehensive site plan was requested to illustrate the vehicle access in the
    context of street signage, the location of the telegraph pole on the site’s boundary
    and steps, walls and storage areas adjacent to the parking areas that could
    obstruct visibility. The appellant offers to provide the requisite visibility splays by
    way of condition, whereas the Council indicate that a condition would not be
    appropriate given that is uncertain whether acceptable visibility splays could
    actually be achieved.
27. In the absence of cogent evidence to the contrary, I can only conclude that the
    scheme would not provide safe access and egress and would, thus, cause
    prejudice to the safety of highway users contrary to, in particular, Policy TR3 of the
    Local Plan which seeks to ensure that accesses and works to the highway comply
    with adopted standards and would not be detrimental to the safety of highway
    users, including pedestrians and cyclists.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007941


Affordable Housing
28. Policy H3 of the Local Plan requires developments to make appropriate
    contributions towards affordable housing. For schemes of 1 to 4 dwellings, a
    financial contribution will be made that will enable the equivalent of 10% of the
    housing to be provided as affordable housing elsewhere in the Borough. The
    Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document (2021) (AH SPD)
    supplements Policy H3 and sets out that the 10% contribution will equate to 5% of
    the gross development value (GDV).
29. The appeal scheme was submitted with a Financial Viability Appraisal5 which
    indicates that the scheme would not be financially viable and thus, could not offer
    the requested 10% contribution. In subsequent correspondence, it is confirmed
    that despite varying the target profit to a lower amount, the development would still
    not be financially viable, but that the appellant would consider negotiating an
    alternative contribution towards affordable housing. Policy H3 provides for such
    scenarios, indicating that where schemes fall short of the policy target as a result
    of viability considerations, an open-book approach will be taken and the onus will
    be on the developer/landowner to clearly demonstrate the circumstances justifying
    a lower affordable housing contribution.
30. Notwithstanding the appellant’s engagement in the open book process to a point,
    no such legal undertaking providing for a viable affordable housing contribution
    was submitted prior to the decision being made on the appeal application and nor
    has one been submitted and justified with the appeal. Thus, I can only conclude
    that the scheme conflicts with the requirements of Policy H3 of the Local Plan and
    also fails to accord with guidance in the AH SPD.
Biodiversity
31. Local Plan Policy EN12 requires no net loss of biodiversity and enhancements
    where possible. Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) also became mandatory in 20246.
    The development would be subject to the statutory Biodiversity Gain Condition as
    it is not exempt from mandatory BNG requirements.
32. The Preliminary Ecological Appraisal, Statutory Biodiversity Metric Calculation
    Tool and Biodiversity Net Gain Plan Report7 submitted with the appeal application
    highlight that the development would result in the loss of 0.06ha of mixed scrub
    habitat which is of medium distinctiveness and in moderate condition. This habitat
    type and condition is equivalent to 0.45 area habitat units. To offset the effects and
    to deliver a 10% gain in habitat units, the appellant intends to purchase 0.54
    habitat units off site.
33. Whilst the Council’s case is that the scheme could have provided larger gardens
    and/or an area of shared public open space to retain more of the onsite habitat, I
    do not consider that it would be able to do in any meaningful way even if the
    dwelling sizes were modestly reduced. Whilst the site may offer relatively valuable
    habitat in the context of an urban environment, to insist upon the retention or
    creation of onsite habitats on such a constrained, modestly-sized infill site would

5
  August 2025
6
  Through Schedule 7A (Biodiversity Gain in England) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, inserted into the 1990 Act by
Schedule 14 of the Environment Act 2021 (amended by the Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023) and The Biodiversity Gain
(Town and Country Planning) (Consequential Amendments) Regulations 2024
7
  ST Environmental, 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                6
Appeal Decision 6007941


      be unlikely to result in the site being used efficiently or deliver on other necessary
      priorities, such as space standard-compliant dwellings, gardens and parking areas.
      As such, the reliance on an off-site solution is understandable and it would not be
      possible to achieve a better outcome in light of the biodiversity gain hierarchy.
34. As I consider that BNG condition could be discharged, the development would not
    result in a loss of biodiversity and would, by implication, also achieve an
    enhancement, albeit off site. It therefore complies with Local Plan Policy EN12.
Other Matters
35. The appellant’s evidence indicates that the Council can only demonstrate a 3.55
    year housing land supply considered against the relevant requirement in the
    Framework for a minimum five year supply with appropriate buffer. The Council
    does not dispute its inability to demonstrate an adequate five year supply of
    housing land. I take this into account in the planning balance below.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
36. In flood risk terms, the development would not be safe for its lifetime and would not
    avoid the increased risks of flooding elsewhere. The development would not be a
    high quality of design, would fail to contribute towards affordable housing and
    would be detrimental to users of the highway network. It would therefore conflict
    with the development plan when taken as a whole.
37. Framework Policy S4 (1) sets out that proposals within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies.
38. The harms identified above raise conflicts with numerous decision-making policies
    of the Framework, including with Policy F6(1) (b) (ii) in respect of flood risks and
    (iii) and Policy DP3(2) in respect of design. It is clear therefore, that the
    development would not provide wider sustainability benefits that outweigh the flood
    risks, in conflict with Framework Policy F6(1) (b) when read as a whole.
39. The site is sustainably located within a settlement. The scheme would make an
    efficient use of land and make a modest, yet valuable contribution to the housing
    stock in the context of an acknowledged housing land supply shortfall. As such,
    these aspects collectively attract great weight in favour of the scheme.
    Additionally, the scheme would provide for adequate BNG and provide the usual
    construction phase economic boost to the area which also weigh modestly in its
    favour.
40. However, the benefits of approving the development would be substantially
    outweighed by the totality of the adverse effects. As such, there are no material
    considerations, including the Framework, that indicate that a decision should be
    made other than in accordance with the development plan.
41. Consequently, the appeal should fail.

H Nicholls
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
