Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by S. Burch BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6007047
19 Chapman Road, Croydon CR0 3NX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Gohar Khan against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Croydon.
•    The application Ref is 25/03914/GPDO.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘single storey rear extension.’

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
       3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development)(England) Order 2015 (as amended) (GPDO) for a single
       storey rear extension at 19 Chapman Road, Croydon CR0 3NX in accordance with
       the terms of the application, Ref 25/03914/GPDO, and the plans submitted with it
       (including plans: Existing Plans & Elevations Site Ocation & Block Plans, Drg No.
       5122/LO/01) , pursuant to Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph
       A.4(2) of the GPDO.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have taken the address used in the heading above from the application form.
       However, for reasons of precision, I have removed the repetition of ‘Croydon.’
3.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
       (GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
       subject to limitations and conditions.
4.     Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior approval is
       required for development which exceeds the limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is
       allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph A.4(3) provides that the local
       planning authority may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
       development does not comply with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that
       are applicable to such permitted development.
5.     Where any owner or occupier of any adjoining premises objects to the proposed
       development, Paragraph A.4(7) to Part 1 requires the local planning authority to
       assess the impact of the proposed development on the amenity of any adjoining
       premises, taking into account any representations received.
6.     An objection was received from the occupier of an adjoining property. The Council
       therefore assessed the effect of the proposed development on the amenity of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007047


       adjoining premises and subsequently refused it on the grounds that it would harm
       the living conditions of the occupants of No. 17 Chapman Road (No. 17), with
       regard to outlook and natural light.
Main Issue
7.     Given the above, the main issue is therefore the effect of the proposed
       development on the living conditions of the occupiers of No.17, with regard to
       outlook and natural light.
Reasons
8.     The appeal site relates to a two-storey end of terrace property on Chapman Road.
       In relation to effect on outlook, the proposed extension would be positioned along
       the shared boundary with No.17. There is a ground floor window at No.17
       positioned close to the shared boundary. Nonetheless, the extension would feature
       a flat roof and measure 2.8 metres in height. The roof would project only slightly
       above the existing boundary fence. Having regard to its modest scale and height, I
       am not persuaded that the proposal would appear unduly dominant or overbearing
       when viewed from this ground floor window. Consequently, I find that it would not
       result in unacceptable harm to the outlook from this window.
9.     Given the separation distance between the proposed extension and the remaining
       ground-floor windows in the rear elevation of No. 17, I do not consider that the
       proposal would result in any material harm to outlook from those windows.
       Furthermore, as the extension would be single storey in nature, it would not
       adversely affect the outlook from the first-floor windows at the neighbouring
       property. Taking these factors together, I find that the proposed extension would
       not result in unacceptable harm to the living conditions of the occupants of No. 17,
       with regard to outlook.
10. Turning to natural light, the appeal site lies to the north of No. 17. Given this
    relationship, together with the path of the sun, any reduction in sunlight received
    by No. 17 would be limited and would not result in unacceptable harm to the living
    conditions of its occupants. In terms of daylight, the proposal would not affect the
    open aspect to the rear of No. 17. Consequently, the levels of daylight received by
    the rear ground-floor windows and the adjoining garden area would be largely
    maintained. Taking these matters into account, I find that the proposed extension
    would not result in unacceptable harm to the living conditions of the occupants of
    No. 17, with regard to natural light.
11. Accordingly, I find that the proposed development would not result in unacceptable
    harm to the living conditions of the occupants of No. 17, with regard to outlook and
    natural light. Insofar as they are material considerations, I have had regard to
    Policies SP4 and DM10 of the Croydon Local Plan and Policy D3 of the London
    Plan. Collectively, and amongst other matters, these policies seek to safeguard the
    amenity of neighbouring occupiers. For the reasons given above, I find no conflict
    with these policies in respect of the matters before me.
Other Matters
12. An interested party has raised concerns regarding the effect of an existing
    outbuilding at the rear of the appeal site. However, the appeal relates solely to a
    proposed extension and, as such, the outbuilding does not form part of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007047


       development before me. Nevertheless, having regard to the separation distances
       between the proposed extension and 20 Thomson Crescent (No.20), together with
       the modest scale of the extension, I do not consider that it would result in
       unacceptable harm through loss of light, outlook or other residential amenity. This
       is the case even when the effect of the proposal is considered alongside that of the
       existing outbuilding. The Council similarly concluded that the scheme would not
       give rise to material harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
13. Concerns have been raised regarding the potential future use of the extension.
    However, the appeal relates solely to a proposed extension to a dwellinghouse,
    and any material change of use would require separate planning permission.
    Concerns have also been expressed regarding overdevelopment and the height of
    the extension. However, the proposed development falls within the scope of
    development permitted by the GPDO. Furthermore, the Council's officer report
    confirms that the extension would comply with the dimensional limitations set out
    under Class A of the GPDO. Accordingly, these matters do not lead me to a
    different conclusion on the acceptability of the proposal.
14. An interested party has raised concerns regarding noise, vibration, dust and
    general disturbance arising from the construction works. In particular, they explain
    that, owing to existing health conditions, they require rest and a calm environment
    to support their recovery. Given the relatively small scale of the proposed works,
    any disturbance from construction would be short lived and would not amount to
    an unacceptable effect on living conditions, even taking account of the interested
    party’s health concerns.
Conditions
15. Planning permission granted for development under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2,
    Part 1, Class A of the GPDO is subject to the conditions set out in paragraphs A.3
    and A.4 of that Class. In summary, these require external materials be of a similar
    appearance to those used in the construction of the exterior of the existing
    dwelling and that the development is carried out in accordance with the details and
    plans submitted as part of the application to the local planning authority. I consider
    that no further conditions are necessary.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, I conclude the appeal is allowed and prior approval
    is granted.



S.Burch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
