Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by M J Francis BA (Hons) MA MSc MClfA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6007606
Bland Hill Farm, Broad Dubb Road, Norwood, North Yorkshire HG3 1TE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Adam Sinclair-Morris against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00047/FUL.
•    The development proposed is detached garage, rear extensions and front porch.



Appeal B Ref: 6007642
Bland Hill Farm, Broad Dubb Road, Norwood, North Yorkshire HG3 1TE
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Adam Sinclair-Morris against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00048/LB.
•    The development proposed is detached garage, rear extensions and front porch.


Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     As set out above, there are two appeals on this site, one for planning permission,
       and the other for listed building consent. Planning permission and listed building
       consent are under different legislation; however, I have dealt with both appeals
       together in my reasoning.
3.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026, and the main parties have been consulted on the implications of
       the revised Framework’s publication on the appeals.
4.     The Council did not include any policies from the Local Plan in the decision
       notices. Therefore, I have relied on the relevant policies within the Framework, and
       as the proposal relates to a listed building and as required by sections 16(2) and
       66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the
       Act), I have had special regard to the desirability of preserving the building or its
       setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it
       possesses.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6007606, 6007642


Main Issue
5.       The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve the Grade II listed building,
         known as Bland Hill Farmhouse and outbuilding1, or its setting or any features of
         special architectural or historic interest that it possesses.
Reasons
Special interest and significance
6.       The appeal site consists of a two-storey farmhouse and outbuilding of coursed
         squared gritstone of mid to late 18th century date. The house was originally two
         bays, but at some point, attached outbuildings have been incorporated into the
         farmhouse. The house is in turn attached to a two-storey former barn which has
         been converted into a separate residential property. The building is one of a line of
         several properties facing Broad Dubb Road.
7.       The central doorway, with a modern door, is set in a plain stone surround. There
         are three light mullion windows with modern glazing on the ground and 1st floors of
         the front elevation. The roof is finished in graduated stone slates with copings on
         the gables and stone chimney stacks. Internally, there is exposed stonework and
         historic roof timbers surviving in parts of the house. On the rear, there are two
         single storey extensions.
8.       There are sizeable grounds to the rear, where a modern double garage is located.
         To the side of the house there is an access drive leading to a parking and turning
         area. With fields to the east and moorland to the front, the property has extensive
         views and a feeling of remoteness.
9.       The special interest and significance of the building, insofar as it relates to this
         appeal, is that it represents a vernacular farmhouse which retains a high degree of
         historic fabric and openings. Its location and attached former agricultural buildings
         attest to local farming practices and its connection to the surrounding landscape.
         Whilst there have been changes to the farm that was located to the west, and
         there has been intervening development which has changed the original setting of
         this property, this does not diminish the clear connection between the appeal site
         and the surrounding land to the south and east.
Effect on the listed building
10. On the front elevation, a small porch is proposed. Whilst it would match the
    materials used in the farmhouse, there is limited evidence of its style and
    construction. Although the appellant states that it would not harm the historic
    fabric, there are no details of how it would be attached to the front elevation, where
    I noted a worn historic step on the threshold into the house.
11. The map regression provided in the Heritage Impact Assessment attests to the
    linear nature of this former farmstead. There is no doubt that front porches are
    found on rural farmhouses, but in this area, it appears that traditionally, smaller
    farmhouses did not have porches. Therefore, constructing a porch is not needed to
    reinforce the legibility of the central entrance, as the appellant contends, as the
    farmhouse was originally, and as can still be seen, a symmetrical front elevation.
    This established vernacular design is key to its significance, particularly as it has

1
    List entry number: 1315344


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6007606, 6007642


       seen less alterations than at the rear of the building. Therefore, I consider that
       constructing a porch would result in harm to the significance of the building.
12. The existing single storey, double pitched extension to the rear, is described as
    modern, having been rebuilt from a previous extension in this location. It currently
    provides a rear access to the house and contains a downstairs bathroom and
    utility area. It is proposed to build a 1st floor above this to provide a bathroom
    accessed from the landing and an en-suite and robes entered from bedroom 1.
13. Whilst I can appreciate the benefits of a 1st floor bathroom, the existing 1st floor
    plan does not identify that there is an existing en-suite containing a shower and
    toilet which has been built into the corner of bedroom 1. Although building
    upwards, as proposed, does not extend the footprint, it would result in two new
    door openings on the 1st floor: the one to the bathroom replacing an existing small
    window under the eaves and a new opening through the rear wall of bedroom one
    to connect it to the en-suite. There is no substantive evidence of how these new
    openings would be created and how they would interact with the existing fabric of
    the building. Whilst the loss of historic fabric would be limited, it would be
    irreversible and would alter the plan form of the property on the 1st floor.
14. Constructing a double pitched, stone slate roof, including rooflights, would visually
    interrupt the existing, simple, plain, rear roofscape. However, as there is no
    substantive evidence of the existing roof structure, it is not clear how the proposed
    roof would physically connect to the rear of the dwelling. This includes how it
    would interact with historic roof timbers which I saw in bedroom 1, and that extend
    into a cupboard at roof height.
15. The size of the existing single storey extension, even if it is not original, appears in
    scale with the house and is barely seen at the rear. However, an upwards
    extension would increase the massing of this elevation and be highly visible and
    dominant from Broad Dubb Road when approaching the site from the east. This is
    despite the house being built into rising ground with terracing above it.
16. On the ground floor, part of the western elevation of the existing extension would
    be removed and a snug would be created by an infill extension between the two
    existing rear projections. A small window opening would be removed on the rear
    elevation and a new doorway created, resulting in the removal of historic fabric.
    Access would be created from the snug into a utility area and toilet in the
    outshoots, however, removing their existing internal walls would be of limited
    benefit to the listed building, as this structure is known to be relatively modern in
    date and there is no evidence of its original layout.
17. I understand that rear elevations of buildings can be more functional and capable
    of change. Although there are indications that the rear of the building has had
    extensions in the past, there is only limited evidence from historic mapping of the
    siting of these, and no evidence of their original form.
18. In this case, the proposed infill extension would enclose a considerable part of the
    rear elevation. Although the rear wall would be visible through the proposed
    French doors, and a window would be re-used, the design and form of the
    extension, attached to the projections either side, would result in a sizeable
    increase in the built form at the rear of the property. Whilst the appellant considers
    that it would provide more useable space and improve circulation, it would alter the
    plan form of the ground floor, extending it in a non-traditional form. This would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6007606, 6007642


       overwhelm and be unsympathetic to the character and appearance of the existing
       house and would harm its significance.
19. The existing garage, built in stone with a slate roof, is relatively low in height and is
    subservient to the house. Set back from the rear of the house, it has a neutral
    effect on the setting of the farmhouse. This would be replaced by a larger,
    agricultural style building in the north-west corner of the plot. The evidence
    suggests that this would be used to store a horsebox and tractor and for the
    appellant’s hobby of collecting cars. I saw a container and several vehicles parked
    at the rear of the property, however, there is limited evidence that the building
    would be able to accommodate all of these.
20. The proposed garage would be some distance from the listed farmhouse and has
    been designed to be partially set into the ground to reduce visual prominence and
    finished in timber cladding to give it a recessive appearance. The evidence
    includes photographs of two agricultural style buildings adjacent to other historic
    farmhouses within the vicinity of this site. However, there is no evidence whether
    these farmhouses are listed, or whether the buildings are on agricultural units
    where such buildings are to be expected. In this instance, the garage is proposed
    within the grounds of a residential site where buildings are generally smaller in
    scale.
21. Furthermore, the land slopes upwards away from the house and road. Therefore,
    even though the building would be sited next to some small trees and built into the
    ground, at over 6 metres in height, it would be a conspicuous feature on the
    skyline at the rear of the site, particularly when travelling along Broad Dubb Road
    to the west.
22. The appellant has drawn my attention to other buildings at the rear of houses
    fronting Broad Dubb Road. I saw from the appeal site an outbuilding on land to the
    west, however, this was relatively close to the property, and roughly in line with the
    container on the appeal site. Beyond this, were horse boxes and farm equipment.
    From the evidence and what I saw, there were no outbuildings on the sloping land
    to the north, with the only outlier being a house to the north-east of the Social Hall,
    as shown on the 1972 OS map extract. Furthermore, I have no evidence whether
    these buildings are listed, or the circumstances under which they have been built.
    Therefore, the evidence does not suggest that these examples are directly
    comparable to the appeal site.
23. Consequently, I consider that the proposed building would be large in relation to
    the size of the house within this residential setting. Although sited further away
    from the listed building than the present garage, it would result in some harm to
    the setting of the farmhouse,
24. Given the above, I find that the proposed works would fail to preserve the listed
    building and its setting and any features of special architectural or historic interest
    which it possesses. This would harm the significance of the heritage asset.
    Consequently, I give this harm considerable importance and weight in the planning
    balance of these appeals.
Other Matters
25. The site is within the Nidderdale National Landscape (NL). National Landscapes
    are designated for the purposes of enhancing natural beauty. Section 245 of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6007606, 6007642


       Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 places a duty upon me to seek to further
       the statutory purposes of protected landscapes in this decision. Policy N4 of the
       Framework advises that development proposals within Protected Landscapes
       should be limited in scale and extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid
       harm to the statutory purposes and special qualities of the Protected Landscape.
26. The NL consists of heather moors to the west, with a softer, more pastoral
    landscape to the east where villages, towns, historic parks and gardens and
    country houses are located. The NL is a landscape that has been influenced by
    farming and industry and has evidence of mines and quarries, as found to the rear
    of the appeal site.
27. Whilst the extensions to the rear would be limited in scale, the new garage building
    would be conspicuous and overly large for a domestic setting. Therefore, based on
    its scale and location, I consider that it would fail to conserve and enhance the
    natural beauty of the NL.
Public Benefits and Heritage Balance
28. Policy HE4 of the Framework advises that heritage assets are an irreplaceable
    resource and should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance.
    Harm to the significance of heritage assets should be avoided and any harm
    should have a clear and convincing justification.
29. Policy HE6 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    asset’s conservation, irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a
    positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. I find in this
    instance that the proposed extensions would cause a medium level of harm to the
    listed building, and the proposed garage a low level of harm. Nevertheless, any
    harm to a designated heritage asset is a matter of considerable importance and
    weight. Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, Policy HE6 states that the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
30. The appellant has set out several public benefits. These are that it would secure
    the buildings optimum viable use through providing essential accommodation;
    supporting the long-term occupation and maintenance of the listed building;
    reducing reliance on externally stored materials and visual clutter; and enhancing
    the setting through replacing a modern garage with an agricultural style building.
31. However, the building has been used and occupied as a dwelling for a
    considerable time and so it is not underused. Whilst the provision of further
    bathroom facilities is desired on the 1st floor, there is already a toilet and shower
    upstairs. Although I understand that having a porch to prevent the front door
    opening directly into the living space would be useful, there is limited evidence of
    this structure and the physical effect it would have on the building. Moreover, there
    is currently a back door, which may not be as convenient, but this does provide
    access into a utility area, avoiding the loss of heat into principal rooms of the
    house. Additionally, owning a listed building requires regular management and
    maintenance which is not reliant on the proposed extensions and alterations to the
    building.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6007606, 6007642


32. Being able to store materials and vehicles in a larger building would remove visual
    clutter at the rear of the site. However, there is limited evidence as to what the
    building would be able to store, and what would to continue to be retained outside.
    Moreover, I have found that the existing domestic garage, which is well built in
    traditional materials, does not harm the setting of the listed building.
33. Given the above, and in the absence of public benefits that would outweigh the
    harm that would be caused, I conclude that the proposal would fail to preserve the
    special historic interest of the grade II listed building. This would fail to satisfy the
    requirements of the Act and would conflict with Policy HE6 of the Framework.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
34. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. In this case the
    development would be located outside a settlement, where Policy S5 indicates that
    only certain forms of development should be approved, unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the Framework’s national decision-making policies.
35. In this respect, policy S5 (1) c. refers, amongst other things, to the extension of an
    existing building, provided that it is of permanent and substantial construction, is
    lawful in planning terms, and any extension or alteration will not result in a
    disproportionate increase in size compared to the existing building. In this case,
    whilst the proposal comprises extensions, it is a listed building, and the extensions,
    because of their scale and form, would harm the significance of the heritage asset.
36. In addition, Policy S5 (2) states that in applying this policy, the circumstances in
    which the benefits of approving development proposals are likely to be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not restricted to,
    situations where a proposal would fail to comply with one of the decision-making
    policies which states that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.
37. In this case I have found that the proposed works would result in harm to the
    significance of a designated heritage asset. This harm is of considerable
    importance and weight and is not outweighed by public benefits. In addition, it
    would fail to conserve and enhance the natural beauty of the NL. Taking all these
    points together, the benefits of granting planning permission would be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the Framework’s decision-
    making policies.
38. Consequently, the development conflicts with the Framework and there are no
    material considerations of sufficient weight to indicate otherwise. Therefore, I
    conclude that the appeals should be dismissed.

M J Francis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
