Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by James Hills MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007678
West Barn, Cobhay Farm, Milverton Road, Bathealton, Wiveliscombe, Somerset
TA4 1NN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
     (the GPDO).
•    The appeal is made by D Worrall against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 03/24/0003/CQ.
•    The development proposed is conversion of agricultural building to a dwelling under Class Q at
     West Barn, Cobhay Farm, Milverton Road, Bathealton, Wiveliscombe, Somerset TA4 1NN.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and prior approval is deemed to be granted under the
       provisions of Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
       for conversion of agricultural building to a dwelling under Class Q at West Barn,
       Cobhay Farm, Milverton Road, Bathealton, Wiveliscombe, Somerset TA4 1NN in
       accordance with the application ref 03/24/0003/CQ and the details submitted with
       it.
Applications for costs
2.     The appellant has made an application for costs against Somerset Council which
       is the subject of a different decision.
Preliminary matters
3.     The description of development in the formal decision and banner heading above
       is taken from the application form.
4.     The GPDO was updated on 21 May 2024. Transitional arrangements allow for a
       prior approval application to be determined in accordance with the 1 August 2020
       version of the GPDO as long as it was made before the 21st of May 2025. Any
       reference to the GPDO in this decision therefore relates to the 2020 version of it.
5.     The application for prior approval was received by the Council on 6 November
       2024, with a decision made on 9 December 2025. It is not disputed that the
       Council failed to notify the appellant within the 56-day period prescribed by
       paragraph W of the GPDO as to whether prior approval was given or refused. In
       these circumstances, and notwithstanding the Council’s claim to the contrary, prior
       approval is deemed to have been granted.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007678


6.     Consequently, I cannot address questions concerning whether the proposal would
       otherwise constitute permitted development under Class Q. This includes the
       parties' submissions and other representations made regarding the agricultural
       use of the building on the relevant date or period thereafter.
7.     I note that a separate appeal has been made against the Council's refusal to issue
       a Lawful Development Certificate in respect of the proposal. However, that appeal
       concerns a different statutory regime and raises separate considerations. It
       therefore has no bearing on my determination of this prior approval appeal, which
       turns solely on the Council's failure to issue its decision within the prescribed
       period. For the avoidance of doubt, nothing in this decision should be taken as a
       finding that the proposal complies with the requirements of Class Q and it may
       only lawfully proceed if it does. No conclusion is reached on those matters.
8.     I have had regard to comments made in respect of the processing of the
       application, though this has no effect on the appeal outcome.
Conclusion
9.     For the reasons given, the appeal is allowed and prior approval is deemed to be
       granted.



J Hills
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
