Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by A James BSc (Hons) MA MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007266
23-24 Brunswick Square, Hove BN3 1EJ
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by 23/24 Brunswick Square Ltd against the decision of Brighton and Hove City
     Council.
•    The application reference is BH2025/01368.
•    The works are described as ‘refurbishment of the front entrance steps to 23-24 (reinstated in the
     same design and construction of original steps and coverings).’


Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. As the appeal relates to a listed building and the site lies within a conservation area
   (CA), I have had special regard to sections 16(2) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
   Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
3. The Council considers that the appeal scheme causes harm to the character and
   appearance of the CA. While this does not form part of the reason for refusal, given
   my statutory duty, I have included this matter as part of the main issues. The
   appellant has had the opportunity to comment on the Council’s submission.
4. Since the Council issued its decision notices, a new National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Both main parties
   have been given the opportunity to comment on it and I have taken all comments
   received into consideration.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are whether the appeal scheme preserves a Grade I listed
   building, known as ‘Nos 1-29 and attached railings’ (Ref: 1187544) and any
   features of special architectural or historic interest that it possesses, and the effect
   on the character and appearance of the Brunswick Town CA.
Reasons
6. ‘Nos 1-29 and attached railings’ is a Grade I listed building, which dates back to
   around the mid-1820s. It is a grand terrace, which forms one half of Brunswick
   Square. It is four to five storeys high, with a basement and features full height,
   curved bays, with moulded strings and courses. It has a stucco finish. The building
   has recessed doorways with columnar doorcases, which are approached via a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007266


     flight of steps. The external steps and landings are typically finished with black and
     white tiling, with various designs present. However, I observed on my site visit that
     the historic tiling has been lost on some properties.
7. Based on the evidence before me and my site visit, I find that the special interest of
   the listed building, insofar as is relevant to this appeal, is derived from its historic
   and architectural interests as an illustration of Regency architecture. The building’s
   grand stature, surviving historic fabric, use of traditional materials and architectural
   detailing make important contributions in these regards. The listed building also has
   significant group value with the adjacent terrace, which together form part of the
   planned architectural composition of Brunswick Square.
8. The appeal site lies within the Brunswick Town CA. The CA encompasses the
   Brunswick Town development that was built in the 19th century and was designed
   by Busby. The Brunswick Town development incorporates the appeal site and
   provides a fine example of Regency architecture. The significance of the CA,
   insofar as is relevant to this appeal, is derived from the high concentration of listed
   buildings within it, the historic street patterns, the prevalence of traditional materials
   and the surviving historic fabric.
9. 23-24 Brunswick Terrace occupies a mid-terrace position. It was previously one
   dwelling but is now in use as self-contained flats. The front entrances to the
   properties are recessed and framed with columns and accessed via a tiled walkway
   from the public highway. There is a separate access to the basement flats. The
   entrance steps are highly prominent from the public realm.
10. The appellant seeks consent to remove the existing tiles and replace them with
    black and white, Victorian-style tiles. The works have already been carried out. The
    appellant advises that the landings to both properties collapsed due to water
    ingress and that given health and safety concerns and access requirements, urgent
    works were required to remedy the situation. While the photographs show signs of
    damp, particularly at basement level, there is no damp survey or condition survey
    before me to fully understand any defects or areas where water ingress has
    occurred. The appellant’s photographs also provide limited evidence of any water
    damage to the historic fabric or the timbers immediately beneath the landings.
    Accordingly, I find that there is no clear and convincing justification for the extent of
    the works that have been carried out.
11. The appellant advises that the tiles have been replaced ‘like-for-like’. However, the
    modern tiles are slightly larger than the historic tiles, as they have been
    manufactured in metric dimensions. The size difference is likely to have been a
    factor for the slight change in pattern.
12. The appellant states that the original tiles were approximately 200 years old and
    were brittle and it was not possible to save them. The appellant argues that they
    had originally planned to reuse the existing tiles prior to the landings collapsing. A
    revised method statement was produced, which states ‘carefully hack up and cart
    away existing black and white tiles.’ It is clear from the photographic evidence that
    some historic tiles remained in situ, despite the collapse of the landings. Based on
    the evidence before me, I find that there is no clear and convincing justification
    before me why all the tiles and the marble nosing needed to be replaced or why the
    tiles and nosing could not have been carefully lifted and reused.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007266


13. The historic tiles displayed signs of age-related wear. However, this did not
    necessarily diminish their contribution to the listed building’s special interest.
    Rather, their worn surfaces and evidence of long-standing use formed part of their
    historic value, demonstrating their age and authenticity. The historic tiles and
    marble nosing made a positive contribution to the special interest of this Grade I
    listed building and the character and appearance of the CA. The appeal scheme
    has resulted in the loss of historic fabric, which has caused harm to the special
    interest of the Grade I listed building and the character and appearance of the CA.
14. The replacement tiles do not display the same patina of age as the historic tiles and
    have a shinier appearance. The overall pattern differs from the historic layout; the
    grouting is darker; the depth of the nosing is not historically accurate; and, the
    layout lacks the subtle irregularities that were present in the historic layout. Along
    with the irreversible loss of historic fabric, I find that the appeal scheme fails to
    preserve the authenticity and historic integrity of the listed building and the
    character and appearance of the CA.
15. The appellant has installed a waterproof membrane. There is no clear and
    convincing justification before me why such a membrane has been chosen and why
    a more traditional, authentic and more breathable method could not have been
    employed.
16. The appellant advises that they used the same contractor and tile supplier that had
    completed the consented works at 7 Brunswick Square1 (No. 7). While full details of
    the circumstances of the other scheme are not before me, the Council advises that
    the rationale for accepting the replacement tiles at No. 7 was that they had been
    severely damaged as a result of the use of an unsympathetic asphalt covering.
    Accordingly, I find the appeal scheme materially different from the consented
    scheme and I give it limited weight in my decision.
17. For the reasons given above, I find that the appeal scheme fails to preserve the
    special interest of the Grade I listed building. Policy HE6 of the Framework advises
    that when considering the effect of a proposal2 on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. The
    Framework is clear that the more important the asset, the greater the weight should
    be. The appeal scheme has resulted in harm to a Grade I listed building, which is a
    building of exceptional interest and importance.
18. In this case, I find that the appeal scheme causes harm to the special interest of the
    Grade I listed building, albeit this harm is at a low level. Nevertheless, a low level of
    harm does not equate to a low planning objection and the Framework states that
    any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable
    importance and weight. Where harm is identified, the Framework requires that the
    effect on the asset and its significance be weighed against any public benefits.
19. The appeal scheme has resulted in investment into the property, which has had a
    small economic benefit, which I give limited weight in my decision as a public
    benefit. The appellant advises that the works were necessary to address damp,
    health and safety and access issues. However, based on the evidence before me, I
    am not convinced that the appeal scheme represents the least harmful option for

1
 BH2016/02720
2
 Although the Framework refers to ‘development proposals’, footnote 63 is clear that the policies within the historic environment
chapter also relate to the heritage-related consent regimes.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  3
Appeal Decision 6007266


     achieving these objectives. Accordingly, I give these matters limited weight in my
     decision. There is also no compelling evidence before me that the use of the listed
     building would cease in the absence of the appeal scheme. As a result, I do not find
     the appeal scheme necessary to secure the viability and long-term conservation of
     the listed building.
20. Overall, I give the public benefits limited weight in my decision. Consequently, in
    attributing considerable importance and weight to the harm that has been caused to
    the significance of the designated heritage asset, I find that there are insufficient
    public benefits arising from the appeal scheme to outweigh this harm.
21. Given the above, the appeal scheme fails to satisfy the requirements of the Act and
    the historic environment policies of the Framework. The appeal scheme also
    conflicts with Policy CP15 of the Brighton and Hove City Plan Part One, March
    2016 and Policy DM27 of the City Plan Part Two, October 2022. These policies,
    among other things, require that the historic environment is conserved and
    enhanced in accordance with its identified significance, giving the greatest weight
    to designated heritage assets and that proposals do not harm the special
    architectural or historic interest of a listed building, including its design,
    construction, fabric, finishes and architectural features.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.

A James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
