Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Alison Fish BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007416
Land adjacent to Red Lane, Rosudgeon, Cornwall TR20 9PU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•   The appeal is made by Mr P Crocker against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•   The application Ref is PA25/04855.
•   The development proposed is permission in principle for up to 5 dwellinghouses.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties have had the
   opportunity to comment on the implications of these changes for the appeal, and I
   have taken it into account in coming to my decision.
3. The planning application form is clear that the appeal relates to a minimum of 1 and
   a maximum of 5 dwellings. I have assessed the proposal on this basis, and treated
   the drawings as being for illustrative purposes only.
4. Although the Council do not refer to Policy 3 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic
   Policies 2010-2030 adopted November 2016 (CLP) in their reason for refusal, it is
   discussed in the officers delegated report and the appellant has referred to it as
   being of ‘key relevance’ to the appeal in their statement of case. Therefore, I will
   not prejudice any party by taking Policy 3 of the CLP into account in reaching my
   decision.
5. The Planning Practice Guidance advises that permission in principle is an
   alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-led development. The
   permission in principle consent route has 2 stages: the first stage (or permission in
   principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-principle. The scope of the
   considerations for permission in principle is limited to location, land use and the
   amount of development permitted. All other matters are considered as part of the
   second (‘technical details consent’) stage, when the detailed development
   proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2 stages.
Main Issue
6. Therefore, the main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development,
   having regard to location, proposed land use and the amount of development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007416


Reasons
7. The appeal site is located outside the settlement limit of Rosudgeon identified in the
   Perranuthnoe Parish Neighbourhood Plan 2019-30 (NP). Policy 3 of the CLP sets
   out the circumstances in which development outside settlements will be permitted
   including where proposals constitute rounding off. In that case, proposals should be
   on land which is immediately adjoining the settlement and of a scale appropriate to
   its size and role.
8. Rounding off is described as land which is substantially enclosed but outside of the
   urban form of a settlement and where its edge is clearly defined by a physical
   feature that also acts as a barrier to further growth (such as a road). It should not
   visually extend building into the open countryside1. Further advice is provided in the
   Chief Planning Officers Advice Note. This is not adopted policy or a supplementary
   planning document but as both parties have referred to it, so have I. This says that
   for a site to be considered to be rounding off it should, amongst other things, be
   predominantly enclosed by edging features and contained within longstanding and
   enclosing boundary features.
9. The appeal site comprises a rectangular shaped field with its western edge forming
   a boundary with Red Lane. Existing residential properties line the eastern side of
   the road. The southern boundary of the appeal site abuts the rear of the properties
   fronting on to the A394. Ivy Cottage is located to the north of the site, although
   established planting and trees means that it is not particularly apparent from the
   appeal site. The close proximity to existing residential development means that the
   site is physically well related to the settlement. In this respect I concur with the
   Inspector’s findings in the appeal elsewhere on Red Lane2 (‘the Red Lane appeal’),
   that further residential development would not be wholly unexpected here.
10. Nevertheless, the elongated site provides a significant visual break between the
    development fronting the A394 and Ivy Cottage. In addition, the land east of the
    appeal site is undeveloped and open and separated from the appeal site by a
    boundary hedge. This boundary comprises a stone-faced bank with associated
    planting. However, rather than forming a robust hedgebank, the stone-faced bank
    is low with low-level vegetation and a lack of hedgerow trees. This means that it
    does not provide a strong sense of enclosure. Instead, it allows views across to the
    undeveloped field beyond, which has a similarly a low-level eastern boundary
    which extends the views into undeveloped countryside further beyond.
11. This means that the appeal site is not substantially enclosed and it has a clear
    affinity with the undeveloped countryside beyond which is clearly visible from Red
    Lane. Additional landscaping could not fully mitigate this impact. Development on
    the appeal site would visually extend building into the countryside and therefore the
    proposal would not constitute rounding off.
12. The appeal site is also located within the Tregonning and Gwinear section of the
    Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape World Heritage Site (WHS). WHSs
    are places of outstanding universal value, defined as of a cultural and/or natural
    significance that are so exceptional as to transcend national boundaries.


1
 Paragraph 1.68 of the Cornwall Local Plan
2
 Appeal ref: APP/D0840/W/25/3367115 Land to north- northeast of Red Lane House, Red Lane, Rosudgeon TR20 9PU (‘The Red
Lane appeal’)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6007416


13. A key component of the Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) is the survival of
    features across the landscape that demonstrate the significant contribution made
    by Cornwall and West Devon to Britain’s Industrial Revolution during the eighteenth
    and nineteenth centuries through deep copper and tin mining. The appellant’s
    Heritage Statement confirms that the appeal site was historically a mineworkers’
    smallholding. As such, the site exhibits one of the seven attributes which,
    individually and collectively, convey and express the OUV.
14. Although the loss of the original homestead and the redevelopment of the
    surrounding land for housing has substantially reduced the integrity and legibility of
    this part of the WHS, the appeal site with its elongated form and surviving
    boundaries positively contributes to the OUV of the WHS.
15. Whilst the existing boundaries which define the smallholding would largely be
    retained and indeed could be enhanced through further planting at technical details
    stage, development on the appeal site, even for a single dwelling would erode the
    legibility of the site as a historic mineworkers’ smallholding. The presence of other
    surviving smallholdings elsewhere in the WHS, does not in my view reduce the
    significance of the appeal site to the WHS or provide justification for the further loss
    of an important attribute that contributes to the OUV of the WHS.
16. Whilst the harm is likely to be minor given the scale of the proposed development
    and the extent of the WHS as a whole, the Framework states that any harm to a
    designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight3.
    It also requires that the effect on the asset and its significance is weighed against
    any public benefits, as does Policy 24 of the CLP.
Heritage Balance and conclusion on the main issue
17. I am told the Council’s 5 year housing land supply sits at either 3.8 or 3.9 years.
    Even if I took the higher figure, this is well below the Government’s expectation. In
    light of this, the proposal would provide much needed additional housing. This
    would make a modest but nonetheless useful contribution towards housing supply
    at a time when the Council are failing to deliver sufficient housing. For these
    reasons I give this public benefit moderate weight.
18. There would also be economic and social benefits arising from the construction and
    occupation of the units in terms of jobs and expenditure, including the support for
    local services and facilities in Rosudgeon. The proposal is for a small site which
    could be built out quickly. Given the scale of the proposed development, these
    public benefits attract moderate weight.
19. The space for occupiers to grow food, proposals to repair and replant hedge
    boundaries and the benefits to biodiversity cannot be secured at permission in
    principle stage. Securing a high standard of design at technical details consent
    stage is a general expectation for development rather than a benefit of this
    proposal. Together these considerations attract very limited weight.
20. Policy HE6 of the Framework states that when considering the potential effect of a
    development on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
    should be given to the asset’s conservation. In this context, the collective moderate


3
    Policy HE6 (3) of the National Planning Policy Framework August 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6007416


        weight I have given to the public benefits of the proposal do not outweigh the harm
        to the designated heritage asset of the highest significance.
21. Bringing all this together, I conclude that the site would not be suitable for the
    residential development proposed, having regard to location, proposed land use
    and the amount of development. The proposal would contrary to Policies 1, 3, 23
    and 24 of the CLP, Policies CW5 and HCA1 of the NP and Policy C1 of the Climate
    Emergency Development Plan Document February 2023 which set out the spatial
    strategy for housing together with the need to ensure the best use of land and
    protect Cornwall’s natural and historic environment.
Other considerations
22. In the Red Lane appeal, the Inspector found that the appeal site was outside, albeit
    well-related to the built form of the settlement. They also found harm in respect of
    the effect on the character and appearance of the area and the significance of the
    WHS but gave significant weight to the benefits of the appeal development,
    specifically the provision of 9 affordable dwellings. That proposal is materially
    different to the one before me.
23. The Quaker House appeal4 and the St Austell appeal5 did not result in harm to the
    OUV of the WHS and the St Austell appeal was for development on a much larger
    scale that the proposal before me now. Neither are therefore comparable to the
    appeal development.
24. Policy S5 of the Framework sets out a list of certain forms of development outside
    settlements which should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. In this case, the 5 year housing
    land supply position indicates an unmet need for housing and I have determined
    that the proposal would be physically well-related to the existing settlement. The
    criteria in Policy S5 (j) have therefore been met. I consider this further in the final
    planning balance.
Other Matters
25. I have had regard to the comments of interested parties including but not limited to
    noise and disturbance during construction, whether the proposal would set a
    precedent for further development, highway safety, loss of hedgerows, trees and
    biodiversity and the erosion of dark skies. Some of these are not matters which
    would fall within the scope of consideration for the first stage of permission in
    principle. In any event, I have identified harm in respect of the main issues so do
    not need to consider other matters further.
Final Planning Balance
26. The proposal would be contrary to the development plan. Proposals should be
    determined in accordance with the development plan unless material
    considerations indicate otherwise.
27. There would be collective benefits arising from the provision of up to five new
    homes but in accordance with Policy S5 of the Framework, I must consider whether
    these would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects.

4
    Appeal ref: APPD0840/W/24/3345642 Quaker House, Penstraze, Chacewater, Cornwall TR4 8PE
5
    Appeal ref: APP/D0840/W/23/3332730 Land b/w Aspen Drive and Boscoppa Road, Aspen Drive, St Austell, Cornwall PL25 3JY


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decision 6007416


28. In this case, I have determined that the proposal would be harmful to the WHS, an
    irreplaceable resource and a designated heritage asset of the highest significance.
    Policy HE4 of the Framework states that heritage assets should be conserved in a
    manner appropriate to their significance. In accordance with Policy HE6 of the
    Framework I have given substantial weight to the assets conservation and
    conclude that in this instance the benefits would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effect to the WHS.
Conclusion
29. The proposed development would be contrary to the development plan and there
    are no other considerations which outweigh this finding. Consequently, with
    reference to Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, the
    appeal is dismissed.

Alison Fish
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
