Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 June 2026
by R Standfield BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007680
32 Bell End, Rowley Regis, West Midlands B65 9LR
     • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
     • The appeal is made by Mr Omar Kazimi against the decision of Sandwell Metropolitan Borough
       Council.
     • The application Ref is DC/25/71260.
     • The development proposed is nursery for 10 no. children and flat on first floor.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Application for Costs
2.     An application for costs has been made by Mr Omar Kazimi against Sandwell
       Metropolitan Borough Council. This application is the subject of a separate
       decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The Planning Inspectorate’s ‘Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England’
       (February 2026) makes clear that what is considered by the Inspector at appeal is
       essentially the same scheme that was considered by the Council and by
       interested parties at the application stage. As such, there is no opportunity for
       amendments to the proposed development, and I have determined the appeal on
       the same basis as the Council.
4.     The National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was updated 17 August
       2026. Insofar as the contents are relevant to this appeal, the NPPF remains
       broadly consistent, therefore, I am satisfied no party would be disadvantaged by
       not having the opportunity to comment on the revised NPPF.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
         • the character and appearance of the street scene;
         • the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers; and
         • highway safety.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007680




Reasons
Character and Appearance
6.     The appeal site comprises an extended detached two storey dwelling on the busy
       main road of Bell End within Rowley Regis. Bell End predominantly comprises
       residential properties with occasional commercial uses. A hot food takeaway and
       hairdressers are positioned within close proximity to the appeal site although both
       immediate neighbours are residential. The design of properties varies, comprising
       a mix of detached, semi-detached and terraced dwellings, featuring hipped,
       pitched and gable roofs and differing plot widths. A number of single storey
       extensions are evident. Given that most of the land to the front of the properties
       has been given over to hard surfacing to provide off road parking, the fronts of the
       properties are very visible from the road and pavements.
7.     The two-storey built form extending to the side boundary at the same building line
       as the neighbouring property, no 33 Bell End, would increase the scale and
       massing in a manner that would result in a terracing effect, detrimentally
       undermining the detached character of each property.
8.     The marginal set back of the extension would be largely imperceptible within the
       street scene and the resulting dwelling would feature an off-centre gable marked
       out by the use of facing brick contrasting against the current render. Fenestration
       alterations would reinforce an awkward unbalanced appearance and the use of a
       hipped pitched roof reflective of the existing roof form would have limited effect in
       reducing this massing. The design would result in a bulky, cramped building,
       sitting tight in its plot, which due to the narrow set back does not appear
       subservient to the host property, thereby undermining its original character and
       appearance and the contribution that it makes to the site and street scene in this
       locality.
9.     Whilst there is a variety of building forms and details nearby, the development
       plan seeks to reinforce the positive design features of dwellings in their particular
       context. This approach is consistent with accompanying supplementary planning
       and national planning guidance as part of achieving high quality design. In this
       instance, the enlargement of the property is proposed in a manner that does not
       sufficiently respect the character and appearance of the host dwelling by way of
       scale and siting. The side extension would completely infill the space between the
       properties with contrasting finish increasing its’ prominence. The clear visibility of
       the dwelling to the public highway and pavements would exacerbate this adverse
       impact.
10. For this reason, the proposed development would be materially harmful to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and street scene, failing to adhere
    to guidance within the Revised Residential Design Guide Supplementary Planning
    Document 2014 (SPD) and contrary to Policy ENV3 of the Black Country Core
    Strategy 2011 (the Core Strategy) and Policy SAD EOS9 of the Site Allocations
    and Delivery Development Plan Document 2012 (SADDPD). These policies are
    broadly consistent with the design policies of the National Planning Policy
    Framework 2026 (NPPF) and together seek to ensure a high standard of design
    quality in built development, including how a development relates to the street.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007680


Living Conditions
11. The proposed development would extend across the full width of the enlarged
    dwelling at the rear with an associated increase in the depth of the flank
    elevations to either side.
12. No 33 Bell End extends further back into the plot and therefore would not be
    significantly impacted. No 31 Bell End is shallower and therefore there would be a
    greater increase in the depth of the side elevation in close proximity to the shared
    boundary. However, the degree of enclosure caused by the development would
    be limited, with a wide proportion of remaining openness experienced from both
    the rear windows and rear garden of no 31. Considering the position of the
    proposed development in relation to neighbouring properties, there would be no
    material loss of sunlight or daylight to either rear gardens or habitable rooms.
13. The proposed development would maintain a single three-bedroomed dwelling
    and add a small-scale childcare facility for up to 10 children supported by 2 full
    time employees, operating 7:30am until 6:00pm. The introduction of the day
    nursery would result in a change in the type of noise generated at the site. Noise
    from increased vehicle movements (engines, stereos, the opening and closing of
    doors), and conversations of children and parents/carers at drop off and pick up
    times would be generated as well as daytime noise from young children, including
    their use of external play areas. The nursery would intensify the use of the rear
    garden and whilst there may be schools and other childcare uses within
    residential areas generally, in the specific case before me, the neighbouring
    properties are particularly close.
14. It is reasonable that some young children may live in the nearby residential
    properties and may give rise to occasional noise from external play however the
    introduction of up to 10 young children at the appeal property for extended periods
    of time each weekday would introduce a regularity and intensity of noise over and
    above that which would be expected in a residential area and which would cause
    material harm to the living conditions of nearby residential occupiers. Whilst the
    appellant has suggested the use of planning conditions to control hours of outside
    play and overall management of the site, the imposition of such a condition would
    be unreasonable.
15. Notwithstanding that there would be no significant harm in relation to light and
    outlook, overall, the proposed development would fail to provide acceptable living
    conditions for neighbouring occupiers by way of noise and general disturbance
    and would therefore be contrary to Policy ENV3 of the Core Strategy and Policy
    SAD EOS9 of the SADDPD which seek to ensure high design standards.
16. Further to this, the proposed development fails to meet the expectations of the
    NPPF which requires healthy living conditions for existing and future occupiers,
    including in respect of noise.
Highway Safety
17. The Council’s report references a need for 3 parking spaces for nursery drop off,
    2 spaces for nursery staff and 2 spaces for the flat. The application submission
    confirms that not all employees would be resident on site and it is feasible that
    there may be a need for additional or alternative employees not forming part of
    the on-site household as circumstances change over time. Whilst the Highways

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007680


       Officer considered it feasible to reduce the parking requirement on the basis of a
       planning condition requiring staff members to live in the flat, this would fail to meet
       the tests of reasonableness and enforceability. The 4 spaces proposed would
       therefore represent an under provision of off-street parking to meet normal
       highways requirements.
18. Further to this, whilst in principle it may be possible to both park in the proposed
    dropping off spaces and to rejoin Bell End in forward gear, the tightness of the
    manoeuvring space and brevity of dropping off and picking up are such that
    parents and carers are likely to temporarily park indiscriminately on the side of the
    road.
19. Site management to stagger drop off and pick up times could help to mitigate this
    however such a planning condition would be unenforceable. Displacement of
    parking onto the adjoining highway is therefore considered likely, encouraged by
    the lack of parking restrictions to the road. Such indiscriminate parking would
    likely compromise the access and parking facilities to other neighbouring
    properties which feature similar frontage arrangements, potentially also mounting
    the pavement and partially blocking the public footpath. It could also partially
    obscure road markings instructing drivers to slow on the approach to a bend in the
    road. Whilst safe parking is available in nearby streets, in my judgement, due to
    distance and the brief nature of the parking requirement, it is unlikely to be used
    by the majority of visitors to the site.
20. The appellant has stated that they are willing to pay for the relocation of the bus
    stop and lamppost to ensure that there is unimpeded access and visibility to the
    off-street parking. However, in the absence of any mechanism to enable this to
    take place, I cannot take this into account in coming to my decision.
21. The evidence as it stands does not convince me that the proposed parking and
    access arrangements will be sufficient. Vehicle movements associated with the
    drop off and pick up of up to 10 children would be concentrated around early
    morning and late afternoon time periods that would also coincide with generally
    higher levels of traffic on the road network. Staggered drop off and pick up times
    would be subject to variation, affected by factors such as personal delays, traffic
    congestion and prolonged hand overs.
22. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would fail to comply
    with the NPPF which requires development proposals to provide appropriate
    parking and for proposals to be refused where there would be an unacceptable
    impact on highway safety.
Other Matters
23. The appellant has raised that he received pre-application advice that informed his
    application submission, specifically in relation to the highway and parking
    arrangement. The evidence submitted suggests that the Council’s approach has
    been consistent in this regard and that such advice was offered without prejudice
    and without being binding to the Council’s formal decision-making process. In any
    event, this does not materially affect my consideration which is based upon an
    impartial assessment of the planning merits of the case.
24. Local and high-quality childcare to support working parents provides an essential
    service as well as providing economic activity and employment, resulting in a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007680


       positive contribution to the community. The benefits that the proposed
       development would offer in this respect weigh modestly in favour of the scheme.
25. The property currently comprises a three bedroomed dwelling and the proposed
    development would retain a three bedroomed dwelling albeit in the form of a first
    floor flat. Therefore, there is no net contribution to the housing stock. Although
    introducing a nursery would make a more efficient use of land, this is outweighed
    by the detrimental impacts relating to character and appearance of the area, noise
    and disturbance and highway safety as described above, affording this factor
    limited weight towards the proposal.
26. Whilst both neighbouring occupiers have written raising no objection to the
    proposed nursery use, the comments which they make do not address the harm
    that I have found and I am required to determine the matter on the basis of the
    long term implications beyond the current occupation arrangements of
    neighbouring properties.
Conclusion
27. The proposed development conflicts with the development plan read as a whole.
    There are no material considerations, including the policies of the NPPF, which
    indicate the decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, the appeal should be
    dismissed.



R Standfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
