Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by S F Barnes MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007335
Lawn Cottage, Wakering Road, Southend-on-Sea SS3 0PY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Claire Callaghan of SKArchitects against the decision of Southend-on-
     Sea City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00963/FUL.
•    The development is re-build existing commercial units.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to re-build existing
       commercial units at Lawn Cottage, Wakering Road, Southend-on-Sea SS3 0PY in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/00963/FUL, subject to the
       conditions contained in the Schedule at the end of this decision.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026, after the deadlines had passed for the exchange of
       statements and final comments on this appeal. The main parties have had the
       opportunity to comment upon the revised Framework and I have taken their views
       into consideration in my assessment.
3.     The application form states that the development has already been completed. I
       observed that a building aligning with the one shown in the submitted plans has
       been erected. Whilst I am therefore considering the appeal retrospectively, for
       clarity, I have based my assessment on the submitted plans rather than what has
       been constructed to date.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the
       Green Belt having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan
       policies.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site is a broadly L-shaped parcel of land set to the end of a long
       access track leading from Wakering Road. It is located within the Green Belt and
       separated from the open fields adjoining its north, south and western boundaries
       by a fringe of dense vegetation. The site is largely covered by established
       hardstanding and is understood to have previously been occupied by a single
       storey, open-sided structure used for storage.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007335


6.     The Framework’s national decision-making Policy GB6 sets out that inappropriate
       development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt. Framework Policy GB7
       sets out categories of development that are not inappropriate in the Green Belt,
       and which therefore should not be regarded as harmful to it or be required to
       demonstrate very special circumstances. Paragraph 1(e) of this policy, so far as
       relevant, provides for the “redevelopment of previously developed land […] which
       would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt".
7.     The proposal concerns redevelopment of previously developed land (PDL). The
       appeal building is located beside the site’s boundary, whereas a previous structure
       was set further into it and clear of its boundaries. It is likely to be taller than that
       structure, with an unbroken ridge line that contributes to a significant increase in
       scale and massing by comparison. In addition, there is no dispute that the laying
       out of formal vehicle parking spaces would be required to make the development
       acceptable, which are likely to be occupied during the proposed operational hours.
       As a result, when looking across the site from the part of the access track closest
       to the appeal building, the development and associated parking would have a
       moderate impact on the openness of the Green Belt.
8.     From the surrounding open fields and adjoining public right of way, the appeal site
       is well contained and effectively screened from most views. I observed a limited
       gap in the vegetation when viewing from the north, through which a small section
       of the roof is visible. Even so, its sloping form and finish colour allow it to appear
       as a benign and recessive feature that neither dominates nor jars with its
       surroundings. Accordingly, the development would have only localised and limited
       visual effects on the openness of the Green Belt. Although the proposal would
       have a moderate harmful effect on openness of the Green Belt overall, this would
       not meet the threshold of substantial harm to openness set out in Framework
       policy GB7 paragraph 1(e).
9.     Whilst the Framework seeks to maintain Green Belts and their openness, it also
       supports certain redevelopment of PDL, as set out above. Policy KP1 of the
       Council’s Core Strategy (2007), which seeks to maintain the openness of the
       Green Belt, does not however contemplate the re-use of PDL. It is therefore
       inconsistent with the Framework’s national decision making policies as they apply
       to this appeal. Despite the proposal’s conflict with Policy KP1, in accordance with
       Framework Annex A, Paragraph 1, that conflict carries very limited weight in my
       assessment and is not determinative.
10. For the reasons given above, I therefore conclude that the development would not
    be inappropriate in the Green Belt having regard to the National Planning Policy
    Framework and relevant development plan policies.
Other Matters
11. I have a statutory duty under section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to have special regard to the desirability of
    preserving listed buildings or their settings or any features of special architectural
    or historic interest which they possess. Lawn Cottage, a grade II listed building,
    adjoins the site close to the shared access track’s entrance at Wakering Road.
    The listed building is a small timber framed and weatherboarded cottage which
    dates to the 18th century with gabled dormer windows.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007335


12. As it relates to this appeal, the significance of this listed building derives from its
    architectural interest at the Wakering Road streetscene and in immediate close-
    range views along part of the shared access track, from where it is best
    appreciated. The appeal development is located a significant distance away and
    due to its scale and the presence of intervening built-form, it does not feature in
    those perspectives of the listed building. Consequently, the setting of this listed
    building is preserved.
13. The Council questions the accessibility of the appeal site’s location for use as a
    light industrial unit. However, its Highways team did not raise any technical
    objection on trip generation, and there is no compelling evidence before me to
    suggest that the development would generate a significant amount of movement
    relative to its rural fringe context. I therefore see no reason to reach a different
    conclusion on this matter.
Conditions
14. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council against the tests set
    out in the Framework and advice in Planning Practice Guidance. I have made such
    amendments as necessary to comply with those and in the interests of precision.
15. A condition identifying the approved plans is necessary in the interests of certainty.
    To safeguard the living conditions of surrounding occupiers in general, it is also
    necessary to restrict the use of the development (Condition 2), its operating hours
    (3) and require adequate provision for storing and managing waste (7). Conditions
    are imposed relating to energy efficiency and sustainability measures, parking and
    electric vehicle charging provision, and cycle parking storage are submitted,
    approved and implemented. These are necessary to ensure a proportionate
    contribution is made to reducing carbon emissions (4), in the interests of highway
    safety (5) and also to encourage sustainable modes of transport (5 and 6).
16. A strict timetable for compliance is required for Conditions 4 to 7 as permission is
    to be granted retrospectively, and so it is not possible to use a negatively worded
    condition to secure the approval and implementation of those matters prior to
    development first taking place. However, none of these matters go to the heart of
    the acceptability of the operational development for which permission is sought.
    The conditions secure certain mitigations which the Council considers can be
    acceptably retrofitted. There is no evidence before me which indicates that
    continuing to use the appeal building would prevent those measures being
    installed or make them ineffective. Consequently, the inclusion of sanctions
    requiring the use to cease, as suggested by the Council, would not be
    proportionate in this case.
17. I have amended the timetable suggested by the Council in respect of Condition 4,
    relating to energy efficiency and sustainability measures. Whilst no specific period
    has been suggested, it is reasonable to conclude from the appellant’s comments
    that a longer period for compliance is necessary to ensure that it is not subject to
    an onerous timetable for undertaking any measures required.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

S F Barnes                                 INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6007335


Schedule of Conditions
1) The development hereby approved shall be retained in accordance with the
   approved drawing Ref. 882P03 REV E.

2) The development hereby approved, shall only be used for purposes falling within
   light industrial use falling within Use Class E(g)(iii) of The Town and Country
   Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) and shall not be used for any
   other purpose, including any change of use permitted under the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 2015 (as amended) or in any
   provision equivalent to that Class in any statutory instrument revoking and re-
   enacting these Orders, with or without modification.

3) Machinery shall be operated, processes shall be carried out and deliveries shall be
   taken at or despatched from the site only between 0700 - 1900 Mondays -
   Saturdays, and not at any time on Sundays or on Bank or Public Holidays.

4) Within 2 calendar months from the date of this permission, details of energy
   efficiency and other sustainability measures to be included in the development,
   including provision of at least 10% of the development’s energy needs from onsite
   renewable sources, decentralised renewable and/or low carbon energy sources,
   shall be submitted for approval to the local planning authority. The approved
   sustainability measures shall then be carried out fully in accordance with the
   approved details within a further 6 calendar months from the date of approval and
   the development retained approved thereafter for its lifetime.

5) Within 2 calendar months from the date of this decision, details of the spaces to be
   laid out for the parking of 2 vehicles, of which 1 space shall be fitted with active
   electric vehicle charging infrastructure, and for vehicles to turn so that they may
   enter and leave the site in forward gear shall be submitted for approval to the local
   planning authority. The car parking shall be laid out and the electric vehicle charging
   infrastructure installed in accordance with those details within 1 calendar month of
   the approval of those details. Those spaces shall thereafter be kept free for such
   purposes only and the development maintained in accordance with those details for
   its lifetime.

6) Within 2 calendar months of the date of this decision, details of secure and covered
   cycle storage facilities for no fewer than 2 bicycles shall be submitted for approval to
   the local planning authority. The storage facilities shall then be made available for
   use within 1 calendar month from the approval of those details. The development
   shall thereafter be maintained in accordance with those details for its lifetime.

7) Within 2 calendar months from the date of this decision, details of covered and
   secure refuse and recycling storage facilities and a Waste Management Strategy for
   the development hereby approved shall be submitted for approval to the local
   planning authority. The approved storage facilities shall then be made available for
   use and the site shall operate in accordance with the approved Waste Management
   Strategy within 1 calendar month of the approval of those details. The development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007335


    shall thereafter be maintained and operated in accordance with those details for its
    lifetime.

End of Schedule.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
