Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Stuart Willis BA Hons MSc PGCE MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6007175
281-291 and The Old Joinery, Bournemouth Road, Poole BH14 9AH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Paul Sheehy against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole
     Council.
•    The application Ref is APP/24/00498/P.
•    The development proposed is to demolish the existing buildings and erect 15 dwellings with
     associated parking and access.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted to demolish the
      existing buildings and erect 15 dwellings with associated parking and access. at
      281-291 and The Old Joinery, Bournemouth Road, Poole, BH14 9AH in
      accordance with the terms of the application, Ref APP/24/00498/P, subject to the
      conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by Paul Sheehy against Bournemouth
      Christchurch and Poole Council. This application is the subject of a separate
      Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.    The scheme was amended prior to determination by the Council including
      reducing the number of units proposed. Therefore, I have taken the description of
      development from the decision notice.
4.    Outline planning permission is sought with matters of access, layout and scale to
      be considered. Landscaping and appearance are reserved matters, and I have
      regarded these elements on the plans as illustrative.
5.    As part of their appeal submission, the appellant provided a unilateral undertaking
      (UU) which relates to contributions towards affordable housing, mitigation against
      effects on protected sites and in relation to biodiversity net gain. The Council
      subsequently confirmed that they no longer wished to pursue the refusal reasons
      relating to these issues.
Main Issues
6.    The main issues are:



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6007175


      •    Whether the proposal would provide appropriate living conditions for future
           occupiers with regard to external space and outlook for Block A; and
      •    The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of nearby occupiers with
           regard to privacy and outlook.
Reasons
Living conditions – future occupiers
7.    There are no adopted guidelines or standards for the area in relation to the size of
      outdoor spaces required for properties. The rear outdoor spaces proposed for the
      occupiers of units in Block A would not be overly spacious and given their location,
      would not be overly bright areas at certain times of the year with tall retaining walls
      behind.
8.    Nevertheless, they do provide some level of private outdoor space with the layout
      and shape of these areas allowing them to be usable spaces by occupiers.
      Although smaller than the linear gardens of the existing properties at the site, the
      size of the outdoor areas are comparable to some others in the area. They are a
      reasonable size and would still achieve sufficient natural light to prevent them
      being uninviting and bleak areas. Although the outlook to the rear would be of the
      large retaining wall behind, landscaping could soften the appearance of this.
9.    Therefore, the proposal would provide appropriate living conditions for future
      occupiers with regard to external space and outlook for Block A. It would be in
      accordance with Policy PP27 of the Poole Local Plan where it requires schemes to
      provide satisfactory external space and amenity for new occupiers.
Living conditions – nearby occupiers
10. While there may be in other areas, the evidence indicates that the Council does
    not have adopted guidance requiring a specific separation distance between
    properties or gardens from windows.
11. The elevation plans provided show windows at upper floor levels to the rear of
    Block A. This includes ones for the main living accommodation, facing towards
    properties and their gardens behind. In addition, front windows are shown near the
    boundary with the adjacent properties along Bournemouth Road.
12. However, there are changes in levels between the proposed and existing
    buildings, more so to the rear of the site which would mean many views would be
    angled and existing mature vegetation would filter views. Moreover, while scale is
    to be considered, appearance is not. The position, type and size of openings,
    including the type of glazing and opening are not to be confirmed at this stage with
    such elements on the plans being illustrative only.
13. Other properties are located further away from the appeal buildings. Given the
    orientation any views would be angled and boundary treatments and landscape
    features would help in filtering or preventing close range direct views into nearby
    properties and their gardens. The internal layout, form and position of openings
    would be subject to reserved matters, and any such concerns can be assessed at
    that stage.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6007175


14. There are properties near the appeal site to both sides and the rear. Nonetheless,
    subject to appropriate design and internal layout, sufficient privacy for the adjacent
    occupiers could be retained.
15. The scale of the buildings is to be considered. Block A would be located at the rear
    of the site. It would extend over a far greater amount of the site than the existing
    commercial buildings. As above, landscape features would filter and partly screen
    views from 7 Vale Road as they currently do of the existing building. Having visited
    this property, while Block A would be seen from that property and garden, the
    outlook would not be significantly altered or harmed as a result. Further details of
    landscaping, including protection measures and planting could be provided at
    reserved matters stage.
16. The outlook from the windows facing the appeal site and gardens at 3 and 4
    Sycamore Mews (No 3 and No 4) is currently largely open as the existing
    commercial buildings do not extend as far as Block A would. Having visited No 3,
    Block A would undoubtedly feature in the outlook from the rear rooms and outdoor
    areas of it and No 4. Notwithstanding this, there would still be some separation
    from the boundary of the site and the difference in levels mean that only the upper
    part of Block A would be prominent and part of it screened by the landscape
    features. As a result, there would still be an outlook over and above the proposed
    building. These factors would ensure a satisfactory outlook would still be
    maintained for occupiers of these properties.
17. The appeal buildings would be seen from other nearby properties. Nevertheless,
    although of a different size and position, there are already several properties and
    buildings on the site that feature in the outlook of these nearby occupiers. Large
    blocks of built form are typical in this urban area where there is often limited
    separation between buildings, and a similar outlook already exists.
18. The appearance, landscaping and materials of the scheme could also help soften
    the proposal. As such, the proposal would not result in an unacceptable outlook for
    nearby occupiers.
19. Therefore, the proposal would not harm the living conditions of nearby occupiers
    with regard to privacy and outlook. It would accord with Policy PP27 of the Poole
    Local Plan where it requires schemes to not result in a harmful impact upon
    amenity for local residents.
Other Matters
20. Land registry information has been provided to indicate that the owners of the site
    are party to the Unilateral Undertaking provided, other than the Council. The
    operative date, which relates to development commenced on the land, is defined
    as the works on land outside of the Council ownership. That area does not include
    any of the dwellings themselves. The Council are not an ‘owner’ as defined by the
    agreement for the purposes of the contributions and commencement. This
    provides sufficient security for securing the provision of the financial contributions.
21. There are services, facilities and public transport options near the site. The
    proposal also includes cycle parking and car parking provision. The bus stop is
    also to be retained and basement parking no longer included. Given the context of
    the site, the provision on site would be sufficient, and the scheme would not lead
    to additional on street parking pressures. It is not for the proposal to address any

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6007175


      existing parking issues. There is no compelling evidence that the layout would
      prevent emergency vehicles using the site.
22. The proposed blocks of built form would be larger than the existing ones on site.
    However, there is no consistent type or size of property and examples exist of
    similar scale buildings in the area. This is also the case for the size, position and
    type of outdoor space provided and the building line. Again, while different to the
    existing layout the proposal would not appear cramped or incongruous with the
    surrounding area and there are buildings located to the rear of others now at the
    site and nearby.
23. Elements of the proposal would be close to existing landscape features, and some
    would be removed. However, details have been provided of likely tree protection
    measures and landscaping would be assessed at the reserved matters stage.
    Proposed planting could also soften the appearance of the scheme, including
    retaining walls and to compensate for any loss of features. Significant net gain has
    been outlined and would be secured by conditions.
24. Planning permission does not overrule any existing covenants over the right of
    way that forms part of the site and is currently used as one of the accesses to
    certain properties or party wall act requirements. There is no clear evidence that
    the proposal would lead to overloading or that there is an existing lack of provision
    of infrastructure in the area. Similarly, it has not been shown that the plans
    provided are inaccurate and if the development were not carried out in accordance
    with the approved plans, then the Council would be able to investigate and take
    action if necessary.
25. There would be noise and disturbance during the works, though there would be a
    construction management plan to reduce such impacts and the works would be
    temporary. There are existing commercial premises and residential properties on
    the site that would result in some noise and disturbance including access to the
    rear of properties. As such, the proposal would not lead to significant additional or
    harmful effects in this regard.
26. There is no upper limit on housing provision and no compelling case that the type
    of units proposed are not in need or that the loss of the existing ones is in greater
    demand. The position of windows in relation to site safety would be looked at when
    appearance is considered. Energy requirements for the proposed units are
    conditioned.
27. Information was provided regarding biodiversity, and conditions are imposed
    regarding mitigation and enhancement measures. The evidence provided indicate
    that subject to conditions, appropriate drainage could be provided, and the scheme
    would not lead to increased risks of flooding.
28. There would be some effects on daylight and sunlight at nearby properties and
    their gardens. However, given the separation distances involved, changes in land
    levels and existing built form at the site along with boundary treatments and
    landscape features, the effects would not result in unacceptable living conditions
    for the occupiers in what is an urban area.
29. Any effect on property values has not been evidenced, and this matter does not
    alter my findings on the main issues or overall conclusion.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6007175


Planning Obligation and Habitats Regulations
30. Policy PP11 of the Poole Local Plan seeks to secure contributions towards
    affordable housing for schemes of this number of units and allows financial
    contributions in lieu of on-site provision in order to meet minimum targets and
    maximise affordable delivery. In line with Policy PP40, a financial viability
    assessment was provided.
31. The UU secures a financial contribution towards affordable housing based on the
    viability information provided as part of the application, ensuring it was to the
    appropriate scale and directly related to the proposal. There is no clear evidence
    to lead me to a different finding from that of the Council in that the amount was the
    correct surplus to apply. Given the policy basis and identified need the contribution
    is necessary. The obligation complies with the tests in Regulation 122(2) of the
    Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 (CIL Regs) and in the National
    Planning Policy Framework (Framework).
32. There is also an obligation securing a contribution towards biodiversity net gain
    (BNG) monitoring. There would be significant net gain and tree planting on site as
    part of the proposal and trees with a target condition. Monitoring would be
    necessary over the 30-year and 50-year periods to ensure features are provided
    and maintained. The scale of the contribution is based on a breakdown of the
    costs involved for the different types of monitoring and their frequency, so directly
    related to the scheme. PPG Biodiversity Net Gain sets out that planning
    obligations may be needed in relation to the maintenance and monitoring of
    significant onsite habitat enhancements. The obligation complies with the tests in
    the CIL Regs and in the Framework
33. The appeal site is located within 5km of the Dorset Heathlands Special Protection
    Area and Ramsar Site, and part of the Dorset Heaths candidate Special Area of
    Conservation. The Dorset Heathlands Planning Framework 2020-2025
    Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) sets out that the area is an extensive
    network of lowland heath within southeast Dorset that are recognised for their
    national and international importance for nature conservation hosting various
    protected priority habitats and species.
34. The SPD indicates that public access to lowland heathland, from nearby
    development, has led to an increase in wildfires, damaging recreational uses, the
    introduction of incompatible plants and animals, loss of vegetation and soil erosion
    and disturbance by humans and their pets have an adverse effect on the
    heathland ecology.
35. The proposal would lead to additional dwellings and occupiers and therefore
    increase the likelihood of this occurring. The proposal is not directly connected
    with or necessary for the management of the designated sites. Having taken a
    precautionary approach, the proposed development is likely to have a significant
    adverse effect on the integrity of the designated sites, when considered in
    combination.
36. The site is also within the Poole Harbour Recreational Zone for the Poole Harbour
    Special Protection Area (PHSPA). The PHSPA is designated in part in order to
    protect the rare vulnerable and migratory bird species which are important
    populations of regularly occurring species and migratory species. The Poole
    Harbour Recreation 2019-2024 Supplementary Planning Document (SPD2) states

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6007175


      that public access in and around the harbour, and various forms of recreational
      activities can disturb the PHSPA birds in the harbour. These activities include
      sailing, walking, dogs and bait digging along the shoreline. Nitrogen Reduction in
      Poole Harbour Supplementary Planning Document (SPD3) refers to increasing
      nitrogen levels from sewage and agriculture contributing to the growth of algal
      mats in the Harbour, restricting the growth, distribution and variety of important
      food available for wading birds.
37. The proposal would lead to additional dwellings and occupiers and therefore
    increase the likelihood of this occurring. As such, the proposed development is
    likely to have a significant adverse effect on the integrity of the designated site,
    when considered in combination.
38. In these circumstances, the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 (the Habitats Regulations) require that an Appropriate Assessment (AA) is
    carried out.
39. The SPD sets out a 2-part strategy for proposals within the 400m-5km zone
    including Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM). This includes
    contributions to secure the day-to-day costs of helping local people to alter harmful
    behaviour through raising awareness of the issues and value of the protected
    sites. This is in part from employing wardens to manage visitor pressures on the
    heathland and delivering education programmes in local schools. SAMMs also pay
    for the ongoing monitoring of a sample of heathlands and the effects of new
    development and whether this strategy is effective. The SPD sets out a rate per
    house for this.
40. The SPD2 again sets out a 2-part strategy which includes SAMM. The set rate per
    house goes towards the day-to-day costs of raising awareness of the issues,
    which includes employing a project coordinator and a warden to manage visitor
    pressures on the Poole Harbour SPA and provide information. SAMMs also pay
    for ongoing monitoring of the effects of new development and whether this strategy
    is effective.
41. The UU includes contributions as set out in the SPD and SPD2 towards the Dorset
    Harbour Mitigation Strategic Access Management and Dorset Heathlands
    Mitigation Strategic Access Management.
42. An AA was undertaken during the application by the Council. As part of the appeal
    comments were sought from Natural England who stated that they are content that
    the proposed measures would be sufficient to avoid an adverse impact to the
    integrity of the sites in relation to the specified qualifying features.
43. The information before me indicates that the impact of the development could
    therefore be mitigated. This would avoid adverse effects on the integrity of the
    designated sites and accord with the Habitats Regulations.
44. These would be necessary to make the development acceptable given the effects
    otherwise, directly related to the development and is reasonably related in scale
    and kind to the development being based on the nature and size of the scheme.
    The obligation complies with the relevant tests in the CIL Regs and the
    Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6007175


45. The site is within the 13.8km-15km zone of the New Forest SAC, New Forest SPA
    and New Forest Ramsar site. The New Forest SPA was designated for its
    breeding and over-wintering bird species of European importance. The New Forest
    SAC for its habitats and non-avian species of European importance. This
    designation reflects the New Forest’s unique mosaic of habitats, including eight
    heathland, grassland, woodland, wetland, bog and open water habitats. The New
    Forest Ramsar was designated for the international importance of the site as a
    wetland, supporting wetland flora and fauna of international importance. These can
    all be adversely affected by increased recreational pressures of people using the
    sites.
46. The Planning Position Statement: New Forest SAC, SPA and Ramsar site
    November 2025 sets out that mitigation should be assessed on a case-by-case
    basis and would potentially be relevant for any site of around 200 or more
    dwellings. Natural England has confirmed that proposals for large-scale residential
    developments (200 or more units) may have a likely significant effect on the site’s
    qualifying features through increased recreational impacts. However, due to the
    number of dwellings involved Natural England agrees that no mitigation is
    required. Given the scale of the scheme and distance from the New Forest sites,
    the proposal would not have a likely significant effect on them and therefore no
    mitigation is required.
Conditions
47. In addition to the standard time limit conditions, I have imposed one requiring
    submission of the remaining reserved matters as this is an outline permission.
    Conditions requiring that the development is carried out in accordance with the
    approved plans, so far as they relate to the matters to be approved are imposed
    for clarity. Floor and roof plans are not included as they would fix elements of the
    external appearance such as the location of openings. Elevation plans are
    conditioned with regard to scale only and not the appearance of the building as
    that is a reserved matter.
48. Details of heights to ridge and eaves are conditioned to protect the living
    conditions of nearby occupiers. The approved plans provide sufficient certainty of
    the widths and lengths of the buildings. Levels details are required to protect living
    conditions and the character and appearance f the area.
49. Conditions relating to detail and provision of the internal routes and access,
    closing of existing accesses and visibility splays are required to prevent harm to
    highway safety. A Construction Management Plan is required for the same reason
    and to protect living conditions. Cycle facilities are conditioned to ensure
    alternative modes of transport are encouraged.
50. Conditions relating to land contamination and a Construction Environment
    Management Plan are imposed to prevent risk to health and pollution. To protect
    the living conditions of nearby occupiers a condition is imposed in relation to
    boundary treatments. Details of surface water drainage are conditioned to ensure
    appropriate provision and prevent increased risks from flooding. To reduce carbon
    emissions a condition is imposed requiring details of renewable energy measures.
    Bin storage details are necessary to prevent harm to the character of the area.
    Details of biodiversity enhancements are conditioned to provide full details and
    timings and are necessary to promote biodiversity and as one avoiding clearance


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6007175


      during bird breeding season. In the interest of biodiversity, due to the significant
      on-site gains, a condition is imposed for a Habitats Management and Monitoring
      Plan. The development may not be begun unless a biodiversity gain plan has been
      submitted to and approved by the local planning authority under the deemed
      condition.
51. A condition relating to tree protection measures is not necessary as that would
    form part of the landscaping reserved matter and the plan referred to is only said
    to be draft. Landscape maintenance and soil retention details could also be
    assessed at the reserved matters stage so such conditions are not imposed here.
    Details of external materials similarly relate to the reserved matter of appearance.
Conclusion
52. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.




Stuart Willis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6007175


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       Details of the appearance and landscaping hereinafter called "the reserved
              matters" shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority before any development takes place and the development shall be
              carried out as approved.
     2)       Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
              planning authority not later than 3 years from the date of this permission.
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than 2 years
              from the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans insofar as they relate to access, layout and
              scale only:
                   •        PL_00_002 Proposed Location Bournemouth Road
                   •        PL_00_001 Revision PL07 Proposed Site Plan
                   •        PL_00_201 Rev PL04 Proposed Site Elevation- Detail
                   •        PL_00_210 Rev PL01 Proposed Cycle Storage-Details
                   •        PL_00_300 Rev PL05 Proposed Sketch Site Section
     5)       The height of the proposed buildings hereby approved shall be as follows:
                   •    Block A: Ridge level: 49.100m, Eaves level: 47.100m
                   •    Block B: Ridge level: 50.500m, Eaves level: 48.500m
                   •    Block C: Ridge level: 50.500m, Eaves level: 48.500m
                        All levels relate to AOD.
     6)       No development shall commence until details of existing and proposed site
              levels have been submitted to and agreed in writing by the local planning
              authority. The development shall then be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details.
     7)       No development shall commence until a Construction Traffic Management
              Plan, including on site working and delivery times has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved
              Construction Traffic Management Plan shall be adhered to throughout the
              construction period for the development.
     8)       No development shall commence until an assessment of the nature and
              extent of contamination affecting the application site area has been submitted
              to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. This assessment
              must be carried out by or under the direction of a suitably qualified competent
              person in accordance with BS10175 (2011) Investigation of Potentially
              Contaminated Sites Code of Practice and shall assess any contamination on
              the site, whether or not it originates on the site. The report of the findings
              shall include:
              i)    a desk top study to identify all previous uses at the site and potential
                    contaminants associated with those uses and the impacts from those
                    contaminants on land and controlled waters. The desk study shall



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      9
Appeal Decision 6007175


                      establish a conceptual site model (CSM) which identifies and assesses
                      all identified potential source, pathway, and receptor linkages;
              ii)     an intrusive investigation to assess the extent, scale and nature of
                      contamination which may be present, if identified as required by the
                      desk top study;
              iii)    an assessment of the potential risks to:
                      •     human health,
                      •     groundwater and surface waters
                      •     adjoining land
                      •     property (existing or proposed) including buildings, crops, livestock,
                            pets, woodland and service lines and pipes,
                      •     ecological systems,
                      •     archaeological sites and ancient monuments; and
                      •     any other receptors identified at (i)
              iv)     an appraisal of remedial options, and justification for the preferred
                      remedial option(s).
     9)       No development shall commence until (following the risk assessment) land
              affected by contamination is found which poses risks identified as
              unacceptable in the risk assessment, until a detailed remediation scheme
              shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The scheme shall include an appraisal of remediation options,
              identification of the preferred option(s), the proposed remediation objectives
              and remediation criteria, and a description and programme of the works to be
              undertaken including the verification plan. The remediation scheme shall be
              sufficiently detailed and thorough to ensure that upon completion the site will
              not qualify as contaminated land under Part IIA of the Environmental
              Protection Act 1990 in relation to its intended use. The approved remediation
              scheme shall be carried out and upon completion a verification report by a
              suitably qualified contaminated land practitioner shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority before the development is
              occupied.
     10)      Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the
              approved development that was not previously identified shall be reported
              immediately to the local planning authority. Development on the part of the
              site affected shall be suspended and a risk assessment carried out and
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. Where
              unacceptable risks are found remediation and verification schemes shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. These
              approved schemes shall be carried out before the development or relevant
              phase of development is resumed or continued.
     11)      No development shall commence until a Demolition and Construction
              Environmental Management Plan (DCEMP) has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The development
              including demolition shall only be demolished and constructed in accordance
              with the approved DCEMP.
     12)      No development shall commence until a Habitat Management and Monitoring
              Plan (HMMP) for on-site biodiversity net gain has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The HMMP shall include:


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      10
Appeal Decision 6007175


              (i) the habitats to be created, enhanced, retained and managed;
              (ii) management objectives and target habitat conditions;
              (iii) management prescriptions and works schedules;
              (iv) monitoring methodologies and reporting intervals;
              (v) adaptive management and remedial measures;
              (vi) the persons or organisation responsible for implementation;
              (vii) a timetable for implementation; and
              (viii) long-term management and monitoring arrangements for a period of no
              less than 30 years and no less than 50 years for the proposed trees.
              The development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the
              approved HMMP, and the habitats shall be managed and monitored in
              accordance with its provisions for the duration of the management period.
     13)      No development shall commence until details of a scheme for the disposal of
              surface water, including future maintenance, management and an
              implementation timetable have been submitted to and agreed in writing by
              the local planning authority. The development shall be implemented and
              thereafter managed and maintained in accordance with the approved details.
     14)      No development shall commence until details of biodiversity enhancements,
              including a timetable for implementation and management and maintenance,
              based on the recommendations of the ‘Preliminary Roost Appraisal (PRA)
              Report 281-291 Bournemouth Road, Poole, Dorset, BH14 9AH’ by ABR
              Ecology Ltd have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The development shall be carried out, maintained and
              managed in accordance with the approved details.
     15)      No dwelling shall be occupied until the visibility splays shown on plan
              reference Proposed Site Plan PL_00_001 Revision PL07 have been provided
              free of any obstruction exceeding 0.6m in height and shall be retained as
              such thereafter.
     16)      No dwelling shall be occupied until boundary treatments for that dwelling
              have been erected in accordance with details that have first been submitted
              to and agreed in writing by the local planning authority and shall thereafter be
              retained in perpetuity.
     17)      No dwelling shall be occupied until details of measures to provide 20% of the
              predicted future energy use of that dwelling from onsite renewable sources
              have been provided in accordance with details including maintenance that
              have first been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. Thereafter they shall be retained and managed in accordance with
              the approved details in perpetuity.
     18)      No dwelling shall be occupied until the existing access points to the adjacent
              highway have been closed in accordance with details that have first been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
     19)      No dwelling shall be occupied until the site access, turning and parking areas
              shown on approved plans have been fully constructed and laid out in
              accordance with the approved plans and details of levels, sections, surface
              materials and lighting that have first been submitted to and approved in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6007175


              writing by the local planning authority. Thereafter, these areas shall be kept
              available for their proposed use at all times.
     20)      No dwelling shall be occupied until the facilities for cycle storage for that unit
              have been provided in accordance with plan reference Proposed Site Plan
              PL_00_001 Revision PL07 and details that have first been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The facilities shall
              thereafter be made permanently available for the occupants of the unit for
              that purpose.
     21)      No dwelling shall be occupied until the facilities for bin storage and collection
              points for that unit have been provided in accordance plan reference
              Proposed Site Plan PL_00_001 Revision PL07 and details that have first
              been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              The facilities shall thereafter be made permanently available for the
              occupants of the unit for that purpose.
     22)      Vegetation clearance shall only be carried out outside of bird breeding
              season of 1st of March to 31st of August, inclusive.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    12
