Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by P Brennan BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008689
Primrose Farm, Bradcutts Lane, Cookham Dean, Maidenhead SL6 9TL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Steven Taylor against the decision of the Royal Borough of Windsor and
     Maidenhead.
•    The application Ref 26/00116/OUT was approved on 16 April 2026, and planning permission was
     granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is Outline planning application, with all matters reserved apart from
     scale, for the demolition of the existing workshop and store and the erection of one two-bedroom
     dwelling.
•    The conditions in dispute are:
     4) The use of the dwelling hereby permitted shall be occupied only by Mr Steven Taylor.
     5) When the premises cease to be occupied by Mr Steven Taylor, the residential use hereby
     permitted shall cease and all materials and equipment brought on to the premises in connection with
     the use shall be removed.
     6) No development shall take place until details of a scheme to restore the land to its condition
     before the development took place (or such other restoration as agreed in writing by the local
     planning authority) at the end of the period for which the site is occupied by those permitted to do so
     has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. These details shall
     include an implementation programme. The restoration works shall be carried out in accordance with
     the approved details.
•    The reasons given for the conditions are:
     4) To ensure an acceptable living environment for future occupiers. Relevant Policies -
     Borough Local Plan QP3 and EP1.
     5) To ensure an acceptable living environment for future occupiers. Relevant Policies -
     Borough Local Plan QP3 and EP1.
     6) To ensure an acceptable living environment for future occupiers. Relevant Policies -
     Borough Local Plan QP3 and EP1.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref 26/00116/OUT for outline
       planning application, with all matters reserved apart from scale, for the demolition
       of an existing landscape contractors’ workshop and store and the erection of a
       two-bedroom dwelling at Primrose Farm, Maidenhead SL6 9TL granted on 16 April
       2026 by the Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead, is varied by deleting
       conditions 4, 5 and 6 and substituting condition 4 with the following condition:
       1) The dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied other than by a person
       solely or mainly employed in the commercial landscaping use operating from the
       site, or a widow or widower or surviving civil partner of such a person, and to any
       resident dependants.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008689


Application for costs
2.     An application for an award of costs was made by Mr Steven Taylor against the
       Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead. This application will be the subject of
       a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Section 79(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 enables me to allow or
       dismiss the appeal or reverse or vary any part of the decision (whether the appeal
       relates to that part or not) and I may deal with the proposal as if it had been made
       to me in the first instance. This means that if I determine that a condition should be
       changed or amended in some way, the appeal is allowed regardless of whether
       this reflects all the amendments sought by the appellant.
Background and Main Issues
4.     Outline planning permission, with all matters reserved except scale, has been
       granted for the demolition of an existing workshop and store and the erection of a
       two-bedroom dwelling.
5.     The appeal relates to conditions that restrict the occupation of the dwelling to the
       appellant; requires the use to cease and all materials and equipment removed
       should the dwelling no longer be occupied by the appellant; and requires details of
       a scheme and implementation programme to restore the land to its original
       condition at the end of the occupation of the dwelling by the appellant. The
       appellant’s submission advises that a revised condition 4 would render conditions
       5 and 6 unnecessary. The proposed revised condition would restrict occupation to
       a person solely or mainly employed in the commercial landscaping use operating
       from the site or a widow or widower of such a person, and to any resident
       dependants.
6.     The main issues are:
           •    whether condition 4 is reasonable and necessary having regard to providing
                an acceptable living environment for future occupiers; and
           •    the effect of removing conditions 5 and 6 having regard to providing an
                acceptable living environment for future occupiers.
Reasons
Condition 4
7.     The appellant currently operates a landscaping contractor business from the
       appeal site. Outline planning permission was granted for a new dwelling and
       included the demolition of 133m2 of commercial floorspace with the retention of
       around 290m2. The approved dwelling is intended for occupation by the appellant.
8.     The Council raises concerns regarding the arrangement between the commercial
       and residential uses should the land become severed in the future, as noise from
       the retained commercial floorspace may cause substantial noise disturbance and
       may jeopardise the future of the business.
9.     Whilst the appellant originally agreed to the imposition of a personal condition, a
       different version of the proposed condition, which was less restrictive, was

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008689


       discussed with the Council. The different wording comprised “The dwelling hereby
       permitted shall not be occupied other than by a person solely or mainly employed
       in the commercial landscaping use operating from the site, or a widow or widower
       of such a person, and to any resident dependants”. However, the Council
       subsequently determined that the condition put forward by the appellant would not
       be enforceable or reasonable as it would prevent the sale, lease and even
       cessation of the commercial use.
10. The application was accompanied by a noise assessment that assessed sound
    arising from the landscape contractor’s yard and its effect on occupiers of the
    proposed dwelling, which is to be used by the operator of the business. The
    background sound level was recorded at 35dB. The assessment identifies that the
    general sound levels recorded at both monitoring points during the assessment
    period were due to environmental sound rather than sound from the existing use
    on site. These were calculated at 48dB. Two periods were assessed whereby the
    existing use of the site raised the recorded levels to 53dB. The assessment
    concludes that the increase above background of 13 and 18dB respectively could
    lead to a significant adverse effect depending on the context.
11. The assessment concluded that the absolute sound levels are low and the
    character of the sounds reflect a rural area. As the dwelling would be newly
    constructed and the occupier would be associated with the noise source rather
    than being separate uses, the assessed effect would be low. The Council’s
    Environmental Protection Officer concurred with the assessment’s conclusions.
12. Consequently, there is an identified need to ensure that the dwelling and the
    commercial use on site remain linked to safeguard the living conditions of future
    occupiers and ensure that future occupiers are not harmfully affected through
    noise from the adjacent landscape contractor commercial operation. However, it is
    not necessary to restrict the occupation solely to the appellant and this could also
    allow occupation by dependants or partners or a differing employee of the
    business.
13. A modified condition, restricting occupation to a person solely or mainly employed
    in the landscape contractor business occupying the adjacent premises, or a
    widow, widower or civil partner of such a person, or any resident dependents (as
    set out at paragraph 1) would be reasonable and necessary to ensure acceptable
    living conditions are provided for future occupiers. However, I have not widened
    the commercial use from that currently occupying the site (a landscape contractor
    business) as the adjusted condition would allow a different landscape commercial
    operation to commence without a further assessment of noise needing to be
    undertaken.
14. The development, with the modified condition, would comply with Policies QP3
    and EP1 of the Borough Local Plan 2013-2033.
Conditions 5 and 6
15. Conditions 5 and 6 require the development to be removed from site and the site
    to be restored to its former condition if the approved dwelling is no longer occupied
    by the appellant, to ensure an acceptable living environment is provided for future
    occupiers. However, the dwelling is tied to the existing business on site. Therefore,
    without permission to vary or remove the personal occupation condition, no other
    occupier could use the dwelling, and it would have to be demolished. If this were to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008689


       occur, there would be no future occupiers on the site whose living conditions would
       require protection, rendering the conditions as unnecessary.
16. The conditions are also overzealous and unreasonable in their requirements. The
    permanent dwelling was considered as not inappropriate development within the
    Green Belt and acceptable in all other respects, bar the occupation restriction due
    to the associated adjacent noise. The identified concern of the Council relates to
    the relationship between the land uses rather than the dwelling itself. As such, the
    imposition of a condition linking the business use to the occupation of the dwelling
    fully addresses the concerns of the Council. Accordingly, the conditions requiring
    the demolition of the dwelling and restoration of the land, should the business use
    cease are not necessary.
17. Consequently, following my consideration of the restrictive occupation condition
    above and that the condition could in the future be varied or removed subject to
    occupation or business requirements, alongside the circumstance that they are not
    required to protect the living conditions of future occupiers, conditions 5 and 6 are
    not considered to be necessary or reasonable.
Other Matters
18. The Council has raised concerns regarding a completed unilateral undertaking
    securing a financial contribution towards the Council’s Carbon Offset Fund that
    formed part of the planning approval (26/00116/OUT) as a new obligation has not
    been provided. However, a new obligation is not required as this decision does not
    create a new separate planning permission for the development. The original
    planning permission and this decision are read together, and the original unilateral
    undertaking requirements would remain.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above, the appeal is allowed and the planning permission is
    varied by deleting the disputed conditions numbered 4, 5 and 6 and substituting a
    new condition which is less restrictive and allows more than just the appellant to
    occupy the dwelling.



P Brennan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
