Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 June 2026
by R Standfield BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008601
Hazelhurst Farm, C2024 Stockton, Worcestershire WR6 6XG
 • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
   against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 • The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs J Stanhope against the decision of Malvern Hills District Council.
 • The application Ref is M/25/01503/FUL.
 • The development proposed is change of use of work element of live/work unit to create additional
   living accommodation.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was updated on 17 August
       2026. Both of the main parties to this appeal have had the opportunity to comment
       in light of the revised document and such comments as were submitted have been
       taken into account accordingly.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the existing and
       future availability of rural employment opportunities.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site comprises a live / work unit sited within a farm complex in the
       open countryside of Worcestershire. The unit is one of two created from a former
       barn in line with planning consent 11/01399/FUL which utilised a planning
       condition to tie occupation of the work elements to their respective residential
       parts. Unit 1 has subsequently achieved consent to change the work component to
       holiday lets and the residential component is occupied independently as confirmed
       by a lawful development certificate.
5.     Unit 2, the subject of this appeal, was intentionally constructed as a live / work unit
       and remains subject to the condition restricting occupation of the work element to
       that of the residential element. It is currently occupied as a single three bedroomed
       residential dwelling across two floors. The workspace comprises a separate
       ground floor space with WC facilities and remains unused. The farm complex
       comprises a further barn conversion and the original farmhouse in a rural setting.
6.     The submitted evidence raises discussion regarding the enforceability and
       appropriateness of the condition attached to consent reference 11/01399/FUL.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008601


       This appeal does not include any explicit application for the removal or
       amendment of the condition.
7.     The condition has achieved its purpose of retaining a rural workspace opportunity
       in line with the express planning consent that was applied for and granted. The
       lack of its use by the current occupiers and the potential for that to continue (noted
       as a fallback position by the appellants) does not preclude its future use as a
       workspace. Retention of the space for such a future opportunity could be enforced
       by means of an enforcement notice or breach of condition notice if required. The
       fact that the Council now use more comprehensive wording does not undermine
       the validity of the existing condition as it stands. Policy DM6 of the NPPF re-
       iterates previously established requirements for the use of conditions and there is
       therefore no change in this respect. As such, the circumstances of the existing
       planning condition are not determinative in this appeal.
8.     The South Worcestershire Development Plan Review (2026) (the Plan Review)
       contains strategic and detailed policies to ensure appropriate provision of
       employment land and retention of existing premises.
9.     Policy SWDPR15 Part D specifically requires proposals for the residential
       conversion of rural employment buildings to be informed by a detailed marketing
       exercise. The accompanying text clarifies the important role of live / work units in
       supporting small and start-up businesses, particularly in the more rural parts of
       South Worcestershire.
10. It is unclear from the submitted evidence when the space was constructed and
    whether it has ever been marketed as a live / work unit prior to the unit’s solely
    residential occupation. The appellants present that they have no use for the
    workspace in its intended form however this in itself does not justify the loss of the
    rural employment opportunity. The supporting evidence provides no analysis of the
    original justification for the live / work unit, whether the site remains a viable
    proposition, the extent of demand for such units in the wider area, the availability
    of alternative units or any marketing exercise as prescribed by the development
    plan.
11. In the absence of such information, it has not been demonstrated therefore that
    the loss of the live / work unit would not harm the availability of rural employment
    opportunities over the development plan period. As such, the proposal does not
    comply with Policy SWDPR 15 of the Plan Review which seeks to secure
    employment opportunities dispersed throughout the rural areas of the district to
    ensure sufficient variety to meet current and future needs.
Other Considerations
12. The potential for the building to be fully utilised in the short term by extending the
    residential accommodation across the workspace is afforded limited weight in this
    instance. The original application was for a live / work unit and the retention of the
    possibility of future employment use would enable full and effective occupation of
    the building to be realised. A solely residential use would have been contrary to
    the development plan policies in place at the time as is also the case now. In
    addition, within the context of the newly adopted Plan Review, any new live / work
    units must evidence the employment element as part of the planning application.
    As such, the circumstances in which the appeal site now finds itself would not be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008601


         replicated however this does not undermine the implemented planning permission
         or the need to provide for rural employment opportunities.
13. Given that the proposed development would not result in a new dwelling, in-
    principle matters relating to a new residential use, remoteness of the location and
    the need for an affordable housing contribution as raised by the Council are not
    determinative matters and there is no conflict with Plan Review Policies SWDPR
    01, SWDPR 03, SWDPR 06 or SWDPR 19. Similarly, the provided appeal decision
    for The Turbles in Castlemorton (PINS Ref 6001649) focuses on in-principle
    matters of location and is not determinative in this instance.
Planning Balance
14. Further to the above conclusions, the proposed development would conflict with
    the development plan taken as a whole. Planning law requires that decisions
    should be made in accordance with the development plan unless material
    considerations indicate otherwise1. The development plan policies are broadly
    consistent with those of the NPPF insofar as they relate to the principles of
    sustainable development, including provision for economic growth.
15. NPPF Policy S3 sets out a general presumption in favour of development under
    which Policy S5 provides for development outside of settlements. The proposed
    development could not proceed under Policy S5 1h or 1j, as there is no net
    addition of dwellings (to contribute towards unmet need) and by extension, neither
    Policies HO8 or HO11 would apply. However, Policy S5 1c allows for the reuse of
    existing buildings unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies within the NPPF. The benefit in this instance relates to making
    effective use of the site, which is afforded substantial weight in line with Policy L2.
16. Policies within Chapter 7 of the NPPF address the objective of building a strong,
    effective economy. In summary, Policy E2 requires substantial weight in favour of
    business growth and Policy E4 specifically supports the sustainable growth of
    businesses in rural areas. The loss of a modern, purpose-built employment unit
    that could support the rural economy in this location would be a very substantial
    adverse effect in this respect.
17. As such, the adverse effect would substantially outweigh the benefit of the
    proposed development. Therefore, the presumption in favour of development in
    Policy S3 is not applied.
Conclusion
18. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the NPPF, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than
    in accordance with it. As such, the appeal should be dismissed.



R Standfield
INSPECTOR

1
    Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2024 and section 70(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
