Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 24 July 2026
by F Cullen BA(Hons) MSc DipTP MRTPI IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6009092
79 Main Street, Seamer, Scarborough, North Yorkshire YO12 4RF
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Chris Sellers against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•      The application Ref is SCAZF25/01310/HS.
•      The development proposed is described as ‘the removal of the existing 2 outbuildings which will be
       replaced with a double garage with an office space in the roof. Rear yard area to be resurfaced in
       tarmac.’


Appeal B Ref: 6008732
79 Main Street, Seamer, Scarborough, North Yorkshire YO12 4RF
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Chris Sellers against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•      The application Ref is SCAZF25/01311/LB.
•      The works proposed are described as ‘the removal of the existing 2 outbuildings which will be
       replaced with a double garage with an office in the roof space. Rear yard area to be resurfaced in
       tarmac.’


Decisions
1.       Appeal A: The appeal is dismissed.
2.       Appeal B: The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.       The two appeals concern the same scheme but are made under separate,
         complementary legislative regimes. I have dealt with both appeals together in my
         reasoning.
4.       The proposal involves the demolition of existing outbuildings positioned at the rear
         of No 79 Main Street, and their replacement with a detached, one and a half
         storey, double garage, incorporating office space in the roof. The Council submits
         that the outbuildings are ‘curtilage listed’ by virtue of their association with the
         Grade II listed building known as 78, 79 and 80 Main Street1, and having formed
         part of the land since before 1 July 19482. This is disputed by the appellant.
5.       Historically, the listed building was a school and school house, and then a post
         office, before being subdivided into three dwellings. The list entry therefore

1
    National Heritage List for England, List Entry Number: 1296711.
2
    Section 1(5)(b) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6009092 and 6008732


       encompasses all three properties. List entries are primarily for identification
       purposes and do not necessarily provide an exhaustive description of the
       building’s special interest. Additionally, the list entry confirms that, unless stated
       otherwise3, the listing includes ‘both the structure itself and any object or structure
       fixed to it (whether inside or outside) as well as any object or structure within the
       curtilage of the building.’ With regard to the latter, the object or structure must have
       formed part of the land since before 1 July 1948.
6.     No substantive evidence has been submitted which supports the appellant’s
       ‘doubt’ over whether the existing outbuildings formed part of the land before 1 July
       1948. The outbuildings are clearly of some age, and I note the presence of a
       structure or structures at the same location on the 1854 OS map4. From the
       evidence before me, I am satisfied that the outbuildings should be ‘treated as part
       of the [listed] building’ for the purposes of the Act and are therefore subject to
       listed building controls.
7.     The listed building is also located within the Seamer Conservation Area (the SCA).
       In determining the appeals I have therefore had regard to the relevant statutory
       duties set out in sections 16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings
       and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended) (the Act).
8.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework was published on
       17 August 2026 (the Framework). The update includes policy changes which are
       relevant to the main issue of these appeals. In the interests of fairness, the parties
       were given the opportunity to comment on the Framework in relation to their
       respective cases. In determining the appeals, I have had regard to the Framework
       and the comments submitted by the parties.
Main Issue
9.     The main issue is whether the proposal would i) preserve the Grade II listed
       building known as 78, 79 and 80 Main Street or its setting; and ii) preserve or
       enhance the character or appearance of the Seamer Conservation Area.
Reasons
10. The appeal property is situated within the defined development limits of the
    settlement of Seamer. It is set well back from Main Street with a large, enclosed
    garden at the front, with The Green Park communal play area beyond. At the rear
    lies an area of hardstanding and an elongated grassed space, where the
    outbuildings are located. The property is accessed via The Green off Main Street.
       Special interest and significance
11. The Council asserts that the appellant’s heritage statement does not meet the
    requirements of Policy HE5(1) of the Framework5. Nonetheless, from the evidence
    presented and my observations on site, I have been able to determine the special
    interest and significance of the designated heritage assets relevant to the appeals,
    as well as any effects of the proposal.



3
  Including in this instance, the listed building description stating that the 20th century extension to left is ‘not of special interest’.
4
  Page 18, Seamer Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Proposals, dated July 2008.
5
  Which requires the submission of an assessment of the significance of the assets affected (including any contribution made by
their setting) and of the potential effect of the proposal on their significance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                      2
Appeal Decisions 6009092 and 6008732


12. The main body of the listed building of 78, 79 and 80 Main Street is stated to
    probably date from the early 18th century, with alterations and additions in the late
    18th, late 19th and 20th centuries. It was a school and school house, then a post
    office, and is now a short terrace of three dwellings of which No 79 forms part. The
    building is constructed of variegated brick in Flemish bond with a stone plinth and
    quoins to the front, coursed limestone rubble to the rear, and a pantile roof with
    brick chimney stacks.
13. As stated above, the outbuildings at the rear form part of the listed building. The
    submitted evidence indicates that they date from at least the early 19th century
    and were historically and functionally associated with the former school and
    schoolhouse. They are single storey, modest in size, scale and form, and
    constructed of a combination of stone and brick with pantile roofs. Although they
    have been extended and altered in the past and are now in a poor state of repair,
    their historic form is discernible. Their age, surviving traditional fabric and historic
    relationship with the main body of the listed building mean that they contribute to
    the asset’s heritage value.
14. From the evidence before me, I find the special interest and significance of the
    listed building to primarily stem from its architectural and historic interests as an
    early 18th century school and schoolhouse, which has subsequently evolved in its
    form and use over time. Important contributors which are relevant to the appeals,
    are its use of traditional materials, construction techniques and detailing; its former
    public functions and associations with the village; and its group value, including the
    outbuildings at the rear.
15. Additionally, the asset’s special interest and significance are also informed, in part,
    by its setting. Its immediate surroundings have direct historic, functional, physical
    and visual links with the asset. In particular, the spaces at the rear allow the
    relationship between the main body of the listed building and its associated
    outbuildings to be experienced, and their value as a group to be appreciated. The
    building’s immediate setting therefore makes a meaningful contribution to its
    special interest and significance. Beyond this are the routes, buildings and spaces
    which make up Seamer. Experiencing the listed building from within this wider
    context permits an understanding of its historic associations with the village and
    the community it served as part of its former public functions. In this way, the listed
    building’s wider setting also contributes to its special interest and significance.
16. The site is located within the SCA, which covers the linear historic core of Seamer.
    Distinctive qualities which contribute to the SCA’s special interest and significance
    include the village’s historic street layout and associated organic pattern of
    development; and the vernacular form of its historic buildings.
17. The use of a common palette of materials, including stone (some rendered and / or
    painted) and pantiles, provide a degree of uniformity to the buildings and street
    scene. Nos 78, 79 and 80 Main Street and associated outbuildings are integral and
    important elements of the village. Whilst they are not conspicuous from the main
    public highways and pavements, they are visible from the adjacent public space of
    The Green Park and / or from nearby private buildings and spaces. Whilst I
    acknowledge the poor condition of the outbuildings, as a result of its historic and
    architectural integrity, the listed building makes a positive contribution to the
    character and appearance of the SCA as a whole, and to its significance as a
    designated heritage asset.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6009092 and 6008732


      Effects
18. Policy HE5(2) of the Framework confirms that assessments of the potential effects
    of development proposals on the significance of heritage assets (including through
    effects on their setting) should identify whether they would be likely to: a. Have a
    positive effect; or b. Have no effect; or c. Result in harm (which includes
    substantial harm), the degree of which should be identified; or d. Cause the total
    loss of significance. Policy HE5(3) advises that in making this assessment it is the
    effect on a heritage asset’s significance rather than the scale of the development
    which should be considered.
19. The proposal would not alter the historic fabric and features of Nos 78, 79 and 80
    Main Street, as the main body of the listed building. However, the demolition of the
    existing outbuildings would result in the loss of their intrinsic heritage merit and
    thus the contribution they make as part of a group to the special interest and
    significance of the listed building, weakening the asset’s value as a whole.
20. I note the findings of the condition report submitted by the appellant6, which
    concludes that the outbuildings are structurally unsound and beyond reasonable
    repair, and recommends that they should be demolished ‘in the interests of public
    safety and risk mitigation’. The dilapidated condition of the outbuildings was clearly
    evident at the time of my site visit. However, the assessment is fairly basic and has
    not been undertaken by a suitably qualified professional, such as a structural
    engineer. This limits the weight I can attach to its conclusions regarding the
    structural condition of the outbuildings and the feasibility of their repair.
21. I am also aware of the report’s reference to the ‘long-term neglect’ of the
    outbuildings having contributed to their poor state of repair. Policy HE4(3) of the
    Framework states that, where there is evidence of deliberate neglect of, or
    damage to, a heritage asset, the deteriorated state of the asset should not be
    taken into account in any decision relating to the asset. However, the evidence
    before me is insufficient to establish that the neglect in this case was deliberate. I
    have therefore taken the present condition of the outbuildings into account, albeit
    in the context of the limitations of the condition report identified above.
22. The proposed garage would replace the existing outbuildings. The main materials
    of stone, pantiles and timber would be generally in keeping with the context within
    which it would sit. Even so, it would be a sizeable structure within the immediate
    setting of the listed building. Its footprint and dimensions of approximately 7.5m x
    6m x 4.60m to ridge, would make it markedly larger than other outbuildings in the
    vicinity that I was able to see when on site. It would therefore not appear
    appropriately subordinate to No 79 or to the listed building as a whole. Moreover, it
    would be of a fairly generic design, with little in its form or detailing which responds
    positively to this sensitive context in terms of the history and character of the site
    and area.
23. Consequently, the proposed garage would not appear as a secondary, ancillary
    structure to the host property, and would compete with its primacy. Its scale,
    massing and dominant presence within this space would disrupt the traditional
    relationship between the principal building and any ancillary outbuildings, and
    diminish the ability to appreciate the significance of the listed building. It would

6
  Andy Whitelaw Joinery Bespoke Joiner. Report on Condition of Outbuildings – Recommendation for Demolition. Date of
Inspection 23 December 2025.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decisions 6009092 and 6008732


      therefore appear as an undistinguished addition that would not assimilate
      satisfactorily into this historic setting.
24. I note the appellant’s willingness to incorporate materials salvaged from the
    existing outbuildings in the construction of the proposed garage, which has the
    potential to mitigate the identified harm to a degree. However, it has not been
    demonstrated how feasible this approach would be in practice, nor what the
    potential extent of any reclamation and reuse of materials would be.
25. The tarmacking of the existing rear yard area between the main house and new
    garage would provide space for additional off-street parking. However, it would
    erode the informal and semi-verdant character of this land and create an expanse
    of visually stark hardstanding. This would lessen the contribution that this part of
    the asset’s setting makes to its special interest and significance.
26. In all of the above respects, the proposal would fail to preserve the special interest
    of the listed building and would harm its significance. The identified harmful effects
    would not be visible from public routes. Nonetheless, listed buildings are
    safeguarded for their inherent architectural and historic interests irrespective of
    whether they, or any parts of them, are readily visible from public spaces.
27. The proposal would have no effect on some of the distinctive qualities that
    underpin the character and appearance and thus special interest and significance
    of the SCA. Moreover, whilst the identified harmful effects would be apparent from
    neighbouring private properties, they would not be perceptible from the wider
    public realm. These considerations limit the extent of harm that the proposal would
    give rise to in respect of the SCA as a whole. Even so, given the positive
    contribution that 78, 79 and 80 Main Street, including associated outbuildings,
    makes to the SCA, it reasonably follows that the proposal would also fail to
    preserve the character and appearance of the SCA as a whole and would harm its
    significance as a designated heritage asset.
28. Accordingly, I find that the proposal would not preserve the Grade II listed building
    known as 78, 79 and 80 Main Street and its setting; and would not preserve or
    enhance the character and appearance of the SCA. The significance of these
    designated heritage assets would therefore be harmed.
      Public benefits and balance
29. In finding harm to the significance of heritage assets, including through effects on
    their setting, Policy HE5(2c) of the Framework requires the degree of harm to be
    identified. Given the nature and extent of the identified effects, I find that the
    proposal would result in a low level of harm to the significance of the listed
    building, and a very low level of harm to the significance of the SCA.
30. Even so, Policy HE6(1) advises that, when considering the potential effect of a
    development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. This is irrespective
    of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial
    harm, or total loss of its significance. Additionally, Policy HE6(3) states that any
    harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance
    and weight.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6009092 and 6008732


31. As I have found harm to the significance of the listed building and the conservation
    area, Policy HE6(4) requires this effect on the asset and its significance to be
    weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
32. There would be some time-limited economic benefits generated by the
    implementation of the scheme. There may also be some public safety benefits
    from the removal of the outbuildings said to be structurally unsound; and
    environmental benefits from the incorporation of salvaged materials into the
    construction of the garage.
33. However, for the reasons set out above, there is limited robust evidence to
    substantiate the claimed structural condition of the outbuildings or the extent of
    any risk they pose. Furthermore, the feasibility and extent of reusing salvaged
    materials have not been demonstrated. Given these considerations and the
    amount of development and works, I attach little weight to these public benefits,
    both individually and collectively.
34. The existing building of No 79 is in residential use. Any benefits that would accrue
    as a result of the proposal to the owner or occupier in respect of its ongoing
    management as a family home would be private in nature. Furthermore, no
    compelling evidence is before me which demonstrates that the proposal is
    required to maintain this use and the listed building, or to maintain the positive
    contribution that the asset already makes to the local community and the area’s
    local character and distinctiveness.
35. In all of the above respects, clear and convincing justification has not been
    provided for the identified harm to the significance of the designated heritage
    assets. Moreover, drawing the above considerations together I find that, on
    balance, the public benefits resulting from the proposal would not outweigh the
    harm to the assets’ significance.
36. The proposal would therefore fail to satisfy the requirements set out in sections
    16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Act, and the provisions within the Framework which
    seek to achieve well-designed places and conserve and enhance the historic
    environment. It would also not comply with Policies DEC1 and DEC5 of the
    Scarborough Borough Local Plan, July 2017, which amongst other things, require
    proposals to apply the principles of good design, including responding positively to
    the local context; and to conserve and where appropriate enhance historic
    environments and assets, including listed buildings and conservation areas.
Other Matters
37. The Local Highway Authority and Seamer Parish Council raised no objections to
    the proposed development and works. Additionally, no representations were
    received from any interested parties at application and appeal stage. Even so,
    these matters are neutral considerations and weigh neither for nor against the
    appeals.
38. In support of the appeals, my attention has been drawn to ‘modern development’
    located close to the site and on Main Street7. I observed these developments
    during my site visit. Whilst the nearby development has a similar backland location
    and both developments use stone and pantiles, neither is directly comparable to

7
    Only images provided.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6009092 and 6008732


      the proposal before me. Furthermore, I have not been provided with the full
      circumstances in which those developments were permitted, including any
      heritage considerations or the local and national policies applicable at the time. I
      therefore attach limited weight to them in determining these appeals.
39. The appellant refers to a bat survey having been undertaken which they state
    found no evidence of bats in the outbuildings8. However, the survey has not been
    submitted as part of the appeals and there is no substantive evidence before me
    regarding the presence or absence of bats. Furthermore, the Council’s delegated
    officer reports make no reference to bats. I am mindful that bats are a protected
    species. Nonetheless, my conclusions on the main issue are sufficient to dismiss
    the appeals. Consequently, as the proposal would not proceed, it is unnecessary
    for me to reach a conclusion on this matter.
Overall Planning Balance and Conclusions
40. Policy S3(1) of the Framework requires decisions on development proposals to
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4 is relevant
    and states that proposals within settlements should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
41. The benefits of the proposed development and works are set out above. These
    carry little weight in the proposal’s favour. Against this, I have found that the
    scheme would not preserve the Grade II listed building known as 78, 79 and 80
    Main Street and its setting; and would not preserve or enhance the character and
    appearance of the SCA. The significance of these designated heritage assets
    would therefore be harmed. As part of this, the proposal would also fail to achieve
    good design insofar as it would not respond positively to its local context.
42. In relation to designated heritage assets, the Framework advises that substantial
    weight should be given to their conservation, and that any harm to them will be a
    matter of considerable importance and weight9. Moreover, the Framework requires
    that development should be refused if, without clear justification, it does not
    respond to its context in terms of integrating with and enhancing its
    surroundings10.
43. Accordingly, having applied the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework, I find that the benefits of approving the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by the identified adverse effects. The proposal therefore
    does not benefit from the presumption in favour of development within settlements
    established by Policies S3 and S4.
44. Appeal A: The proposed development would conflict with the development plan
    when read as a whole and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons
    given above, Appeal A should be dismissed.
45. Appeal B: For the reasons given above, Appeal B should be dismissed.

F Cullen INSPECTOR
8
  Point 4 – Appellant’s Grounds of Appeal.
9
  Policies HE6(1) and HE6(3) of the Framework.
10
   Policies DP3(1) and DP3(3) of the Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          7
