Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 June 2026
by M Cryan BA(Hons) DipTP MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026

Appeal Ref: 6008944
512 High Road, Tottenham, London N17 9SX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Jeremy Davies of Bingwood Property Company LLP against the Council of
     the London Borough of Haringey.
•    The application reference is HGY/2025/3167.
•    The development proposed is a conversion and mansard extension of the upper floors to create
     3 no. 1-bed flats to replace a 3-bed maisonette.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for a conversion and mansard
       extension of the upper floors to create 3 no. 1-bed flats to replace a 3-bed
       maisonette is refused.
Procedural Matter
2.     On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (“the Framework”). I have determined the appeal in the light of the new
       Framework and, where I have referred its policies or paragraphs, numbering is
       from the current August 2026 version.
Background and Main Issue
3.     The Council had not determined the planning application before the appeal was
       lodged. Its appeal statement indicated that it would have refused planning
       permission for a single reason:
       “The proposed mansard roof extension, by reason of its scale, design, massing,
       and the loss of original architectural features, would have an overly bulky,
       awkward and incongruous appearance in the street scene, as well as detracting
       from the building’s original 19th Century form, causing to the significance of the
       locally listed building, and to the significance of the Bruce Grove Conservation
       Area, without providing sufficient public benefit to outweigh the impact [of this]
       harm […]”
4.     Based on all the evidence before me I consider that the main issue is the effect of
       the proposed mansard roof extension on the character and appearance of the
       Bruce Grove Conservation Area (“the BGCA”), with particular regard to the appeal
       property being a locally-listed building.
Reasons
5.     I have a statutory duty under section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to pay special attention to the desirability of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008944


       preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the BGCA. The
       Framework states that, as heritage assets are irreplaceable, they should be
       conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance, and that any harm or loss
       requires clear and convincing justification (Policy HE4). It goes on to say that
       substantial weight should be given to the conservation of a designated heritage
       asset, and that any harm to its significance should be weighed against any public
       benefits resulting from the proposal (Policy HE6).
6.     The BGCA was designated in 1991 and covers a section of Tottenham High
       Road – as well as some areas just off the High Road – for a short distance north
       and south of Bruce Grove railway station. The area urbanised rapidly from about
       1872 following the opening of the station, which was the catalyst for a wave of
       commercial development along the High Road. The Council’s BGCA Appraisal and
       Management Plan (“the AMP”) describes the conservation area as a notable
       example of “an essentially late-Victorian commercial townscape”. The Heritage
       Statement submitted with the planning application identifies key attributes of the
       BGCA, including the continuous built frontage to the High Road, the roofscape and
       massing of the terraces, the survival of historic fabric (such as traditional roof-
       forms, eaves lines, chimneys and parapets), and the inter-relationship of the High
       Road with the side streets running off it. I consider that the significance of the
       BGCA, insofar as it relates to this appeal, is primarily derived from this
       combination of factors which mark it as a vibrant Victorian and Edwardian high
       street.
7.     The appeal property itself is a three-storey building, dating from the first half of the
       19th century, of yellow stock brick construction (though the street frontage and part
       of the southern side elevation have been painted) with gauged window arches and
       a simple brick on edge parapet detail to the front, and a glazed timber-framed
       shopfront across the ground floor. It has timber sash windows, though these are
       not original and the cills of the two first-floor windows on the front elevation have
       been raised. Notwithstanding this somewhat unsympathetic alteration, which has
       given those windows rather odd proportions, the building makes a positive
       contribution to the character and appearance of the BGCA. It is identified in the
       AMP as a locally listed building; its status as a non-designated heritage asset
       (“NDHA”) is not disputed between the main parties.
8.     The proposed development is a mansard roof extension to create a third floor. The
       property would also be reconfigured internally to provide three one-bedroom flats,
       in place of the existing three-bedroom maisonette on the first and second floors.
       The AMP advises that “mansard roof extensions will not be considered appropriate
       unless these are a feature of the original building, or they are an established
       characteristic of the street scene and can be accommodated behind an existing
       parapet”.
9.     Mansards are not an original feature of the appeal property, nor its immediate
       neighbours. While mansards are found reasonably frequently in some parts of
       London, and indeed are very common in certain areas, they are rare within the
       BGCA as a whole – the AMP identifies only a handful, at Nos 429/421 and 433-
       441 on the west side of the High Road, and Nos 418/420 and 444/446 on the east
       side, so they could not in my view be said to be an established characteristic of the
       street scene. I recognise, as the appellant pointed out, that there is some variety
       on the part of the High Road around the appeal site, in that buildings differ in age,
       height, scale, roof form, architectural treatment and building line. Nevertheless, a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008944


       mansard roof as proposed would be an unusual feature in the context of the
       appeal property itself and its close surroundings.
10. As well as being somewhat incongruous simply as a consequence of its type, the
    creation of a mansard would lead to the loss of the original roof form, reducing the
    appeal property’s authenticity as an NDHA, and to the building taking on a
    disproportionately tall and narrow appearance, compared both to its own current
    form and that of its similarly aged and styled neighbours at Nos 514 and 516. The
    dormers would be set forward of the mansard roof slope which would give them a
    bulky and dominant appearance. The development would also diminish the role of
    the tall front chimney stack; while this would be retained and raised “using original
    detailing” it would largely be subsumed into the mass of the mansard extension,
    thereby reducing its positive contribution to the building’s appearance.
11. The frontage of the appeal property stands forward of the upper floors of its
    neighbours to the north, and there is an alleyway giving access to a courtyard at
    one side, factors which give the building an increased presence in the street scene
    compared to some of its neighbours. It is also prominent because of its location
    opposite the point where Bruce Grove joins the High Road – while the bend in
    Bruce Grove and the position of the railway bridge mean that longer views of the
    appeal property from Bruce Grove are obscured, it is a very visible feature at the
    junction itself. The harm I have described above would be apparent to very many
    people passing the site on foot or in vehicles along the High Road, or by trains
    across the Bruce Grove bridge.
12. Some aspects of the proposed development would be acceptable – the mansard
    roof itself would be of slate with lead dormer projections, with yellow stock brick
    side wall and parapet, and the timber box sash windows would be aligned with the
    original ones below. The scheme also includes the enlargement of the front first-
    floor window openings (described in paragraph 7 above) to return them to
    something like their original proportions, again with timber box sashes. In these
    respects, materials and detailing would be entirely appropriate. However, taken as
    a whole, I consider the proposed development would lead to a loss of the appeal
    property’s authenticity which contributes to its significance as an NDHA and which
    is a positive feature of the BGCA.
13. While Policy HE7 of the Framework says that harm to the significance of an NDHA
    “should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced judgement
    made”, here the harm would undermine the positive contribution the appeal
    property makes to the significance of the BGCA as a designated heritage asset.
    Accordingly, the development would not preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the BGCA. Given the small scale of the proposed development, the
    degree of harm which would be caused to the BGCA would be moderate, though
    Policy HE6 of the Framework recognises that any harm will be a matter of
    considerable importance and weight.
14. I have had regard to the benefits of the proposed development put to me by the
    appellant. The scheme would make a positive contribution to local housing supply
    by providing a net gain of two dwellings in a highly-accessible town centre location;
    while the total number of bedrooms on the site would not actually be increased,
    even a modest uplift in housing supply is an appreciable public benefit. However, I
    do not consider that this would outweigh the harm to the designated heritage asset
    which I have found.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008944


15. I therefore conclude that the development would harm the character and
    appearance of the appeal property and the BGCA. This would be contrary to
    Policy SP11 of the 2017 Haringey Local Plan Strategic Policies Document,
    Policies DM1, DM9, DM12 of the 2017 Haringey Development Management DPD,
    and Policies D6 and HC1 of the London Plan 2021. Together, and among other
    things, these policies seek to ensure that all new development respects its local
    context and character and historic significance, that proposals for extensions and
    alterations within conservation areas complement the style, scale, proportions and
    details of the host building and are not overbearing or intrusive, and that
    extensions to locally-listed buildings are restricted to less significant parts of the
    building and do not adversely affect its external appearance. For the same
    reasons, and as I have set out already, the proposal would also fail to accord with
    the provisions of the Framework which seek to protect and conserve heritage
    assets.
Other Matters
16. The appellant submitted a completed unilateral undertaking (“UU”) making
    provisions restricting the availability of car parking permits for controlled parking
    zones to future residents of the development. The UU is intended to mitigate the
    effects of the proposed development, and as I am dismissing the appeal for other
    reasons it has not been necessary for me to consider it in further detail.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
17. The appeal scheme would provide a modest boost to the supply of housing by
    creating three flats where currently there is one. However, the mansard form
    proposed for the development would have an adverse effect on the significance of
    the appeal property as an NDHA, and in so doing it would fail to preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the BGCA. The proposal therefore
    conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole.
18. Policy S4 of the Framework says that “development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in this Framework”. Policy L2 says that substantial weight should
    be given to the benefits where a development proposal would help to make
    effective use of land, including (at paragraph 1.d. of that policy) by creating
    additional homes or floorspace by using the airspace above existing residential
    and commercial premises. I acknowledge that this proposal would provide
    additional residential floorspace in that manner.
19. However, Policy L2 goes on to say (at paragraph 1.d.i.) that such development
    should be consistent with the overall street scene; Policy DP3 also requires
    development proposals to respond to their context (including history and
    character) “so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings”. I have
    found that the proposal would cause unacceptable harm to the character and
    appearance of the appeal property, and so would not preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the BGCA. I have also found that the moderate harm
    to the significance of the conservation area would not be outweighed by the public
    benefits of the scheme which were put to me, and that the proposal would conflict
    with the Framework’s policies in respect of the conservation and enhancement of
    the historic environment.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008944


20. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework does not
    point to permission being granted in this instance.
21. None of the material considerations identified, including those of the Framework,
    justify a decision other than in accordance with the development plan. The appeal
    is therefore dismissed.



M Cryan
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
