Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026
by L Reid BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26TH August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008532
The Chequers Public House, Matching Green, Harlow, Essex CM17 0PZ
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr Patrick Brady against the decision of Epping Forest District Council.
• The application Ref is EPF/1973/25.
• The development proposed is demolition of existing buildings and replacement extensions.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of
       existing buildings and replacement extensions at The Chequers Public House,
       Matching Green, Harlow, Essex CM17 0PZ in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref EPF/1973/25, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. Since the appeal was made, the Government published a revised National
   Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). Any policies that are material to this
   decision have not fundamentally changed in the Framework. As a result, I consider
   that there is no requirement for me to seek further submissions on the revised
   Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s interests have been prejudiced by my
   approach.
3. The appellant has submitted two additional drawings with the appeal. Both
   drawings identify the sections of the building proposed for demolition. One drawing
   also distinguishes the existing parts of the building and the proposed development.
   These additional drawings do not result in a substantial or fundamental change to
   result in a different application. The Council has also had the opportunity to
   comment. Given their nature, the acceptance of these drawings would not deprive
   those who should have been consulted of the opportunity of such consultation. I
   have therefore considered them in determining this appeal.
4. The second reason for refusal refers to occupiers of the dwellings in ‘Colyers’ at the
   rear of the site. As highlighted by the appellant and confirmed by my observations
   at the site visit, the dwellings in question are located in ‘Colvers’. Although the
   Council has not clarified this, I have treated it as a typographical error.
5. The appeal site is within the Green Belt. The main parties agree that the proposed
   development would not be inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Based on
   my observations and the evidence before me, I have no reason to reach a contrary
   view.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008532


Main Issues
6.       The main issues are:
         •     The effect of the proposal on the significance of The Chequers as a non-
               designated heritage asset;
         •     Whether the proposal would preserve or enhance the character or
               appearance of the Matching Green Conservation Area;
         •     The effect of the proposal on the setting of Little Elm Cottage, The Lilacs and
               Chestnut Cottage; and,
         •     The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of Colvers,
               with regard to noise, disturbance and odours.
Reasons
The Chequers
7.       The appeal relates to The Chequers which is a public house. As detailed in the
         appellant’s Heritage Statement/Impact Assessment1, the building is understood to
         date from the mid-19th century and is thought to have originated as a coaching
         inn. Historic mapping indicates that it was established as a prominent freestanding
         building, with several outbuildings positioned to the rear and sides. Externally, the
         front of the building continues to retain elements of its historic character and
         appearance, reflected in its brick-built Victorian style and traditional form.
         However, the building has been altered and extended over time, changes which
         are most evident in the side and rear elevations.
8.       The Chequers is a locally listed building. Its significance as a non-designated
         heritage asset (NDHA) not only derives from its architectural and historic interest,
         but also from its communal value. As one of the few remaining public houses in
         the area, it has an important role as a longstanding community facility and social
         gathering place. The building's rarity as a surviving public house therefore adds to
         its local heritage significance.
9.       The proposed development involves the demolition of the existing covered outdoor
         seating area with a single-storey rear extension. The extension would occupy a
         similar footprint to the existing structure and would not increase the floor area. It
         would also not project beyond the existing south-east elevation of the building, as
         it would be set behind the existing building line.
10. At the rear of the building, several buildings are concealed behind a timber
    fencing, forming a compound that extends around the rear and part of the side of
    the building. The compound projects further outwards along the north-west
    elevation than the main part of the building itself and therefore forms part of the
    established building line. It is proposed to demolish the compound and replace it
    with a single-storey side and rear extension.
11. The proposed single-storey side and rear extension would occupy a footprint
    equivalent to the area currently enclosed by the compound. Whilst it would project
    beyond the side wall of the main part of the building, it would follow the established

1
    August 2025.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6008532


       building line created by the existing compound. This proposed extension would
       therefore not project any further outward along the north-west elevation than the
       existing compound.
12. A ramp with railings would also be installed along the north-west elevation. It
    would be in line with the side wall of the proposed single-storey side and rear
    extension and would serve only to provide level access to the building. Given that
    neither proposed extension would increase the footprint of the building beyond the
    existing building lines, I am satisfied that the proposal does not result in
    overdevelopment.
13. Part of the proposed single-storey side and rear extension would incorporate a flat
    roof. Whilst the existing flat-roofed structures within the compound would be
    removed as part of the proposal, this demonstrates that flat-roofed elements
    already form part of the building’s built form albeit later additions. Much of the
    proposed flat roof would be screened by the adjoining pitched roof element,
    limiting its visibility. The flat roof design would also facilitate the concealment of
    plant equipment within the extension, allowing existing visible equipment to be
    removed from the north-west elevation. The flat roof would be of a simple design,
    which would ensure that the extension remains secondary to the main roof of the
    building, preserving its prominence and legibility. Given its limited visibility and
    modest scale, the flat roof would not appear visually incongruous with the historic
    character and appearance of the building.
14. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would not cause
    harm to the significance of the building as an NDHA. Accordingly, it would comply
    with Policy DM7 of the Epping Forest District Local Plan 2011 – 2033 Part One
    (the Local Plan), which amongst other things, sets out that there is a general
    presumption in favour of retaining NDHAs.
Matching Green Conservation Area
15. As the appeal site is within the Matching Green Conservation Area (the CA), I
    have had regard to Section 72(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) which requires that special
    attention be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of that area.
16. From my observations at my site visit and as set out in the Matching Green
    Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan 2007, the
    significance of the CA is primarily derived from the historic layout of the settlement
    and large number of historic buildings. Its character and appearance are generally
    informed by the variety of architectural styles, the scale of buildings, the
    predominantly residential nature of the settlement and the presence of one main
    local amenity, which is the appeal site. As a prominent building within the
    settlement, the appeal site forms an important component of its history and
    architectural interest and therefore makes a positive contribution to the
    significance of the CA as a whole.
17. The appellant has drawn attention to the planning history of the appeal site, noting
    that the building has been subject to a range of alterations and extensions which
    have increased the size of the building. This has not been disputed by the Council.
    The proposed extensions would be modest in size, relative to the existing building


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008532


       and would be subservient features when considering the built form that they would
       replace.
18. The proposal would mostly affect the south-east elevation, which would be visible
    in public views, and the north-west elevation which would be seen by visitors to the
    appeal site and from some limited private residential views. As the extensions
    have been designed to respect the architectural detailing and historic character of
    the building, the resulting form of development would be sympathetic. The
    evidence before me also indicates that flat roofs are not alien features in the CA.
19. The existing lean-to bar is also proposed to be removed, allowing the traditional
    form and proportions of the building to be more readily appreciated. Importantly,
    the front elevation, which retains the majority of the building's original architectural
    features and makes the greatest contribution to its historic character, would remain
    largely unchanged. Consequently, the proposal would have a neutral effect on the
    significance of the CA.
20. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would preserve the
    character and appearance of the CA. Accordingly, the proposal would comply with
    Policies DM7 and DM9 of the Local Plan. These policies, amongst other things,
    require development proposals to relate positively to their context, drawing on the
    historic environment with heritage assets and their settings preserved or
    enhanced.
Little Elm Cottage, The Lilacs and Chestnut Cottage
21. Section 66(1) of the Act 1990 requires that special regard is had to the desirability
    of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which it possesses. The listed buildings closest to the appeal site,
    and those specifically identified by the Council, are Grade II listed Little Elm
    Cottage2 to the west, and Grade II listed The Lilacs3 and Chestnut Cottage4 to the
    east.
22. From the Historic England List Entries and my observations during the site visit,
    the setting of these listed buildings is derived in part, from their historic form and
    appearance, and the semi-rural character of the area. The appeal site is visible
    from The Lilacs and Chestnut Cottage, while visibility from Elm Tree Cottage is
    more limited. It forms part of the wider backdrop rather than an important
    component of their setting and has no apparent historic or functional association
    with the listed buildings in such a way that contributes to how these buildings are
    experienced or understood. Consequently, the appeal site makes a neutral
    contribution to their setting.
23. The proposed extensions would be subordinate additions to the appeal site and
    would not interrupt any important views of the listed buildings or alter the way in
    which they are experienced. Consequently, the proposal would preserve the
    setting of the nearby listed buildings. It would therefore comply with Policies DM7
    and DM9 of the Local Plan.
The occupiers of Colvers


2
  Historic England List Entry Number: 1337542
3
  Historic England List Entry Number: 1317198
4
  Historic England List Entry Number: 1123939


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
Appeal Decision 6008532


24. To the rear of the appeal site are several two-storey houses within Colvers. The
    proposal would relocate the bin store to the rear of the site. Although it would be
    located closer to the dwellings in Colvers than at present, a substantial separation
    distance would remain between them. Furthermore, it would be positioned
    between an existing wall and the boundary fencing, providing a degree of physical
    screening and further enclosure. Whilst the bin store would be large in size, its
    positioning would help to contain activities associated with the storage and
    collection of refuse, thereby reducing the potential for noise disturbance and
    limiting the spread of any odours.
25. Taking these factors together, I am satisfied that the proposal would not cause
    harm to the living conditions of the occupiers of Colvers, with regard to noise,
    disturbance and odours. Accordingly, the proposal would comply with Policy DM9
    of the Local Plan, which amongst other things, requires proposals to take account
    of the amenity of neighbours.
Other Matters
Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation
26. Large parts of Epping Forest have been designated as a Special Area of
    Conservation (SAC) in accordance with the Conservation of Habitats and Species
    Regulations 2017. The qualifying features of the SAC are its wet and dry
    heathlands, beech forests and stag beetle. The conservation objectives are to
    ensure that the integrity of the site is maintained or restored as appropriate, and to
    ensure that the site contributes to the conservation of its qualifying features.
27. The Council has identified two pathways of impact that are currently adversely
    affecting the SAC, one of which is atmospheric pollution primarily from vehicle
    emissions on roads within and adjacent to the SAC. The appellant has confirmed
    that the proposal would not increase the number of covers or the customer
    capacity of the public house. Although an increase in staffing is proposed, this
    would be accommodated from the existing pool of staff. Consequently, the
    proposal would not be expected to generate a net increase in traffic using roads
    that pass through or adjoin the SAC. I therefore conclude that the proposal would
    not be likely to have a significant effect on the SAC, either alone or in combination
    with other plans or projects, in respect of atmospheric pollution.
28. The Council has confirmed that, given the scope of the proposal in accordance
    with the Air Pollution Mitigation Strategy, the development would not have an
    adverse effect on the integrity of the SAC in respect of air pollution. In the absence
    of any substantive evidence to the contrary, I have no reason to disagree with that
    conclusion.
Interested party comments
29. The Council previously refused planning permission for a rear extension and to
    enclose the existing outdoor dining area5, which was subsequently dismissed at
    appeal. However, the proposal before me differs from this earlier scheme as it has
    a smaller footprint, would remain within the existing building lines and would not
    increase the seating capacity. As such, the current proposal is not directly
    comparable to the earlier scheme.

5
    Council Ref: EPF/2654/17


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008532


30. As the proposal would not increase the number of customer covers, it would not
    increase the capacity of the restaurant or intensify its use. The enclosed area would
    continue to accommodate customers who could already lawfully use the outdoor
    seating area. Furthermore, the enclosure would be likely to contain customer noise
    to a greater degree than the existing open seating area. The proposal would
    therefore not result in a significant increase in noise and disturbance. Similarly,
    having regard to the lawful use of the appeal site and the nature of the proposal,
    there is no persuasive evidence before me that it would give rise to harm in respect
    of traffic or parking. The Council has also raised no objection on these grounds.
Conditions
31. I have imposed the statutory implementation condition [1], along with a condition
    listing the approved plans to provide certainty [2]. In the interests of the character
    and appearance of the CA and to protect the significance of the building as an
    NDHA, it is necessary to require the materials of the extensions [3] and bin store
    [4] to be agreed before use. The Council’s Contamination Officer has highlighted
    that the appeal site has potentially contaminated land. To ensure risks from land
    contamination are remediated if necessary, a contamination condition is imposed
    [5].
32. Based on the information available, this permission is considered to be one which
    will not require the approval of a biodiversity gain plan before development is
    begun because a statutory exemption applies.
Conclusion
33. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.



L Reid
INSPECTOR



                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
       date of this decision.
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans: 24131-0000 Rev P3 – Location and Block Plan,
       24131-1000 Rev P2 – Proposed Site Plan, 24131-1100 Rev P6 – Proposed
       Ground Floor Plan, 24131-1102 Rev P1 – Proposed First Floor and Roof Plans,
       24131-1302 Rev P2 – North East Elevation, 24131-1303 Rev P2 – North West
       Elevation, 24131-1304 Rev P2 – South West Elevation, 24131-1305 Rev P2 –
       South East Elevation.

    3) Prior to the construction of the extensions hereby approved, details of the
       materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
       extensions shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          6
Appeal Decision 6008532


         Development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.

    4) Prior to its installation details of the materials to be used in the construction of
       the bin store shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority.

         Development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.

    5) Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the
       approved development that was not previously identified shall be reported
       immediately to the local planning authority. Development on the part of the site
       affected shall be suspended and a risk assessment carried out and submitted to
       and approved in writing by the local planning authority.

         Where unacceptable risks are found remediation and verification schemes shall
         be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. These
         approved schemes shall be carried out before the development is resumed or
         continued.

                                           END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      7
