Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 August 2026
by MG Garrard LLB (Hons), PGDip.LP, Solicitor
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008404
Pinfield House, Brown Heath Lane, Martin Hussingtree, Worcestershire WR9 7JF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Kernaghan against the decision of Wychavon District Council.
•    The application Ref is W/25/00931/FUL.
•    The development proposed is demolition of existing dwelling and replacement of 1 no. new dwelling
     and associated external works.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    Since the application was determined, the Council adopted the South
      Worcestershire Development Plan Review 2021-2041 (2026) (SWDPR), which
      superseded the policies against which the Council had determined the appeal
      proposal. The main parties addressed this in their appeal statements. I have taken
      the updated policies into account in making my decision.
3.    Upon adoption of the SWDPR, the Council was able to demonstrate a five-year
      supply of deliverable housing with the required buffer. During the appeal, the
      Council has provided further evidence about its housing land supply, which the
      appellant had opportunity to comment on during the appeal.
4.    During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given
      an opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the
      appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching my decision.
      References to the Framework in my decision are to the August 2026 version.
5.    The appellant submitted a draft unilateral undertaking during the appeal. Following
      revisions and comments from the parties, an executed version was provided. I
      consider its effect in relation to biodiversity net gain (BNG) below.
Main Issues
6.    The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt for the
                purposes of the development plan and the Framework, including the effect
                on openness;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008404


            •   whether the replacement dwelling would be disproportionately larger than
                the existing dwelling;
            •   the effect of the proposal on protected species; and
            •   whether the proposal would satisfy the requirements of the statutory
                framework for BNG.
Reasons
Inappropriate development and openness
7.      The appeal site lies in the Green Belt and comprises Pinfield House, associated
        outbuildings and garden land. The proposal would replace the existing dwelling
        and some of the outbuildings with a larger dwelling on a revised footprint.
8.      The fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping
        land permanently open. Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate and by
        definition harmful unless it falls within a category in Policy GB7 of the Framework
        that is not to be regarded as inappropriate.
9.      The categories in Policy GB7 relevant to the proposal are GB7:1.b, which includes
        the replacement of an existing building where it is in the same use and not
        materially larger than the one it replaces, and GB7:1.e, which refers to the
        redevelopment of previously developed land where this would not cause
        substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
10. Turning first to GB7:1.b, the proposed replacement dwelling would be more than
    double the width of the existing dwelling whether measured at ground or first floor.
    It would also be higher and slightly deeper. The gross internal area would
    approximately double and, as a significant part would be single storey, the footprint
    would almost triple.
11. The appellant argues that, when considered alongside the recently approved
    certificate of lawfulness for an ancillary building1, the replacement dwelling would
    not be materially larger. However, GB7:1.b refers to the replacement of an existing
    building, and the proposed ancillary building has not been constructed. Whilst it
    may be relevant as a potential fallback position, a matter to which I return later in
    my decision, it does not form part of the existing development against which the
    proposal is to be assessed for the purposes of this exception. Even taking account
    of the removal of existing outbuildings apart from the double garage and carport,
    the replacement building would be materially larger. Therefore, GB7:1.b does not
    apply and the proposal would, in terms of this criterion, form inappropriate
    development.
12. The appellant contends that the site forms previously developed land and
    therefore Framework Policy GB7:1.e applies. This identifies the redevelopment of
    previously developed land that would not cause substantial harm to openness as
    not inappropriate development. The appeal site has been lawfully developed and
    is occupied by permanent structures. It therefore falls within the definition of
    previously developed land in Annex B to the Framework. By demolishing the
    existing dwelling and some associated outbuildings and building a replacement
    dwelling, the proposal would amount to redevelopment of the appeal site.

1
    W/26/00474/CLPU


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008404


         Accordingly, the proposal would fall to be considered under Policy GB7.1e, subject
         to consideration of openness which I address below.
13. The Planning Practice Guidance2 explains that assessing impacts on openness
    requires a judgement based on the circumstances of the case considering factors
    including spatial and visual aspects, the duration of the development, and the
    degree of activity likely to be generated such as traffic.
14. As discussed above, the proposed dwelling would be materially larger than the
    buildings it would replace and, in any event, would be a substantial structure. Even
    taking account of the recently granted certificate of proposed lawfulness for an
    outbuilding to provide a home office, gym, sauna and wet room, the increased
    mass and bulk of the replacement dwelling would reduce openness spatially.
15. Turning to the visual aspects of openness, the proposal would sit at the end of the
    driveway off Brown Heath Lane within extensive garden land with mature trees
    and vegetation which would filter views from the road. It would be well screened
    from the nearby public right of way by established hedging. Its size and
    contemporary design would give it a strong visual presence, but the existing
    planting and being set further back from the road than the current dwelling, would
    limit its visual effect.
16. From the rear, the visual prominence of the existing dwelling is reduced by the
    mono-pitched roof and limited first floor glazing. The proposal would have a taller
    eaves height and include large full-height areas of glazing, which would give it a
    prominent appearance to the rear. As I noted from my site visit, views of the rear of
    appeal site are possible looking back from the public right of way, but they are
    reduced as a result of the topography of the land at that point.
17. The proposal would continue the existing use of the site as a single dwellinghouse.
    Whilst the replacement dwelling would be larger, there is little to indicate that it
    would result in a material increase in parked vehicles, domestic paraphernalia or
    similar features that could affect openness. Accordingly, it would not materially
    increase the spatial or visual effects arising from the appeal site's residential use.
18. Noting the increase in the size, footprint and volume of the replacement dwelling,
    the effect on openness is not determined solely by a quantitative comparison of
    built form. The appeal site is already occupied by a detached dwelling and
    associated buildings within substantial grounds. The proposal’s increased scale
    would reduce openness, but it would be contained within the existing residential
    curtilage, and would remove the majority of the outbuildings, consolidating the built
    form into a more coherent arrangement centred on the replacement dwelling.
19. Bringing all the above together, taking account of the existing character of the site,
    the contained nature of the proposal, the limited spatial and visual effects identified
    above, and the absence of any material increase in activity, the harm to openness
    which would occur would fall well short of substantial harm. The proposal therefore
    falls within Policy GB7:1.e and is not inappropriate development in the Green Belt
    for the purposes of the development plan and the Framework, including the effect
    on openness.



2
    Paragraph: 013 Reference ID: 64-013-20250225


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decision 6008404


20. Policy SWDPR 04 of the SWDPR requires substantial weight to be given to any
    harm to the Green Belt and states that Green Belt proposals will be determined in
    accordance with the Framework. However, the Framework directs that
    development which is not inappropriate should not be regarded as harmful to the
    Green Belt. Accordingly, applying the more recent Framework, I conclude the
    proposal would not conflict with SWDPR 04 read as a whole.
Principle of replacement dwelling
21. The appeal site is outside any defined development boundary. The main parties
    accept it is therefore in open countryside, where development will be strictly
    controlled in accordance with the spatial strategy in Policy SWDPR 03, subject to
    other policies within the SWDPR. Policy SWDPR 23 states that the replacement of
    an existing dwelling in the countryside with another single dwelling will be
    permitted subject to the criteria set out in the policy.
22. The Council raises concern about only one of the criteria in SWDPR 23. Criterion
    A.iii. requires that the replacement dwelling is not disproportionately larger than the
    existing dwelling and will not exceed the existing gross internal floorspace by more
    than 30%.
23. As measured by the appellant’s architects, the existing dwelling has a footprint of
    112 m² and a gross internal floor area of 143.2 m², while the proposed dwelling
    would have a gross internal floor area of 345 m². Policy SWDPR 23 expects
    proposals to be measured against the existing dwelling, with any extension within
    the previous five years counting towards the 30% increase in gross internal
    floorspace.
24. If implemented, the detached ancillary outbuilding recently granted a certificate of
    lawfulness would provide 113 m² of space, including facilities similar to some of
    those proposed at ground floor level within the replacement dwelling.
    Notwithstanding the appellant’s intention to construct the ancillary outbuilding if
    permission is not granted for the proposal, it would not count towards the baseline
    against which the proposal should be measured under Policy SWDPR 23.
25. The reasoned justification for Policy SWDPR 23 seeks to retain existing dwellings
    where possible. It indicates that the main justification for retaining small dwellings
    is design related because larger new properties can adversely affect the character
    of the area. The maximum percentage increase is intended to ensure any increase
    is proportionate. The Council has not objected to the proposal’s design beyond its
    size relative to the existing dwelling, and I have no reason to disagree with its
    conclusion that the scheme would be high-quality and would complement the
    locality.
26. Nevertheless, the proposal would significantly exceed the size limitations in Policy
    SWDPR 23 and would be disproportionately larger than the dwelling it would
    replace. Consequently, it would not satisfy the policy requirements for replacement
    dwellings in the countryside and would not be one of the forms of development
    supported in the open countryside by the development plan’s spatial strategy.
    Therefore, I conclude that the proposed replacement dwelling would not be
    acceptable in this countryside location having regard to relevant development plan
    policies.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008404


27. Accordingly, it would conflict with Policies SWDPR 03 and SWDPR 23 of the
    SWDPR with regard to their expectation that development in the open countryside
    will be strictly controlled while allowing the replacement of an existing dwelling
    subject to the criteria set out.
Protected Species
28. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (Habitats
    Regulations) require me to have regard to the potential effects of the development
    on protected species. Circular 06/2005 also advises that the presence or absence
    of protected species, and the extent to which they may be affected, should be
    established before planning permission is granted and that ecological surveys
    should be deferred to planning conditions only in exceptional circumstances.
29. A Preliminary Ecological Assessment (PEA) undertaken in August 2024 identified
    a bat roost within the existing dwelling and recommended further surveys. Those
    surveys confirmed a day roost and established that a Natural England licence
    would be required before demolition could take place. Having had regard to
    Regulations 9(1) and 9(3) of the Habitats Regulations and noting that there is no
    dispute between the parties on this matter, I have no reason to conclude that the
    necessary licence would be unlikely to be granted in respect of the dwelling.
    Accordingly, this aspect of the proposal does not weigh against the development.
30. The PEA was prepared on the basis that the outbuildings would be retained.
    However, the proposal subsequently evolved to include the demolition of all
    outbuildings other than the wooden garage and carport. No bat survey information
    has been provided in respect of the brick-built garage, which the Council considers
    could provide opportunities for bat roosting, and which the PEA classified as
    having moderate suitability for roosting bats.
31. The appellant argues that the removal of roof tiles, said to be following storm
    damage, has left the building exposed to the elements and therefore unsuitable for
    bats. However, there is no substantive evidence before me regarding when the
    tiles were lost or the resultant impact on the suitability of the structure for roosting
    bats. Moreover, the appellant’s own ecological evidence advised that further
    survey work would be required if demolition of the outbuildings is proposed.
32. In the absence of that survey work, I cannot be satisfied that demolition of the
    brick-built garage would not harm legally protected bat species, nor can I conclude
    that the proposal would be capable of being licensed if required.
33. With regard to great-crested newts (GCN), the PEA identified a man-made pond
    (P1) within the appellant’s ownership adjacent to the appeal site which was
    assessed as having good suitability to support GCN. A further pond nearby (P2)
    was dry at the time of the survey, and ten additional ponds were identified within
    500 metres of the site. The PEA advises that GCN surveys would be required if
    more than 100 m² of suitable terrestrial habitat would be lost, subject to ponds
    within the area of influence containing water.
34. No GCN surveys have been submitted. The appellant states that the ornamental
    pond (P1) is fed by a pump which has since been switched off, leaving the pond
    dry and unsuitable for GCN. However, Natural England’s standing advice indicates
    that surveys may be required where there is a suitable waterbody within 500
    metres of the development site, including where ponds hold water only seasonally.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008404


      Moreover, the evidence before me does not establish whether the proposal would
      result in the loss of more than 100 m² of suitable terrestrial habitat, a circumstance
      which the appellant’s own ecological assessment identifies as necessitating further
      survey work.
35. Whilst neither pond close to the site contained water at the time of my visit, this
    occurred during a period of exceptionally dry weather and does not demonstrate
    that they are permanently incapable of supporting GCN. Taking these matters
    together, I do not have sufficient information before me to exclude the possibility of
    adverse effects on GCN or their habitat.
36. The submitted evidence demonstrates that the effects of demolishing the existing
    dwelling on bats could be addressed through mitigation and licensing. However,
    insufficient survey information has been provided in relation to the brick-built
    garage and the potential effects of the proposal on GCN. In accordance with
    Circular 06/2005, these matters should ordinarily be resolved before planning
    permission is granted and I have seen no exceptional circumstances that would
    justify a different approach. Consequently, it has not been demonstrated that the
    proposal would avoid unacceptable effects on protected species or that any
    necessary mitigation and licensing measures could be secured.
37. The proposal therefore conflicts with Policy SWDPR 29 of the SWDPR insofar as it
    advises that proposals that would compromise the favourable condition of,
    amongst other things, species or habitats of principal importance recognised in the
    Worcestershire Biodiversity Action Plan or listed under section 41 of the Natural
    Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006, will only be supported if the need
    for and the public benefits of the proposed development significantly outweigh the
    loss.
38. Additionally, this would be contrary to Policy N2 of the Framework and the
    precautionary approach set out in Circular 06/2005.
Biodiversity net gain
39. BNG is a statutory requirement introduced by the Environment Act 2021. Where
    applicable, it is secured through a statutory planning condition intended to ensure
    a minimum 10% increase in biodiversity value. Article 7 of the Town and Country
    Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 requires
    an application for planning permission to be accompanied by a statement
    confirming whether the development would be subject to the statutory BNG
    condition and if not the reasons for that. If BNG is applicable, further information is
    required so the statutory BNG condition can be applied and discharged.
40. The proposal includes substantial biodiversity enhancements, but they are not
    secured by a planning obligation or any other mechanism before me, which
    reduces the weight that could be placed on them. The appellant instead relies on
    the proposal being exempt from the BNG regime as a self-build dwelling. Whether
    that exemption applies depends on the dwelling being properly secured as a self-
    build dwelling.
41. No legal mechanism, such as a planning obligation under section 106 of the Town
    and Country Planning Act 1990 (1990 Act), to secure the proposal as self-build
    development was submitted to the Council prior to its determination of the
    proposal. However, an executed unilateral undertaking dated 25 August 2026 has

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008404


      been submitted in support of the appeal. It has been executed by the owners as a
      deed and is expressed to take effect as a planning obligation under section 106 of
      the 1990 Act. It secures the dwelling as a self-build dwelling and requires evidence
      of compliance to be provided following completion and occupation.
42. I am satisfied that this provides sufficient certainty that the dwelling would be
    delivered and occupied as self-build development for the purposes of the
    exemption relied upon. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would satisfy the
    requirements of the statutory framework for BNG. Consequently, the proposal
    would not conflict with Policy SWDPR 30 insofar as it requires that all qualifying
    development proposals must deliver the statutory minimum measurable BNG
    attributable to the development in line with legislation.
Other Matters
43. The recently granted certificate of lawful proposed use or development for an
    ancillary building represents a fallback position that could be implemented if the
    appeal were to fail. The building would provide some of the accommodation
    facilities sought within the replacement dwelling. Although less substantial than the
    appeal proposal, it would add to the dispersed built form on the site rather than
    consolidate the development as proposed. Given the realistic prospect of
    implementation, I afford the fallback moderate weight in favour of the proposal.
44. The proposal would deliver an energy-efficient dwelling designed to Passivhaus
    standards. The Council accepts it would reduce operational carbon emissions and
    represent a benefit of the scheme. The proposal would also achieve a high-quality
    contemporary design. Although these sustainability and design credentials are
    commendable, they rely on established principles rather than anything particularly
    innovative or exceptional. I therefore attach moderate weight to these factors in
    favour of the proposal.
45. The Council accepts that, in accordance with Annex D, paragraph 9 of the
    Framework, it is now required to demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites, including a 20% buffer. It has confirmed that the South
    Worcestershire Councils' Five Year Housing Land Supply Report, published in
    June 2026, demonstrates a 5.48-year housing land supply. There is no substantive
    evidence before me that leads to a different conclusion. In any event, as the
    proposal is for a replacement dwelling, it would not add to the overall housing
    stock, and this matter carries limited weight in my determination.
46. I have had regard to the representations made in support of the proposal, including
    its design, sustainability and perceived benefits to the character of the area. Those
    matters have been considered against the evidence and the relevant planning
    policies and are reflected in my conclusions elsewhere in this decision.
Planning Balance
47. The proposal would not constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt,
    and I have found no conflict in relation to the statutory framework for BNG.
    However, it would conflict with Policy SWDPR 23 because the replacement
    dwelling would be disproportionately larger than the dwelling it would replace and,
    consequently, it would conflict with the spatial strategy in Policy SWDPR 03. I have
    also found that it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would avoid


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008404


      unacceptable effects on protected species, contrary to Policy SWDPR 29. The
      proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan when read as a whole.
48. The proposal would replace a dwelling that needs modernisation with a dwelling
    that meets modern standards and a more coherent development than could arise
    from the fallback position represented by the lawful ancillary building. It would also
    deliver environmental benefits through its Passivhaus-led design. In addition, the
    proposal includes biodiversity enhancements which, if delivered, would provide
    ecological benefits. There would also be modest temporary economic benefits
    arising from construction activity.
49. Policy S5 of the Framework sets out how the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development should be applied to development outside settlements. It also
    indicates that development in the Green Belt should be determined in accordance
    with the relevant Green Belt policies. In this case, as I have found that the
    proposal would not be inappropriate development in the Green Belt, the proposal
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework taken as a whole.
50. Policy S5:2 indicates that adverse effects are likely to substantially outweigh
    benefits where a proposal fails to comply with a national decision-making policy
    requiring refusal in particular circumstances. Policy N2 states that development
    should be refused where significant harm to biodiversity cannot be avoided,
    adequately mitigated or, as a last resort, compensated for. As the evidence does
    not establish the likely effects on protected species, or whether any necessary
    mitigation and licensing could be secured, that harm has not been satisfactorily
    addressed. Alongside the conflict with Policies SWDPR 03 and SWDPR 23, the
    adverse effects would substantially outweigh the benefits when assessed against
    the Framework taken as a whole.
Conclusion
51. The proposal would conflict with the development plan read as a whole and there
    are no material considerations of sufficient weight to indicate that a decision
    should be taken other than in accordance with it. The appeal is therefore
    dismissed.

MG Garrard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
