Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Alison Fish BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008414
Land Opposite Trewithin Terrace, Trewithin, Ashton, Helston, Cornwall TR13 9TQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Robin Hawkins against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•   The application Ref is PA26/00144.
•   The development proposed is construction of affordable led development of minimum 2, maximum 2
    dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties have had the
   opportunity to comment on the implications of these changes for the appeal, and I
   have taken it into account in coming to my decision.
3. The Planning Practice Guidance advises that permission in principle is an
   alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-led development. The
   permission in principle consent route has 2 stages: the first stage (or permission in
   principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-principle. The scope of the
   considerations for permission in principle is limited to location, land use and the
   amount of development permitted. All other matters are considered as part of the
   second (‘technical details consent’) stage, when the detailed development
   proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2 stages.
4. The planning application form is clear that the appeal relates to a minimum of 2 and
   a maximum of 2 dwellings. I have assessed the proposal on this basis and treated
   the drawings as being for illustrative purposes only.
5. The Council considered the proposal as an affordable-led housing development.
   For the sake of consistency and notwithstanding the lack of a legally binding
   mechanism to secure this, so have I.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
   regard to location, proposed land use and the amount of development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008414


Reasons
7. The appeal site comprises a rectangular parcel of land. It is enclosed by
   established hedges on all sides, including along the road frontage, where an
   existing field access gate is located.
8. The site lies opposite a row of semi-detached dwellings that extend along the
   northern side of the road. To the south, beyond the established roadside hedgerow,
   the landscape is open in character, with far reaching views across the surrounding
   countryside. While a limited number of scattered properties are present on the
   southern side of the road, the predominance of development along the northern
   frontage creates a strong linear settlement pattern and reinforces the area's
   distinctive character.
9. Policy 9 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010-2030 adopted
   November 2016 (CLP) relates to rural exception sites. This permits development on
   sites outside of, but adjacent to the existing built-up area of smaller towns, villages
   and hamlets, whose primary purpose is to provide affordable housing to meet local
   needs where they would be well related to the physical form of the settlement and
   appropriate in scale, character and appearance.
10. Despite its proximity to the existing residential development in Trewithin Terrace,
    the appeal site forms part of the area of open countryside to the south. It is visually
    and physically separated from the established linear built form of the settlement by
    the intervening public highway and established roadside hedge. The appeal
    proposal would disrupt the well-defined and established linear pattern of the
    settlement, undermining its cohesive form and character.
11. Whilst there are examples to properties located to the south of the road, these are
    further to the west and well screened such that they are not readily apparent from
    the immediate environs of the appeal site, nor do they detract from the strong linear
    character I have described above. My attention has been drawn to an appeal
    decision relating to the development of land at Praa Sands1. However, in that case
    the Inspector describes existing residential development on two sides of the appeal
    site, so it differs somewhat from that before me.
12. For these reasons, the proposed development would not be well related to the
    physical form of the settlement nor appropriate in terms of scale or character.
13. The appeal site is located within the Godolphin and Tregonning Hill Area of Great
    Landscape Value (AGLV). Godolphin and Tregonning Hills are prominent land
    forms providing panoramic views over the gently undulating rural landscape which
    is enclosed with hedgerows and trees.
14. I saw that the existing dwellings to the north of the appeal site, were particularly
    visible from the elevated public highway to the south east of the appeal site on
    Tregonning Hill. From here the rural setting of the settlement is particularly
    apparent. Whilst the appeal site is not large, and the development relates to only
    two dwellings, the proposal would result in the encroachment of development into
    the currently undeveloped landscape setting of the settlement. It would appear as
    an incongruous intrusion into the countryside, an impact which could not be
    mitigated by landscaping proposals.

1
    Appeal Ref: APP/D0840/W/25/3370001 Land West of Lowenna, Pentreath Lane, Praa Sands, Penzance TR20 9AD


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
Appeal Decision 6008414


15. The appeal site is also located within the Tregonning and Gwinear section of the
    Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape World Heritage Site (WHS). WHSs
    are places of outstanding universal value, defined as of a cultural and/or natural
    significance that are so exceptional as to transcend national boundaries.
16. The Management Plan2 sets out the Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) of the
    WHS, highlighting the survival of features across the landscape that demonstrate
    the significant contribution made by Cornwall and West Devon to Britain’s Industrial
    Revolution during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries through deep copper
    and tin mining. It highlights the need to conserve the OUV, integrity and authenticity
    of the WHS with the key landscape attributes of the Tregonning and Gwinear
    section of the WHS including mine sites, mining settlements and mineworker’s
    smallholdings.
17. I accept that no physical remains survive on the appeal site. However, it is evident
    that the appeal site is located in a rural mining landscape which does contain
    physical reminders of the mining heritage of area including a nearby chimney stack
    which I saw from the road in front of the appeal site. Interested parties also refer to
    the properties in Trewithin Terrace having been built for mineworkers.
18. Despite this, no substantive attempt has been made to understand whether the
    appeal site or its open and undeveloped character which provides views towards
    the wider rural landscape and back towards Trewithin Terrace, are characteristics
    that contribute to the significance of the WHS, as required by Policy HE5 of the
    Framework. On the basis of the evidence before me, particularly the presence of
    nearby mining remains and the visual connection of the appeal site to the
    surrounding mining landscape I cannot rule out the possibility that the proposal
    would have a harmful effect on the integrity, authenticity and therefore significance
    of the WHS.
19. Whilst any harm is likely to be minor given the scale of the proposed development
    and the extent of the WHS as a whole, the Framework states that any harm to a
    designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight3.
    It also requires that the effect on the asset and its significance is weighed against
    any public benefits, as does Policy 24 of the CLP.
20. The Council’s 5-year housing land supply sits at 3.9 years which is well below the
    Government’s expectation. In light of this, the proposal would provide additional
    housing, including much needed affordable housing in the local parish. This would
    make a modest but nonetheless useful contribution towards housing supply at a
    time when the Council are failing to deliver sufficient housing. For these reasons I
    give these public benefits moderate weight.
21. There would also be economic and social benefits arising from the construction and
    occupation of the units in terms of jobs and expenditure. Given the scale of the
    proposed development, these public benefits attract modest weight.
22. Detailed landscaping proposals are not before me and the benefits to biodiversity
    have not been quantified. Securing a high standard of design at technical details
    consent stage is a general expectation for development rather than a benefit of this
    proposal. Together these considerations attract very limited weight.

2
    The Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape World Heritage Site Management Plan 2020-2025
3
    Policy HE6 (3) of the National Planning Policy Framework August 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              3
Appeal Decision 6008414


23. The Inspector in the Praa Sands appeal gave significant weight to the delivery of
    affordable housing. However, that development related to between 6 and 8
    affordable homes and is therefore a different scale of development to the one
    before me.
24. Despite documentary evidence of previous development on the site, the appeal site
    is not previously developed land as the definition excludes land which was
    previously developed but where the remains of the permanent structure or fixed
    structure have blended into the landscape.
25. Policies S5 and HO10 of the Framework provide support for housing, including
    rural exception sites. However, as I have set out above, the site does not adjoin nor
    is it physically well-related to a settlement.
26. I have found that I cannot rule out the possibility that the proposal would have a
    harmful effect on the OUV of the WHS, owing to the insufficient information before
    me that would enable me to conclude on this matter. Policy HE6 of the Framework
    states that when considering the potential effect of a development on the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to
    the asset’s conservation. In this context, the moderate weight I have given,
    collectively, to the public benefits of the proposal are not sufficient to outweigh the
    potential harm to the designated heritage asset.
27. Bringing all this together, I conclude that the site would not be suitable for the
    development proposed, having regard to location, proposed land use and the
    amount of development. The proposal would therefore be contrary to Policies 1, 2,
    3, 9, 12, 21, 23 and 24 of the CLP which set out the spatial strategy for housing
    including rural exception sites, together with the need to ensure the best use of
    land and protect Cornwall’s natural and historic environment.
Other Matters
28. I have had regard to various comments of interested parties including, but not
    limited to, the impact on highway safety, light pollution, noise, outlook, flood risk,
    contamination and land ownership. However, these are not matters which would fall
    within the scope of consideration of permission in principle. In any event, I have
    identified harm in respect of the main issues.
29. Had I been minded to allow the appeal, I would first have needed to determine
    whether or not the proposal amounted to habitats development as Article 5B(1) of
    the Town and Country Planning (Permission in Principle) Order 2017 provides that
    permission in principle cannot be given for habitats development. However, as the
    appeal is to be dismissed, such an assessment is not necessary.
Conclusion
30. The proposed development would be contrary to the development plan and there
    are no material considerations, including the Framework that outweigh this conflict.
    Consequently, with reference to Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory
    Purchase Act 2004, the appeal is dismissed.

Alison Fish INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
