Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by G Dring BA (Hons) MA MRTPI MAUDE
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008840
10 Goodminns Estate, Sedgeford, Norfolk PE36 5NB
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr Ryan Watts against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk Borough
     Council.
    The application Ref is 26/00265/F.
    The development proposed is self-build bungalow following sub-division of site and demolition of
     existing detached garage.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on 17
      August 2026 which replaces the previous version. Both parties have had the
      opportunity to comment on the new Framework. Accordingly, I have had regard to
      the current Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues are:
                the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
               whether the proposed dwelling would provide satisfactory living conditions
                for future occupiers in respect of noise; and
               the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of 8
                Goodminns Estate in respect of outlook, privacy and noise.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.    The site comprises a sloping area of land to the side of 10 Goodminns Estate
      which forms part of a corner plot. The surrounding dwellings, including No 10, are
      generally single storey and set back from the road, behind front gardens and
      individual driveways. Consequently, there is consistency in the layout of built form
      as well as a sense of spaciousness which contributes positively to the character
      and appearance of the area. The southern boundary of the site runs alongside the
      rear garden that serves 8 Goodminns Estate with the side elevation of No 8 facing
      towards the front elevation of No 10. Heacham Road runs alongside the northern
      boundary of the site.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008840


5.    The proposed bungalow would follow the existing stepped positioning of dwellings
      as you move from west to east along this part of Goodminns Estate. However, this
      would result in the proposed dwelling being in closer proximity to the southern
      boundary of the plot, when compared with No 10 and other dwellings further west.
      Therefore, the proposed siting would be at odds with the prevailing pattern of
      development, and it would not result in the same level of spaciousness.
6.    The proposed parking configuration would include a shared turning area for use by
      future occupants and the occupants of No 10 alongside a tandem parking
      arrangement for both dwellings. Whilst no objection is raised by the Council in
      terms of highway safety, the layout of the parking and turning area and the
      functionality of it would appear as a more intensive design approach which would
      result in a constrained arrangement that would be at odds with the character of the
      area.
7.    The lack of spaciousness towards the southern end of the plot and the presence of
      an incongruous parking and turning arrangement would be tempered by the corner
      location and the fact that the proposal would not be significantly dominant visually.
      However, the incongruity I have found above would be discernible from the rear
      garden areas of the neighbouring dwellings to the south and from No 10.
      Consequently, some harm would result.
8.    The proposal would provide a single storey dwelling on a similar sized plot to many
      others in the area. The plot at No 10, whilst reduced in size, would remain
      sufficient. Whilst the footprint of the proposal would be larger than some dwellings
      on the estate, it would not appear substantially so. Sufficient garden space would
      be provided for both No 10 and the proposed dwelling. The design of the dwelling
      would be restrained, and the materials would be in keeping. In these respects, I do
      not find that the proposal would be incongruous.
9.    Nevertheless, when all the factors are considered together, the proposal would be
      at odds with the character and appearance of the area. It would therefore result in
      harm to the character and appearance of the area. It would be contrary to Policies
      LP02, LP18 and LP21 of the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk Local Plan 2021-2040
      (LP) and Policy H3 of the Sedgeford Neighbourhood Development Plan 2017-2036
      Adopted September 2019 (NP) which seek, amongst other things, that
      developments respect and enhance local character whilst responding to the
      context of the area.
Living conditions for future occupiers
10. A shared turning space would be located between No 10 and the proposed
    dwelling. It would be necessary for motorists to manoeuvre within this, in order to
    reverse into or out of the two parking areas. Such vehicle movements would be
    increased by the proposed tandem parking arrangement to the new dwelling and
    No 10, whereby one vehicle would be parked in front of another at both dwellings.
11. The gap between the proposed dwelling and the driveway and turning space
    would be relatively narrow. Vehicles accessing No 10 would need to pass close to
    the proposed dwelling, alongside the main entrance door and two bedroom
    windows. This would concentrate vehicle noise close to the rooms used by the
    future occupants. Whilst the movements would be limited to serve one dwelling
    and a hard surface could reduce the extent of the noise, this level of vehicle
    activity in such close proximity to a neighbouring property would not be typical of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008840


       the area. Consequently, the proposal would lead to a level of noise disturbance
       that would likely exceed levels that occupiers would reasonably expect.
12. The proposal would therefore result in unsatisfactory living conditions for future
    occupants, in respect of noise. It would be contrary to Policy LP21 of the LP which
    seeks, amongst other things, that the amenity of the occupiers of the new
    development will be satisfactory, having regard to a number of factors including
    noise.
Living conditions of the occupiers of 8 Goodminns Estate
13. The site slopes from north to south and sits higher than No 8. Consequently,
    despite that it would be single storey, the proposed dwelling would be higher than
    No 8. Whilst the roof of the proposed dwelling would slope away from the shared
    boundary, it would nevertheless be located a relatively short distance from the
    boundary and would run alongside it for a considerable length.
14. The proximity to the boundary, the overall height, the difference in levels and the
    length of the dwelling located alongside the shared boundary would result in a
    sense of enclosure for the occupants of the garden area serving No 8 that would
    be overbearing. I did not witness, nor am I directed to a similar relationship in the
    surrounding area, where a dwelling is positioned alongside the side boundary of a
    rear garden in the same way.
15. Whilst some overlooking is common, there are currently no windows looking
    directly towards the rear garden of No 8 from the north. The proposed dwelling
    would result in one kitchen window, one bedroom window and an access door
    facing the southern boundary. These would be in close proximity to the boundary
    and given the change in levels, it is very likely that views from the proposed
    dwelling would directly overlook the private garden area of No 8. This would
    significantly reduce the level of privacy currently enjoyed by the occupants of No 8.
16. The appellant asserts that trellis could be used to provide additional height to the
    existing fence, thus limiting the potential for overlooking. No substantive
    information is provided, however, the detail shown on the Street Scene drawing
    suggests that the height of the fence in relation to the eaves height of No 8 would
    be significant. Without compelling evidence to the contrary it is likely that the
    altered boundary treatment would harmfully increase the sense of enclosure of the
    rear garden space serving No 8.
17. Vehicles accessing both No 10 and the new dwelling would utilise the access
    which would run alongside the side boundary of No 8. Vehicles parking at the new
    dwelling would continue alongside the full length of the rear garden of No 8 directly
    adjacent to the boundary. The turning area which would be used by those
    accessing No 10 and the new dwelling would be directly adjacent the rear garden
    of No 8 and in close proximity to its rear elevation also.
18. Consequently, it is very likely that there would be an intensification in the number
    of vehicles moving alongside the side boundary of No 8 and as a result, increased
    noise disturbance from vehicular movements would occur. Whilst the use of a hard
    surface may help to limit the vehicle noise to some degree, it would not alter the
    fact that those additional movements would occur in such close proximity to the
    boundary. Whilst parking could be arranged in a similar way to serve No 10


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008840


       without the proposal, in my view, the increase in the number of dwellings is more
       likely to result in an increase in vehicular movements.
19. Taken together, the effects on outlook, privacy and noise disturbance would result
    in a significant harmful effect on the living conditions of the occupants of No 8.
20. Due to the orientation of the proposed dwelling, sitting to the north of No 8, the
    effect on sunlight reaching No 8 would not be significant. Nevertheless, this does
    not override my concerns set out above.
21. The proposal would therefore result in significant harmful effects on the living
    conditions of the occupiers of No 8 in respect of outlooks, privacy and noise. It is
    contrary to Policy LP21 of the LP which seeks amongst other things, that
    development does not have a significant adverse impact on the amenity of others.
    It is also contrary to Policy H3 of the NP, which seeks that proposals are not
    harmful to the living conditions of neighbouring occupants.
Other Matter
22. The site is within the Zone of Influence of a number of European Sites that are
    protected under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as
    amended). However, Regulation 63(1) requires an Appropriate Assessment (AA)
    to be carried out where the competent authority is minded to give consent for the
    proposed development. As I find that the development is unacceptable for the
    reasons set out above, there is no need for me to carry out an AA.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
23. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires
    applications to be determined in accordance with the development plan unless
    material considerations indicate otherwise. The proposal would be contrary to the
    LP policies identified above in relation to the character and appearance of the area
    and living conditions for future and existing occupants. Consequently, the proposal
    would be contrary to the development plan when read as a whole.
24. Policy S3:1 a. of the Framework states that Policy S4 should be applied when
    considering development proposals within settlements. Policy S4:1 states that
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits for doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    Framework policies.
25. Policy S4:2 sets out criteria where the benefits of approving development are likely
    to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, although these do not form a
    closed list. In this case Policy S4:2 criterion a. ii. regarding development within
    residential curtilages is relevant along with Policy S4:2 c relating to decision-
    making policies which state that proposals should be refused in certain
    circumstances.
26. There is no dispute between the parties that the site is within the settlement and
    therefore in principle the location is acceptable. The proposal would result in one
    additional dwelling, within an existing settlement which would provide social
    benefits. There would be economic benefits during the construction phase and
    after with future occupants supporting local services and facilities. There would
    also be some environmental benefits through the landscaping on the site.
    However, given the scale of the development those benefits would be limited.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008840


27. The appellant states that the proposal would be a self-build dwelling, for which
    there is unmet need in the Council area. However, there is no mechanism before
    me which would secure the development as such. The Council has provided
    suggested wording for a planning condition in this respect, however, based on the
    evidence before me it has not been demonstrated that this would meet the tests
    set out at Framework Policy DM6. I therefore attribute negligible weight to the
    asserted self-build nature of the development.
28. The site lies within the Norfolk Coast National Landscape (NL). Framework Policy
    N4:1 states that development within such Protected Landscapes should be limited
    in scale and extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to the
    statutory purposes and special qualities of the NL. The scale of the development
    would be limited and within the settlement. It would therefore be sensitively located
    in respect of the Protected Landscape. This matter therefore weighs neither for nor
    against the proposal.
29. The site is outside of but adjacent to the Sedgeford Conservation Area (CA)
    boundary. Framework Policy HE6:1 states that substantial weight should be given
    to the conservation of designated heritage assets such as the CA. The significance
    of the CA lies in the intimate arrangement of historic buildings and how they
    interact with the surrounding landscape. Given the limited scale of the proposal
    and the siting within an established residential estate, it would appear visually
    separated from the CA. The proposal would therefore preserve the character and
    appearance of the CA, and it would not be harmful to it. This is a neutral
    consideration.
30. Policy DP3:1 of the Framework states that development proposals should respond
    to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Policy
    DP3:3 states that proposals should be refused, if without clear justification, they
    conflict with DP3:1. I have found that the impact on the character and appearance
    of the area would be tempered largely by the corner position of the site,
    nevertheless, there would be some harm in this respect which would be contrary to
    the Framework. I attribute moderate weight to this conflict.
31. Policy L2:1 d. ii of the Framework supports additional development within existing
    plots, subject to proposals providing acceptable living standards for residents and
    neighbours in terms of privacy and external amenity space. I have found above
    that there would be significant adverse effects on the living conditions of the
    neighbouring occupants at No 8, including in relation to privacy and the use of the
    rear garden. The proposal would therefore be contrary to this part of the
    Framework and as a result it would not make effective use of the land. I attribute
    significant weight to this conflict.
32. I therefore find that in combination, the adverse effects of the proposal would
    substantially outweigh the benefits in this case.
33. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and there are no
     material considerations, including the Framework, that indicate that I should take a
     decision other than in accordance with it. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

       G Dring
       INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
