Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 September 2026
by S.Burch BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008787
229 High Street, Orpington, Bromley BR6 0JU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 20M Class AA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Aziz against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 26/00098/NOT.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘erection of an upwards two stories extension creating to
     provide 6no. self-contained flats (3 x 1 bed flats (2p) and 3 x studio flats) with associated amenity
     space, bin and cycle store.’

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision, in so far as relevant to the subject matter of the prior approval.
Background and Main Issue
3.     Schedule 2, Part 20, Class AA of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the GPDO) permits
       development consisting of works for the construction of up to two additional
       storeys of new dwellinghouses immediately above the existing topmost storey on a
       detached building in commercial or mixed use. This right is subject to limitations
       which are specified at paragraph AA.1, and conditions which are set out at
       paragraph AA.2.
4. The Council conclude that the proposal would comply with the limitations set out at
   paragraph AA.1 of Class AA, such that it would fall within the scope of permitted
   development rights, subject to consideration of relevant matters of prior approval.
   On the evidence before me I see no reason to take a different view.
5.     The conditions set out in paragraph AA.2 (1) requires the developer to apply to the
       local planning authority for prior approval as to several specified issues before
       beginning development. This includes the external appearance of the building.
       This appeal follows the Council’s decision to refuse prior approval, as it
       determined that the proposal would be harmful in respect of that issue.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008787


6.       The Council’s reason for refusal states that the proposal would “constitute
         inappropriate overdevelopment of the site, undermining the established local
         pattern of development and urban grain, and detracting from the visual amenity of
         the streetscene and the character and appearance of the area”. Case law1 has
         held that where prior approval is required in relation to the effect on the external
         appearance of a building, the decision maker can consider this effect both in terms
         of on the building itself, and on its surrounding area. I have therefore determined
         the appeal on this basis.
7.       Accordingly, the main issue in this appeal is whether prior approval should be
         granted as to the external appearance of the appeal building, including the
         surrounding area.
Reasons
8.       The appeal site relates to a three-storey building at the junction of High Street and
         Homefield Rise. Along High Street, buildings are generally up to three storeys in
         height. Although there is variation in roof form, the similar roof heights create a
         sense of uniformity within the street scene. Along Homefield Rise, as you travel
         away from the appeal site, there are some taller buildings.
9.       The resultant building would project substantially above the roofline of the majority
         of properties within this section of High Street. The increased height and scale
         would disrupt the prevailing sense of uniformity and cohesion that characterises
         High Street.
10. Whilst I acknowledge that corner locations can, in some circumstances,
    accommodate additional height, in this instance the resultant building would be
    substantially taller than most buildings along High Street and would not perform a
    visually coherent bookend function. The resultant building would appear visually
    jarring and unduly dominant within the street scene, and this would be
    exacerbated by its prominent corner location. The other mansard roof forms on
    corner plots in the area, as illustrated in the appellant’s appeal statement, are of a
    reduced height in comparison to the appeal proposal.
11. I acknowledge that this appeal follows a previously dismissed appeal at the site2.
    The appellant contends that the current scheme addresses the shortcomings
    identified in that earlier appeal. In particular, the development incorporates a
    mansard roof form and differentiating materials, together with several dormer
    windows and bay projections, among other design amendments intended to
    respond to the concerns previously raised.
12. I accept that the revised scheme would offer some improvements when compared
    with the previous proposal. The proposed metal cladding would provide a degree
    of visual cohesion with the red brick lower floors, whilst the bay windows would
    introduce some articulation to the elevations. However, the shallow pitch of the
    mansard roof, the limited set-back of the upper floors and the scale of the dormers
    would fail to create a genuinely subordinate upper storey. Consequently, the
    building would continue to read as a five-storey structure and would appear out of
    keeping with the prevailing character and scale of surrounding development.


1
    CAB Housing Ltd v SSLUHC & Broxbourne BC [2023] EWCA Civ 194.
2
    6002321


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6008787


13. My attention is drawn to a prior approval granted by the Council in recent years for
    a two-storey upward extension on the neighbouring site of 221-227 High Street.3 I
    acknowledge that this scheme was approved after the CAB Housing judgement4.
    Whilst the development did not appear to have been implemented at the time of
    my site visit, the evidence before me indicates that the approval remains extant.
    However, based on the submitted information, the uppermost floor of that scheme
    would be noticeably set back from the principal elevation facing High Street,
    thereby reducing its visual prominence.
14. By contrast, the proposed development would incorporate only a limited setback at
    the upper levels. Moreover, the appeal site occupies a prominent corner plot,
    whereas the neighbouring scheme relates to a mid-terrace property and was
    assessed under Schedule 2, Part 20, Class AB of the GPDO. Consequently, the
    appeal proposal would appear more prominent and visually intrusive within the
    street scene.
15. In any event, the prevailing built form along High Street is generally characterised
    by buildings of up to three storeys in height. Even if I were to allow the appeal,
    and this scheme and the neighbouring prior approval were to be subsequently
    implemented, the majority of properties along High Street would nevertheless
    remain no more than three storeys in height. As such, whilst I have taken the
    neighbouring prior approval scheme into account in my decision, it does not alter
    my conclusions, nor does it justify allowing the scheme.
16. My attention has been drawn to several other appeal decisions for prior approval
    schemes. The allowed appeal in Dartford5 resulted in the creation of a four-storey
    building. However, that decision notes the presence of a substantial commercial
    building of up to four storeys to the east of the appeal site, together with a number
    of other buildings of a similar height, including nearby residential properties. By
    contrast, the area surrounding the appeal site is predominantly characterised by
    buildings of up to three storeys. Consequently, I am not satisfised that this scheme
    would be directly comparable to the appeal scheme before me.
17. In relation to the allowed appeal in Chingford6, I have little information regarding
    the surrounding context of the site before me. Accordingly, I am unable to
    conclude that its circumstances are directly comparable to those of the appeal
    before me.
18. I therefore conclude that, for the reasons above, the proposed development would
    result in unacceptable harm to the external appearance of the appeal building,
    including the surrounding area. As a result, it would not satisfy condition AA.2(1)(e)
    of Class AA regarding the external appearance of the building.
19. The proposal would not comply with Policies 4 and 37 of the London Borough of
    Bromley Local Plan and Policy D3 of the London Plan, insofar as they are relevant
    to this prior approval matter. Collectively, these policies seek to ensure that
    development responds to the existing character of an area. It would also be
    contrary to the aims of the Framework, insofar as relevant to the subject matter of
    the prior approval.


3
  23/03488/CDETND
4
  CAB Housing Ltd v SSLUHC & Broxbourne BC [2023] EWCA Civ 194.
5
  APP/T2215/W/23/3326555
6
  APP/U5930/W/23/3318995


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6008787


20. The Council’s refusal reason also refers to the schemes noncompliance with
    Policy D4 of the LP. This policy relates to masterplans, design codes and design
    and access statements, amongst other things. It is therefore not relevant to the
    appeal proposal.
Other Matters
21. As set out, I have considered development plan policies only insofar as they are
    relevant to the prior approval matter, and in the context of the GPDO’s purpose of
    increasing the supply of housing. However, prior approval appeals cannot be
    determined on the basis of s38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
    2004, or as though the development plan must be applied. This is because the
    principle of development is established through the grant of permission by the
    GPDO.
22. Reference has been made to various social, economic and environmental benefits,
    including sustainable design and the contribution to the local housing supply at a
    time when the Council has a significant shortfall in its five-year housing land
    supply. The appellant also highlights support provided by the Framework for
    upwards extensions as a means of delivering additional homes. However, as
    mentioned, the principle of the development is already accepted through the
    GPDO. As set out, regard must be had to paragraphs of the Framework only in so
    far as they are relevant to the subject matter of the prior approval.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons given above, I conclude that prior approval should not be granted
    and therefore the appeal is dismissed.



S.Burch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
