Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Jonathan Edwards BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008562
Manor Court, North Side, Steeple Aston, Bicester OX25 4SE
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
       planning permission
•      The appeal is made by Mrs Veronica Oakeshott against Cherwell District Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/00019/F.
•      The development proposed is new two storey rear extension to replace existing single storey
       extension along with internal refurbishment and window replacement.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The appeal site lies within the Steeple Aston Conservation Area (the CA) and near
         to the listed buildings of Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse and the Church
         of St Peter and St Paul. In line with statutory duties1, I have paid special regard
         and attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
         appearance of the CA and preserving the setting of the listed buildings.
3.       The Council considers that the appeal property is not curtilage listed and I have no
         adequate evidence before me to consider differently. The Council’s Conservation
         Officer has previously suggested, when considering an earlier planning
         application, that the property should be identified as a non-designated heritage
         asset (NDHA). However, whilst the Historic Environment PPG notes that these can
         be identified as part of the decision-making process on planning applications, the
         earlier comments do not appear to have been concluded upon by the Council or
         referenced in its current appeal statement. Nevertheless, whilst I have not
         regarded the appeal property as a NDHA, it lies within the CA and is evidently of
         heritage significance.
4.       A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
         been issued since the appeal was lodged. There is no need to seek the main
         parties’ views on the new version of the Framework as its provisions on conserving
         and enhancing the historic environment are similar to the previous version.
Main Issues
5.       The Council has not issued a decision on the planning application leading to this
         appeal. However, in light of the appeal submissions, I consider the main issues are

1
    Sections 72(1) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008562


      whether the development would preserve or enhance the character or appearance
      of the CA and its effect on the setting and significance of the aforementioned listed
      buildings.
Reasons
Effect on the character and appearance of the CA.
6.    Manor Court is a 2 storey dwelling, positioned side on to North Side so that its
      wide front and rear elevations are roughly perpendicular to the highway. A stone
      boundary wall runs along the roadside boundary of the property’s back garden.
      The rear wall to the listed building Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse runs
      along the back boundary of the appeal site. There are clear views of the rear of
      Manor Court from the highway and from the church yard to the Church of St Peter
      and St Paul, which lies on higher land on the opposite side of the road.
7.    The appeal property is a good example of local vernacular as it has limestone and
      marlstone walls, stone roof slates and a traditional form and massing. Also, it has
      local historic interest as it formed part of the agricultural development associated
      with Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse. The submissions indicate the
      building was originally a single storey home for farm workers rather than a barn
      and it has been significantly altered and enlarged over time. Nonetheless, Manor
      Court has architectural and local historic interest.
8.    The appeal property lies in the historic centre of Steeple Aston and within the CA.
      This part of the village contains mainly residences, predominantly made of stone
      and with pitched roofs, although the church is the most prominent building. The
      streets are narrow and frequently lined with buildings or stone boundary walls. The
      medieval layout of the roads, the prevalence of quintessential stone houses as
      well as the historic interest of the church and the Manor Court Cottage Rectory
      Farmhouse all contribute towards the significance of the CA. Also, for the
      purposes of this appeal, I consider the significance, character and appearance of
      the CA is drawn from the range of built development within it, the relationship of
      the buildings to each other and the spaces and land around them. The views from
      the road of Manor Court and across its garden to the adjacent listed building
      contribute positively to the character and appearance of the locality.
9.    The proposal would include the replacement of an existing single storey projection
      with a larger, part single part double storey addition. The extension would have a
      noticeable effect on the appearance of the appeal property as it would be seen
      over the boundary wall from North Side and from the churchyard opposite.
10. The main part of Manor Court has a distinctive linear form that adds to its visual
    quality and allows appreciation of its origins and its evolution. To a degree, the
    existing rear projections interrupt this linear form. However, these additions do not
    detract from the simple form of the main roof as they are single storey and set
    below the eaves of the building. Also, their low height helps ensure the existing
    rear projections appear subservient to the main part of the house.
11. In contrast, the roof to the 2 storey element of the proposed extension would
    protrude well above the eaves level of the existing building. The proposal has been
    revised so the extension’s roof would be set slightly below the main ridgeline.
    However, it would still significantly affect the roof form of the host property. Also,
    the extension would dominate the rear elevation of Manor Court due to its height,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008562


      width and depth. As a consequence, it would visually overwhelm the rear of the
      appeal property so that the linear form of the main part of the house would not be
      so readily appreciated.
12. The external walls and roofs of the proposed extension would be constructed of
    materials to match the rest of the house. The proposed windows that would be
    seen from public vantage points would be of a design and of proportions that
    reflect existing fenestration. Unsympathetic elements such as larger windows,
    solar panels and rooflights would be mainly on the elevation facing away from the
    road and so they would not unduly affect the outward appearance of Manor Court.
13. Nonetheless, the identified harmful effects of the proposed extension on the rear of
    the host property would be visible from the road. In these regards, the proposal
    would undermine Manor Court’s positive contribution to the qualities of the CA.
14. Therefore, I conclude the development would not preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the CA. In these respects, it would be contrary to
    policy ESD15 of the Cherwell Local Plan adopted 2015 (2015 LP) and policy C28
    of the Cherwell Local Plan adopted 1996 (the 1996 LP) as well as policy HE9 of
    the Framework. These policies look for development to conserve and enhance
    conservation areas and those buildings that make a positive contribution to their
    character or appearance.
Effects on the settings and the significance of the listed buildings.
15. Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse is a grade II listed building. The list
    description mentions it was previously a manor house probably dating from about
    1400, although with later alterations and additions. Part of its significance lies with
    its age and historical association with the manor of Steeple Aston. The appellant’s
    heritage statement suggests that its architectural interest is derived from its
    principal elevations and internal features, although these cannot be seen from the
    appeal property or public vantage points. However, listed buildings are
    safeguarded for their inherent architectural and historic interest regardless of
    whether public views can be gained. Equally, the significance of a building is not
    just focused on frontages. In this case, large parts of the back wall to the listed
    building are visible from the road and churchyard. The stone walls and tiled roof in
    the rear of Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse reflect the local vernacular
    and so they are of architectural significance.
16. The extension would affect the setting of the listed building as it would be seen
    from the appeal property’s garden, from the road and from the churchyard in front
    of and alongside the rear of Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse. Moreover,
    the extension would be taller and of much greater volume than the existing
    projection to the rear of Manor Court and so it would further obstruct views of
    Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse compared to the existing situation. Also,
    by reason of its size and close proximity the extension would draw the eye away
    from the listed building. The development would only have a minor effect on the
    way Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse is seen. Even so, the obscuring of
    views and the distraction from the listed building would be detrimental to its setting
    and its architectural and historic significance.
17. The Church of St Peter and St Paul is a grade II* listed building. Its origins date
    from at least the 13th century although there has been several phases of
    subsequent rebuilding and alteration works. The significance of the church is partly

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008562


         derived from its age as well as its architecture that provides an insight into
         changing trends in design and workmanship over time. Moreover, it plays an
         important role in demonstrating the cultural and religious history of the village due
         to its long standing presence and prominence in the heart of the settlement. The
         close proximity and visual connection between the church and other buildings on
         North Side add to the appreciation of Steeple Aston’s history.
18. From a patio area to the rear of Manor Court there are views of the upper part of
    the church tower above the existing single storey rear projection. The proposed
    extension would block these views and so it would affect the way the church is
    experienced from the appeal property. The development would not impact on
    views of the church from public vantage points and it would therefore have only a
    marginal effect on how the church is seen in overall terms. Nonetheless, the loss
    of a view of the tower would be harmful to its significance, even if the view is from
    private land.
19. Intervisibility between the church and Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse is
    already obscured to a degree by vegetation. The proposal would cause a minor
    interruption to views between the buildings but a degree of intervisibility will
    remain. Even so, the long-standing visual and historic association between the
    buildings would be further eroded by the proposal. In these regards, the
    development would be harmful to the settings and historic significance of both the
    church and Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse.
20. Therefore, I conclude the development would result in harm to the significance of
    both listed buildings through development that is detrimental to their settings. In
    these respects, the proposal would be contrary to 2015 LP policy ESD15. This
    policy looks to ensure all development within the setting and the vicinity of any
    historic asset is of a design that complements the asset. Reference is made to
    1996 LP policy C28 but this contains no provisions relating to listed buildings and
    development within their settings.
Other heritage assets.
21. The Council suggests the stone wall along the roadside boundary of the appeal
    site is curtilage listed. Its significance partly lies with its age and use of
    sympathetic materials. It is also in a prominent position and so it contributes
    positively towards the wider street scene. The proposed extension would affect the
    setting of the wall as it would be seen behind it in views from the road and the
    churchyard. However, irrespective of whether the wall is listed, the extension
    would be set away from the roadside boundary and so it would not meaningfully
    affect how the wall is viewed within the street scene. As such, no harm would be
    caused to the significance of the boundary wall.
22. The appellant’s submissions2 also refer to other listed buildings within the village.
    The development would not affect the settings of these buildings due to the
    separation distances and intervening properties and vegetation.
23. I am referred by the appellant to a 2 storey extension to the nearby listed building
    called The Old School House that was granted planning permission and listed
    building consent in 1997. However, from the information provided, this extension is
    different to the current proposal, particularly in terms of its visibility and relationship

2
    Listed under paragraph 3.3.50 of the appellant’s Heritage Statement.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   4
Appeal Decision 6008562


      to other listed buildings. Therefore, I am not bound to arrive at the same
      conclusion in my assessment of this appeal scheme.
Other considerations and planning balance.
24. I have found the proposal would be unacceptable when considered against the
    main issues and so it would conflict with the statutory duties and the development
    plan when read as a whole. It follows to consider whether other factors justify
    allowing the proposal contrary to the development plan.
25. Part 4 of policy HE6 of the Framework states that where harm would be caused to
    the significance of a designated asset, that effect should be weighed against any
    public benefits. The development would include solar panels for the generation of
    renewable energy. The scheme would also facilitate the internal insulation of the
    house, so increasing energy efficiency. Policy HE6 of the Framework identifies
    enabling energy efficiency and low carbon heating measures as an important
    public benefit. However, whilst the solar panels attract some weight as public
    benefits the internal insulation could take place in the absence of this proposal.
26. The provision of additional floor space would help address the appellant’s
    accommodation requirements. However, there is little evidence to show the
    property as it stands is deficient in these regards. In any event, this is a private
    rather than a public benefit that attracts only limited weight.
27. The proposal would only affect the rear of Manor Court but its effects would be
    noticed from public vantage points within the central part of the village. The
    development would affect only a small part of the CA but nevertheless it would
    affect a prominent vernacular building in a sensitive position within the heart of the
    area. The proposal would have a modest effect on the CA’s significance. The
    detrimental effects on Manor Court Cottage Rectory Farmhouse would be
    noticeable from public vantage points. The proposal would cause a moderate
    degree of harm to the significance of this listed building due to the obscuring and
    overbearing effect on the rear elevation. The effects on the significance of the
    listed church would be limited as only views from a small part of the Manor Court’s
    back garden would be affected.
28. Part 1 of policy HE6 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be
    given to the conservation of a designated heritage asset. With this in mind, I find
    the harmful effects that would be caused to the significance of Manor Court
    Cottage Rectory Farmhouse, the Church of St Peter and St Paul and the CA would
    outweigh any public benefits of the proposal. As such, there is no clear or
    convincing justification for the harm that would be caused to the significance of
    these assets. Therefore, the development would be contrary to policy HE4 of the
    Framework. Accordingly, I find insufficient justification to allow the development
    contrary to the identified conflict with development plan policies.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given above, I conclude the appeal should be dismissed.

Jonathan Edwards
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
