Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by G Dring BA (Hons) MA MRTPI MAUDE
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008987
Land South of 2 Leighton Road, Hamerton, Cambridgeshire PE28 5QR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Marcus Berry against the decision of Huntingdonshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02302/FUL.
•    The development proposed is detached dwelling and ancillary detached garage and secure bicycle
     store.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026 which replaces the previous version. Both parties have had the
       opportunity to comment on the new Framework. Accordingly, I have had regard to
       the current Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           •    Whether the site is in a suitable location for new housing having regard to
                the spatial strategy set out in the development plan and the accessibility of
                services and facilities; and
           •    The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
Whether the site is in a suitable location
4.     Hamerton is defined as a small settlement in the Huntingdonshire Local Plan (LP).
       Policy LP 9 supports development within the built-up area of small settlements,
       subject to certain criteria being met. The policy also provides support for
       development proposals on land well-related to the built-up area where specifically
       supported by other policies in the LP.
5.     Hamerton is a dispersed settlement surrounded by countryside. The site
       comprises a parcel of fairly flat, open grassland with a frontage onto Leighton
       Road. Whilst it neighbours existing houses and associated garden areas on two
       sides, given its undeveloped nature it has an affinity with the surrounding



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008987


       countryside. As such, I find it to be in the countryside for the purposes of the
       development plan, outside of the settlement of Hamerton but directly adjacent to it.
6.     The built-up area of a settlement is defined in the LP supporting text as a distinct
       group of buildings that includes 30 or more homes. The existing development
       adjacent to the site equates to approximately 24 homes. Therefore, the site cannot
       be well-related to a built-up area for the purposes of LP Policy LP 9. Policy LP 10
       relating to development in the countryside is therefore relevant. This policy states
       that development in the countryside will be restricted to the limited and specific
       opportunities as provided for in other policies of the LP.
7.     Whilst the appellant refers to Policy LP 28, this relates to rural exception housing
       and there is nothing before me to suggest that the proposal is for affordable
       housing. This policy therefore provides no support for the proposal. It is not
       asserted that any other policies that support development in the rural area are
       relevant in this case.
8.     I am not referred to any significant services and facilities within the village of
       Hamerton that would meet the day to day needs of future occupants. There are no
       separate pavements along the road network within the settlement, and the roads
       are fairly narrow and unlit, making it an unattractive option for residents to reach
       them on foot in any case. As such, future occupants would be reliant on other
       villages and towns for goods and services.
9.     I am told that there is a bus service that provides access to larger settlements
       where there are a wider range of services and facilities, however this is very
       limited, only equating to two buses each weekday.
10. A National Cycle Route runs through the settlement, and future occupants could
    cycle along it to Sawtry, a larger settlement with a range of services and facilities,
    in 20 minutes. This would provide an alternative option for more confident cyclists
    but would not necessarily be attractive to many, particularly those who are less
    mobile or for those with children, given the route utilises the narrow rural roads.
11. Taking the above into account, it is very likely that future occupants would be
    heavily reliant on the private car to access services and facilities. Whilst limited
    accessibility to services and facilities by sustainable transport modes is the case
    for the smaller settlements in the district, Policy LP 9 recognises this and sets out
    a more restrictive approach to development in these locations.
12. I am referred to an appeal decision at Fryars Farm, located in a different Council
    area. However, that scheme related to a change of use and extension of an
    existing building in the open countryside and is therefore not comparable to the
    scheme before me.
13. In conclusion, the site would not be in a suitable location for new housing having
    regard to the spatial strategy set out in the LP and the limited accessibility of
    services and facilities. The proposal is therefore contrary to LP Policies LP 9 and
    LP 10 which seek, amongst other things, to direct new development to within or
    adjacent to the built-up area of smaller settlements, where there are opportunities
    for future occupants to access services and facilities by sustainable modes of
    travel and to limit development within open countryside locations.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008987


Character and appearance
14. The site occupies a position at the rural edge of the settlement. It is bounded by
    existing dwellings and associated garden areas to the north and east. The site has
    a frontage onto Leighton Road. To the north of the site are existing dwellings, 1
    and 2 Leighton Road, beyond which is the junction with Sawpit Lane. A number of
    dwellings front onto Sawpit Lane with their rear boundaries visible from Leighton
    Road. To the south the site is separated from the adjacent agricultural field by a
    post and wire fence. Whilst the site is currently undeveloped, its surrounding
    character is influenced by both the established residential development and its
    relationship with the open countryside beyond.
15. The most relevant built form context is provided by Nos 1 and 2 directly to the
    north of the site and the dwellings that front onto Sawpit Lane. Nos 1 and 2 are a
    pair of modest semi-detached dwellings of a traditional rural design and materiality
    in keeping with the rural area. Together with the established vegetation and
    boundary treatments they provide a fairly well contained transition between the
    settlement and the countryside. The dwellings along Sawpit Lane are generally set
    back from the road behind vegetation. Although they are varied in design,
    materials and appearance, they are predominantly two storey dwellings located
    within plots of a fairly regular width.
16. The character of this part of the settlement is therefore comprised not only from
    the presence of the existing residential development, but also how it relates to the
    countryside beyond. The undeveloped nature of the site currently contributes
    positively to this transition.
17. The presence of a dwelling on the site would not be entirely unexpected given its
    position at the settlement edge. When approaching from the south along Leighton
    Road, both Nos 1 and 2 and the rear boundaries of Oakwoods and the other
    dwellings that front onto Sawpit Lane are discernible above and through the
    roadside hedging. A planning condition requiring suitable boundary treatments
    could be used to ensure that these would be appropriate for the location.
18. However, whilst the proposed dwelling would not be significantly taller than
    Nos 1 and 2, it would be substantially wider than each of those properties
    individually. Its detached form and overall scale, together with the massing and
    roof arrangement proposed would cause it to read as a large, bulky and visually
    prominent building at the settlement edge.
19. Although the width and overall footprint of the proposal may be comparable in
    some respects with Nos 1 and 2 when considering them in combination, the
    proposal would not be experienced in the same way visually. Nos 1 and 2
    comprise two modestly scaled dwellings within the established pattern of
    development, whereas the proposal would be viewed as one large detached
    dwelling occupying a much wider plot than is characteristic of this part of the
    settlement. It would therefore have a substantial visual presence which would be
    overly dominant in the settlement edge context.
20. In addition, the greater setback from the road, when compared with the positioning
    of Nos 1 and 2, would introduce a different relationship between the proposed built
    form, the road and the intervening space which would be incongruous with the
    established pattern of development. These harmful effects would be highlighted
    further by the proposed modern design approach.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008987


21. For the above reasons, I find that the proposal would appear as an overly
    dominant element of built form when viewed from Leighton Road which would
    significantly weaken the established transition between the settlement and the
    countryside. There is more variety in the design of dwellings that front onto Sawpit
    Lane, however, they are more discernible when heading along Sawpit Lane, away
    from Leighton Road and they do not occupy the same prominent relationship with
    the entrance to the settlement, as the site does.
22. Whilst landscaping and additional boundary treatments may soften the
    appearance of the proposal in time, it would not resolve the fundamental scale,
    footprint, form or siting of the dwelling. Nor would it provide a form of mitigation
    that could be relied upon, particularly during the winter months when vegetation is
    less dense.
23. Whilst I find that the proposal would not be overly oppressive in terms of its spatial
    relationship with Nos 1 and 2, mainly due to the separation distance that would be
    retained and the greater set back from the road, this does not outweigh my
    concerns with regard to the harmful effect that would result to the character and
    appearance of the settlement edge.
24. In conclusion, I find that the proposal would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area and would therefore be contrary to Policies LP 10, LP 11
    and LP 12 of the LP. These policies seek, amongst other things, that new
    development is well designed and of a high quality that responds positively to its
    context and that the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside is
    recognised.
Other Matters
25. A Unilateral Undertaking relating to a wheeled bin contribution was submitted with
    the appeal. Given my findings on the main issues, I have not considered this
    matter further.
26. An interested party made a representation in support of the proposal. Whilst an
    additional dwelling would result in some social benefit, there is nothing to suggest
    that such a limited development would secure new amenities within the settlement.
    This matter therefore does not alter my findings set out above.
Planning Balance
27. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires
    planning applications to be determined in accordance with the development plan
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise. The proposal would be contrary
    to the LP policies identified above relating to the location of the development and
    the character and appearance of the area. Consequently, the proposal would be
    contrary to the development plan when read as a whole.
28. There is no dispute between the parties that the Council cannot currently
    demonstrate a five year housing land supply. The appellant suggests the supply is
    3.5 years currently whereas the Council cite 3.68 years. Irrespective of whichever
    is more accurate, it is evident that there is a shortfall and a need for new housing
    in the district.
29. I have found above that the site is next to but outside of the settlement of
    Hamerton. The Council has not contended that Hamerton does not constitute a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008987


       settlement for the purposes of the Framework Glossary definition, and it also refers
       to it as a village in its Officer Report. Framework Policy S3:1 b. states that Policy
       S5 should be applied where development proposals are located outside
       settlements.
30. Framework Policy S5:1 identifies that outside settlements, only certain forms of
    development should be approved as set out under criteria a. – j., unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies set out in the
    Framework.
31. Criterion j. identifies support for development which would meet an evidenced
    unmet need where a development would be physically well related to an existing
    settlement (unless the nature of the development would make this inappropriate)
    and be of a scale which can be accommodated taking into account the existing or
    proposed availability of infrastructure. Given the housing land supply position, this
    criterion is engaged.
32. Given the proximity of the site to the settlement edge, the site would be spatially
    well-related. Notwithstanding the harm I have found in relation to the proposed
    design approach, in principle, I do not find that the nature of the residential
    development proposed, given its location and that it would be limited to a single
    dwelling would be inappropriate in this case. Consequently, it would be physically
    well-related in the context of the Framework Policy S5:1 j. test.
33. There is no evidence before me that there is not sufficient infrastructure to support
    one additional dwelling, or that such a limited development would not be of an
    appropriate scale for the settlement. Therefore, the proposal would comply with
    criterion j. of Framework Policy S5:1.
34. Turning now to consider whether the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when considering the policies set
    out in the Framework.
35. The proposal would provide one additional dwelling which could be built out
    relatively quickly. There would be economic benefits during construction and after
    with future occupants supporting local services and facilities. Environmental
    benefits would also result from one energy efficient dwelling and the planting of
    trees, hedgerows and wildflowers on site and the reintroduction of the existing
    pond. However, even taking into account the current housing land supply position,
    the scale of the proposal means that these benefits would be moderate.
36. No objections are raised by the Council on the loss of land of agricultural value,
    highway safety, parking, flood risk, biodiversity, heritage or living conditions of
    existing neighbouring occupants or future occupants. A lack of harm or policy
    compliance in these respects are neutral considerations that weigh neither for nor
    against the proposal.
37. The proposal is described as a self-build development, however there is no
    mechanism before me which would ensure that it would represent such a
    development. Whilst the Council refer to a condition being necessary to ensure the
    self-build nature of the proposal, there is no suggested condition before me setting
    out wording which would meet the tests set out in Framework Policy DM6.
    Accordingly, I attach negligible weight to this matter.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008987


38. Considering the adverse effects, the proposal would be contrary to the spatial
    strategy set out in the LP and as such would be at odds with the plan led system
    advocated by the Framework. However, given the current housing land supply
    position, this attracts limited weight against the proposal.
39. Despite the proposal not resulting in significant movements, future occupants
    would likely be heavily reliant on the private vehicle to access services and
    facilities, which would be at odds with Framework Policy CC2:1 b. which states
    that development proposals should support good access to facilities in order to
    limit the need to travel. However, I note that Framework Policy TR3:1 e. also
    identifies that in rural areas, opportunities to improve sustainable modes of
    transport should be taken where they exist and can be supported by the
    development proposed. Given the location of the site adjacent to a settlement,
    which is supported in principle under Framework Policy S5 in certain
    circumstances, I find limited weight should be attributed to this matter in this case.
40. However, the proposal would be contrary to Framework Policy DP3:1 which states
    that development proposals should respond to their context so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings. Framework Policy DP3:3 states that
    development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict
    with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3. I have not found any justification for the design
    approach taken in the evidence before me and therefore I give substantial weight
    to the conflict with Policy DP3:1 of the Framework.
41. In conclusion, when carrying out the balance set out in the Framework under
    Policy S5:1, I find that the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
42. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are
    no other considerations, including the Framework, which indicate a decision other
    than in accordance with the development plan. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

G Dring
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
