Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18th August 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008436
Pavement outside 167 Stroud Green Road, London N4 3RN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant full planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/3559/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the removal of an existing telephone kiosk and deployment of a Street
     Hub 3 unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6008435
Pavement outside 167 Stroud Green Road, London N4 3RN
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/3560/ADV.
•    The development proposed is the removal of an existing telephone kiosk and the deployment of a
     Street Hub 3 unit.


Decision
1.     Appeal A and Appeal B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The location of the appeal site in the above banner heading has been taken from
       the Council’s decision notice as this is a more accurate description of the location
       of the appeal site.
3.     The description of development in the above banner heading has been taken from
       the original application forms. The Council’s decision notice includes advert
       screens which are the subject of Appeal B, and I have determined the appeal
       accordingly.
4.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
       amendments against the December 2024 version. Although there have been
       significant amendments made, the changes relevant to this appeal are not
       substantive or determinative to the outcome of my decision. I have therefore not
       gone back to the parties to seek any comment.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008436, 6008435


5.       As set out above, there are two appeals on this site. They differ only in that Appeal
         B is for advertisement consent for the illuminated advertisement. I have considered
         each proposal on its individual merits. However, to avoid duplication I have dealt
         with the two schemes together, except where otherwise indicated.
6.       Regulations to control advertisements may be exercised only in the interests of
         amenity and public safety taking into account (a) the provisions of the development
         plan, so far as they are material; and (b) any other relevant factors. The
         assessment regarding public safety is not disputed and, as such, I have not
         considered this element further. Although the reasons for refusal set out on the
         decision notice for Appeal B refers to policies contained in the London Plan, 2021,
         Islington’s Strategic and Development Management Policies, 2023, the
         Framework, guidance contained within Islington's Urban Design Guide, 2017 and
         the Stroud Green Conservation Area Design Guidelines, 2007. These are material
         considerations rather than being decisive in the determination of Appeal B.
7.       The appeal site is located within the Stroud Green Conservation Area (CA). The
         Council has also referred to the surrounding Grade II listed buildings, and the
         Questionnaire confirms this to relate to Elkins Brothers, Gentlemens Outfitters1.
8.       I therefore have a duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
         Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (PLBCAA) to pay special attention to the desirability
         of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA. Section 66(1)
         also requires special regard to be had to the desirability of preserving the building
         or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it
         possesses.
9.       I have had regard to Policy HE5 of the Framework which explains that
         assessments of the potential effects of development proposals on the significance
         of heritage assets (including through effects on their setting) should identify
         whether proposals would be likely to: a. have a positive effect, which is where the
         significance of a heritage asset would be enhanced, or better revealed; or b. have
         no effect on the significance of a heritage asset; or c. result in harm to the
         significance of a heritage asset, either from work affecting the asset itself or from
         development within its setting. This policy explains that the degree of harm should
         be identified. Policy HE6 of the Framework explains that when considering the
         potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a designated
         heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation (and
         the more important the asset, the greater the weight should be). This is
         irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm,
         substantial harm, or total loss of its significance.
10. Policy HE9 of the Framework specifically covers CAs explaining that development
    proposals within or affecting the significance of CAs should: a. retain and conserve
    buildings and other features which make a positive contribution to the character or
    appearance of the CA where possible; and b. consider the area’s special
    architectural or historic interest (as identified as part of the designation of the CA)
    in the design of development. In advertisement appeals this is only relevant in so
    far as it relates to amenity.



1
    List entry number: 1209539


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008436, 6008435


Main Issues
11. It is considered that the main issue for Appeal A is the effect of the proposed
    development on the character and appearance of the surrounding area, including
    whether it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA and
    preserve the setting of the Grade II listed building (Elkins Brothers, Gentlemens
    Outfitters).
12. For Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisement on
    amenity.
Reasons
13. The appeal site relates to a section of pavement located outside 167 Stroud Green
    Road. This stretch of pavement has existing street furniture in the form of
    lampposts, bins, bicycle stands, bus shelters and street trees. There is also
    outside seating nearby and another Communication Hub with integrated digital
    display. An existing telephone kiosk is also located at the appeal site, and I
    understand that historically an ATM cash machine was also located here but that
    element has since been removed. The surrounding area is mixed in character,
    typically with commercial units at ground floor and residential units at upper floor
    levels.
14. The proposed development seeks consent for the installation of 1 no. new BT
    Street Hub, incorporating 2 no. digital 75’’ LCD advert screens, one on each side
    of the proposed unit. The advertisement display is the subject of Appeal B. The
    unit would provide free public Wi-Fi, free UK calls, USB charging, wayfinding
    assistance, an emergency services button, plus a range of other digital services for
    those in the vicinity. The LED display screens on each side of the unit carry
    advertising, which helps fund the free public services and can be used for Local
    Authority-specific messaging. As part of the proposals, the unit would remove the
    existing telephone kiosk located at the site.
15. As set out earlier, the appeal site is located within the CA. The CA Design
    Guidelines, 2007 (CADG) explains that the CA is characterised by the lively mixed-
    use buildings with ground floor shops and residential use above which line the
    busy main roads (Stroud Green Road). It is explained that the houses, shops,
    pubs and commercial premises give vibrancy to the character of the area. The
    designs and materials of the buildings within the CA vary, but they combine to
    produce a piece of townscape with a unique character that is important to preserve
    and enhance. The CADG explains that internally illuminated signs will not normally
    be permitted and that advertisements and signs can often detract from the visual
    amenity of the area. The Council will therefore seek to ensure that signs, display
    panels and advertisements are appropriately located and are of a suitable size and
    design.
16. The proposed Hub would be located in a prominent position and would be taller
    and wider than the existing telephone kiosk as well as being of a solid dark design,
    more monolithic and would also have two large digital displays. The proposed Hub
    would therefore be more noticeable than the existing kiosk and would be a visually
    prominent addition to the street scene. The display screens due to their nature,
    would draw the eye resulting in harm to the visual amenity of the area and quality
    and experience of the CA. While conditions could be imposed to control the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008436, 6008435


       degree of illumination, this would do little to alleviate the visual prominence of the
       proposals.
17. There is an existing Communications Hub with integrated digital display near the
    appeal site which provides a range of public benefits in the form of public access
    to Wi-Fi, public telephone and a defibrillator. The introduction of another
    Communications Hub with integrated digital display screens in close proximity to
    the existing Hub would result in an undue concentration of digital infrastructure,
    giving rise to harmful visual clutter in the public realm.
18. Although shop fronts and signage provide some colour and visual interest to the
    street scene, my site visit identified very few illuminated features, the existing
    Communications Hub being the only notable example. Consequently, the
    prevailing character of the area is not one that is defined by illuminated or digital
    displays. In this context, the proposed unit would appear as a visually intrusive
    addition, which the surrounding townscape lacks the capacity to absorb without
    harm to visual amenity.
19. The appellant contends that, as the proposal involves upgrading an existing piece
    of street furniture, it would not introduce additional clutter into the street scene. As
    set out above, the proposed development differs from the existing kiosk in terms of
    its size, design and overall form as well as the provision of digital displays. As a
    result, it would appear dominant, intrusive and visually distracting, creating a level
    of visual clutter that is materially greater than that of the existing structure.
20. I understand that a further kiosk located on the junction of Crouch Hill Road and
    Shaftesbury Road would also be removed as part of the proposals. That call box is
    not however located within the red line boundary and is in a different location. It is
    unclear what mechanism would be used to ensure its removal, and in any event,
    this would not be sufficient to overcome the harm I have identified as the proposed
    development would still be an obtrusive and detracting feature in this specific
    location.
21. Whilst there are examples of BT Hubs and similar development that have been
    granted planning permission and advertisement consent in the borough and across
    the UK including planning appeals, this does not set a blanket position for the
    proposed development as each application is assessed on its own site-specific
    context and merits.
22. I have considered the setting of the Grade II listed building, Elkins Brothers,
    Gentlemens Outfitters and any effect arising from the appeal proposals. However,
    this listed building is located some distance away from the appeal site to the
    southeast with limited intervisibility between the two. On this basis, I do not find
    that the same harm would be caused to this listed building and this element is
    therefore of lesser concern to me. A lack of harm in this respect would not
    however overcome the other harm I have identified.
23. For the above reasons, the proposed development would unacceptably harm the
    character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would fail to preserve the
    character or appearance of the CA which would result in harm to the significance
    of the heritage asset. Given the scale and prominence of the proposals, the extent
    of harm would be at the higher end of the spectrum.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008436, 6008435


24. Policy HE4 of the Framework explains that any harm to, or loss of, the significance
    of a designated heritage asset (including from development within its setting)
    should have a clear and convincing justification. Policy HE6 explains that any harm
    to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and
    weight. It goes on to explain that where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. This balancing exercise applies to Appeal A.
25. The benefits associated with the scheme include the removal of the existing
    telephone kiosk and the provision of a communications kiosk providing free public
    Wi-Fi, free UK calls, USB charging, wayfinding assistance, an emergency services
    button, plus a range of other digital services for those in the vicinity. The LED
    display screens on each side of the unit carry advertising, which helps fund the
    free public services and can be used for Local Authority-specific messaging. I am
    also aware of features and capabilities including, environmental sensors, insight
    counting and small cell mobile connectivity.
26. My attention has been drawn to the Code of Practice for Wireless Network
    Development in England, 2022 and the London Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2050,
    2014 which amongst other matters, sets out the importance of connectivity.
    Chapter 9 of the Framework also relates to supporting high-quality
    communications where the objective is to support the expansion and upgrading of
    telecommunications infrastructure, in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation
    of equipment and respect important environmental safeguards. Policy CO1 of the
    Framework explains that in considering proposals for the expansion or upgrading
    of electronic telecommunications networks, substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of maintaining or improving network coverage, capacity, reliability and
    resilience. The Framework also supports emergency services telecommunications
    infrastructure. On this basis, I attach substantial weight to the benefits of the
    scheme.
27. The proposed development would result in a high level of harm to the significance
    of the CA. In accordance with the Framework, this harm is afforded substantial
    weight. Whilst the benefits of the proposal also attract substantial weight, the
    magnitude of those benefits taking into account the nature and scale of the
    proposals is not sufficient to outweigh the identified heritage harm, to which
    considerable importance and weight must be given. Additionally, I am mindful that
    the presence of another nearby Communications Hub which provides many of the
    services proposed means that the area is already well catered for in terms of
    access to public Wi-Fi and public telephones. The harm is not therefore justified
    having regard to Policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework. Consequently, the
    planning balance weighs against the proposal.
28. Within the context of my statutory duties in the PLBCAA, I conclude that Appeal A
    would unacceptably harm the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
    It would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. This
    would be contrary to Policies D3, D4, HC1 and T2 of the London Plan, 2021,
    Policies PLAN1, DH1, DH2 and T4 of Islington’s Local Plan Strategic and
    Development Management Policies, 2023. Such policies together, amongst other
    matters, explain that all forms of development are required to be of a high quality
    and make a positive contribution to local character, legibility and distinctiveness,
    based upon an up-to-date understanding and evaluation of the defining

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008436, 6008435


       characteristics of an area. For the same reasons, the proposed development
       would also be contrary to the Framework, guidance contained within Islington's
       Urban Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document, 2017 and the CADG. I
       am aware of other policies the appellant refers to which provide support for digital
       connectivity infrastructure, but the proposed development would still be contrary to
       the above-mentioned policies which I must consider.
29. I have reviewed the application of the policies set out on the decision notices and
    find them to be relevant in the particular circumstance of this case. This is because
    amongst other matters, they relate to design, public realm and heritage.
30. The Council cite Policy DH6 of the Islington's Local Plan Strategic and
    Development Management Policies, 2023 within the first reason for refusal on
    Appeal A relating to character and appearance matters. However, Policy DH6
    relates to advertisements which are subject to Appeal B only which is covered
    below.
31. Given my findings above in terms of character and appearance matters, it is
    concluded that Appeal B would also harm amenity. It would therefore conflict with
    the relevant policies above as well as Policy DH6 of the Islington's Local Plan
    Strategic and Development Management Policies, 2023 which specifically relates
    to advertisements requiring amongst other matters, advertisements to respect
    local context, including listed buildings and CAs.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
32. Policy S3 of the Framework explains that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4
    explains that development proposals within settlements should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework. Whilst I have found a lack of harm in relation to the Grade II listed
    building, I have found that the proposed development would unacceptably harm
    the character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would fail to preserve the
    character or appearance of the CA. Considering my findings above, the benefits of
    the scheme would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects identified,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
33. Bringing everything together, the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan when considered as a whole. There are no material
    considerations, either individually or in combination including the provisions of the
    Framework, that would outweigh the identified harm and associated plan conflict. I
    conclude that Appeal A and Appeal B should be dismissed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
