Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by R Standfield BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008669
Crown House, 1 Stafford Place, Weston-super-Mare, North Somerset BS23 2QZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Summers of Trust Inheritance Ltd against the decision of North Somerset
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/P/0327/FUL.
•    The development proposed is replacement of 24 no. windows.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was updated 17 August
       2026. Insofar as the contents are relevant to this appeal, the NPPF remains
       broadly consistent, therefore, I am satisfied no party would be disadvantaged by
       not having the opportunity to comment on the revised NPPF.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the character and
       appearance of the area, having particular regard to whether the development
       would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the Great Weston
       Conservation Area (GWCA), and whether it would preserve the setting of the
       Grade II listed former Weston-super-Mare Library.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site is located within the GWCA whereby Section 72 (1) of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires special
       attention to be paid to preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of
       conservation areas. It is also within proximity of the Grade II listed former Weston-
       super-Mare Library where Section 66 (1) of the same Act requires special regard
       to the desirability of preserving a listed building or its setting.
5.     Submitted documentation relating to the GWCA places the appeal site within
       Town Centre Character Area 7 – The Boulevard. The significance of this part of
       the GWCA is derived from the so named wide, tree lined Victorian avenue
       displaying strong rhythms of gables and bay windows, alongside the use of red
       brick with supplementary Bath or Weston stone. The former Weston-super-Mare
       Library, by local architect Hans Price, is positioned at a focal point, displaying the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008669


       free Renaissance style of architecture and building design in a detailed and
       complete front elevation.
6.     Policy CS5 of the North Somerset Core Strategy (2017) (the Core Strategy) sets
       out that the Victorian townscape is a distinctive component of the historic
       environment that should be subject to particular attention. In addition,
       development within the town centre is expected to demonstrate exemplar
       standards as set out in the explanatory text to Core Strategy Policy CS12 (Design
       Quality).
7.     The GWCA Appraisal and Management Plan (AMP) identifies the particularly
       negative impact arising from loss of traditional historic features in the Boulevard
       area, with replacement uPVC windows and doors being specifically noted. The
       overall condition of the street in terms of retaining historic features is stated as
       being low, with significant attention required. The AMP states that where original
       painted softwood sash windows survive, they offer important historical evidence of
       the original appearance. As such, the retention or reinstatement of such details is
       encouraged, with high expectations for proposed development to comply with the
       AMP’s approach, reinforced by Policy DM3 of the Development Management
       Policies, Sites and Policies Plan Part 1 (2016) (the Sites and Policies Plan).
8.     The appeal site, Crown House, comprises a detached two storey Victorian
       building positioned at a prominent corner opposite the listed former library and is
       highly visible within the public realm of Boulevard and also the adjacent Stafford
       Place. It features double bay windows fronting Boulevard and vernacular carved
       gables to the roofscape. It contributes positively to both the GWCA and the setting
       of the listed building, with traditional timber sliding sash windows displaying
       original proportions and details, including the integral horn to the upper sash
       frame that demonstrates the quality of Victorian fenestration.
9.     Whilst the submitted brochure illustrates the proposed replacement windows to be
       sliding sash and the appellant suggests that these will replace the existing
       windows like for like, there are inevitable differences in the use of uPVC over
       timber. These differences arise from the construction, finish, and wear over time,
       effecting the proportions and overall appearance of the window, which are already
       altered by the introduction of the gap with silver spacer strip and the double-
       glazing panes. The uniform finish of uPVC manufactured with a ‘woodgrain effect’
       lacks the authenticity of a timber window that ages over time.
10. Notwithstanding that the individual differences are unlikely to be visible in detail
    from the street, the overall appearance would be of modern uPVC double glazing.
    Further, the loss of authentic building materials would undermine the heritage
    value of this visually prominent building and the wider GWCA, exacerbating the
    local decline in original details noted by the AMP.
11. Examples of similar window replacements have been presented by the appellant
    at 39 Boulevard (adjacent to the appeal site), 8 Albert Quadrant (to the rear of the
    appeal site), and no’s 3 and 5 Stafford Place (also adjacent to the appeal site). I
    have not been provided with the details of these projects or the circumstances for
    the consideration of each scheme and as such, I afford these examples limited
    weight. Having observed each of these addresses during my site visit, I am not
    persuaded that the cumulative impact within the immediate locality of the appeal
    site wouldn’t further erode the quality of the street scene and undermine the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008669


       ambitions of the Council to retain and reinstate the quality of the Victorian
       buildings.
12. My attention has also been drawn to an allowed appeal for replacement windows
    at 24 Clarence Road South (APP/D0121/W/23/3319856), which the appellant
    contends provides a precedent for this current decision. Notwithstanding that each
    appeal must be considered on its own merits, 24 Clarence Road South is within a
    different part of the GWCA and sits at the corner of residential streets overlooking
    a park. As such, its visual prominence and context is very different to that of the
    current appeal site. Further to this, the Inspector in that case, concludes that other
    retained elements of the building would preserve the aspects that contribute most
    to the significance of the GWCA in that location. In the case of the current appeal,
    the AMP priority of retaining details, specifically including timber framed windows
    and doors within the Boulevard area, sets a differing context and as above
    therefore, the referenced appeal contributes limited weight in favour of this case.
13. Annex B of the NPPF confirms that the setting of a heritage asset comprises the
    surroundings in which the asset is experienced. Its extent is not fixed and may
    change as the asset and its surroundings evolve. Elements of a setting may make
    a positive or negative contribution to the significance of an asset, may affect the
    ability to appreciate that significance or may be neutral. The appeal site forms part
    of the setting of the Grade II listed former library. The significance of the library
    lies in its architectural detail and historic context as a public building / library. The
    spacing of the Boulevard at this point allows a generous setting of Victorian
    buildings, including the appeal site, which reflect to various degrees the detailing
    and materials of the listed building.
14. The ability to experience the significance of the former Weston-super-Mare
    Library would suffer an erosion of its physical setting, albeit to a limited degree.
    Therefore, harm would be caused to the significance of both the GWCA and the
    setting of the listed building.
15. Policy H6 1 of the NPPF states that substantial weight should be given to the
    conservation of a designated heritage asset and in H6 4, any harm to, or loss of,
    the significance of such an asset requires clear and convincing justification along
    with an assessment of the harm weighed against any public benefits resulting
    from the proposal.
16. In this instance, there would be some temporary economic benefits associated
    with fabrication and installation of the new windows and an overall contribution to
    sustainability by way of improved thermal efficiency which Policy H6 4 identifies
    as an important public benefit. However, I am not persuaded that the public
    benefits would be of sufficient magnitude to outweigh the harm to the significance
    of the heritage assets, and the considerable importance this carries.
17. Recognising that the current single glazing panes are resulting in significant
    energy use, cost and discomfort for the occupants, there would be a valuable
    improvement in the thermal efficiency of the building with double glazed panes
    which would contribute towards the improved well-being of the occupants and
    energy performance benefits in support of environmental sustainability. An
    interested party notes that such improvement could also enable businesses to
    stay in the locality. However, I have not been presented with substantive evidence
    to suggest that the proposed uPVC windows would significantly outperform well


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008669


       installed and maintained double glazed timber windows which could meet energy
       efficiency and comfort requirements whilst also maintaining the authenticity of the
       building and preserving the contribution that the building makes to the GWCA.
18. Therefore, the harms that would be caused to the significance of the GWCA and
    the setting of the former Weston-super-Mare Library lack clear and convincing
    justification. The public benefits, taken as a whole, would not outweigh the
    substantial weight that the conservation of designated heritage assets carries.
    The proposal would therefore fail to accord with the historic environment policies
    in Chapter 20 of the NPPF.
19. For these reasons the proposal would neither preserve or enhance the character
    or appearance of the existing building and would undermine the positive
    contribution that it makes to the character and appearance of the GWCA. It would
    also fail to preserve the quality of the setting of the Listed Building.
20. It would thus fail to meet the requirements of part II sections 66 (1) and 72 (1) of
    the Act and Chapter 20 of the NPPF, which states that substantial weight should
    be given to the conservation of heritage assets. It would be contrary to Policies
    CS5 and CS12 of the Core Strategy and Policies DM3, DM4 and DM32 of the
    Sites and Policies Plan, collectively the development plan. Taken together, these
    policies require that new development protects, and where possible enhances, the
    historic environment, with reference to settings, design quality and distinctiveness.
Conclusion
21. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



R Standfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
