Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by M Aqbal BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008553
41 Taunton Road, Bridgwater, Somerset TA6 3LP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Edward James, EDJ investments against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 08/25/00197.
•    The development proposed is change of use of from a lawful 6-bedroom (Use Class C4) HMO to an
     8-bedroom HMO (Sui Generis).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from a
       lawful 6-bedroom House (Use Class C4) HMO to an 8-bedroom HMO (Sui
       Generis) at 41 Taunton Road, Bridgwater, Somerset TA6 3LP, in accordance with
       the terms of the application Ref 08/25/00197 and subject to the following
       conditions.
       1) The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of
          three years from the date of this permission.
       2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans: Location Plan Drawing No. GD2714/21, Block Plan
          Drawing No. GD2714/22, Proposed Plans & Elevations Drawing No.
          GD2714/20 and Proposed Cycle & Bin Store Drawing No. GD2714/05.
       3) The parking spaces shown on Drawing No. GD2714/22 shall be provided prior
          to the commencement of the use hereby permitted and shall thereafter be
          retained and kept available for the parking of vehicles associated with that use
          at all times.
       4) The number of residents occupying the HMO hereby permitted shall not
          exceed 8 at any time.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Since the determination of the application, the National Planning Policy Framework
       has been revised (August 2026) (the revised Framework). I have had regard to the
       revised Framework in determining the appeal. However, the appeal principally
       concerns matters relating to living conditions and the effects of the intensified use,
       and I have identified no aspect of the revised Framework that materially alters my
       assessment of those matters.
3.     I note that the appellant has described the development differently during the
       application and appeal stages. Accordingly, in the interests of precision and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008553


       certainty, I have used the description of development set out in the Council's
       decision notice.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
       i)       the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of future occupiers; and
       ii)      the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers,
                with particular regard to noise, activity and disturbance.
Reasons
Living conditions of future occupiers
5.     The appeal property presently benefits from a lawful six-bedroom House in
       Multiple Occupation (HMO) use. Under the appeal scheme, two rooms previously
       providing communal living accommodation would be converted to bedrooms,
       increasing occupation to eight persons. All bedrooms would be provided with
       en-suite facilities and there is no dispute that the accommodation would satisfy
       relevant HMO licensing requirements. Whilst the planning and licensing regimes
       serve different purposes, compliance with relevant licensing standards is capable
       of assisting in informing my assessment of the living conditions likely to be
       experienced by future occupiers.
6.     The proposal would result in the loss of two existing communal rooms.
       Nevertheless, a communal kitchen, dining and sitting area would remain available
       for the use of occupiers. Whilst the amount of communal accommodation would be
       reduced compared to the lawful arrangement, the evidence before me indicates
       that a meaningful shared living space would be retained. I also note that the
       accommodation is spread across three floors and benefits from external amenity
       space, factors which assist in accommodating the modest increase in occupancy
       proposed. Taking all of these matters into account, I do not consider that the
       remaining communal accommodation would be inadequate for the scale of
       development proposed or that occupiers would be compelled to rely upon their
       bedrooms for day-to-day living activities.
7.     Bedroom 2 would be located adjacent to part of the communal accommodation
       and near the staircase serving the upper floors. Consequently, its occupier would
       inevitably experience a greater degree of activity than occupiers of some of the
       other bedrooms.
8.     However, a degree of activity and interaction is inherent in shared living
       accommodation. The question is whether the relationship would result in
       conditions so poor as to justify withholding planning permission. Based on the
       evidence before me, I am not persuaded that it would. The bedroom would be of
       an appropriate size, would have its own en-suite facilities and would continue to
       benefit from access to communal accommodation. Furthermore, there is no
       persuasive evidence that the level of activity likely to arise within the communal
       areas would be materially different from that commonly experienced in HMOs and
       other forms of shared accommodation.
9.     For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal would provide acceptable
       living conditions for future occupiers.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6008553


10. As such, the proposal would accord with Policy D25 of the Sedgemoor Local Plan
    (LP), which seeks to secure an appropriate standard of amenity for existing and
    future occupiers.
Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
11. The appeal property forms part of an established residential area and benefits
    from a lawful six-bedroom HMO use. Consequently, comings and goings, visitor
    movements and the use of communal facilities already form part of the established
    planning baseline. HMOs can generate activity patterns that differ from those of a
    single dwellinghouse, and the proposal would represent an intensification of the
    existing use from six to eight residents. Nevertheless, given the modest increase in
    occupancy and the fact that the proposal would remain a form of residential HMO
    occupation, I do not consider that it would materially alter the character of the use
    or give rise to a materially different pattern of activity at the site.
12. I have taken account of the relationship between the appeal property and
    neighbouring dwellings, including 43 Taunton Road. A number of rooms would
    adjoin the shared party wall and, consequently, some degree of noise transmission
    between the properties may occur. However, ordinary domestic noise associated
    with residential occupation is an expected characteristic of properties sharing party
    walls and I have seen no substantive evidence to indicate that the proposal would
    give rise to unacceptable effects in this regard.
13. I also note that the two additional bedrooms would be created within former
    ground-floor communal living areas. Given that those rooms could already
    accommodate activity generated by several occupiers simultaneously, and in the
    absence of evidence to the contrary, I am not persuaded that their conversion to
    bedrooms would result in a material increase in noise or disturbance affecting
    neighbouring occupiers.
14. The submitted management plan includes measures directed towards occupier
    behaviour, anti-social behaviour, neighbour complaints and management
    oversight. Whilst such measures cannot guarantee that disturbance will not arise,
    they nevertheless provide some reassurance that the property would be actively
    managed and that any complaints arising would be capable of being addressed in
    a structured manner.
15. I have also considered the proposed parking arrangements. The access track
    already serves a number of garages and parking spaces associated with nearby
    properties and some degree of vehicular activity already occurs in this location.
    Moreover, the appeal property already benefits from a lawful six-bedroom HMO
    use and there is nothing before me to suggest that this part of the site could not be
    used in association with that use for parking purposes. I also note that the site
    occupies a sustainable location with access to nearby shops and services, and
    that cycle parking would be provided. Consequently, future occupiers would not be
    wholly reliant on private car travel. In these circumstances, and noting that the
    proposed parking area would be enclosed by existing boundary treatments and
    located behind the main built form of the dwelling, I am not persuaded that the
    proposal would result in unacceptable noise, activity or disturbance for
    neighbouring occupiers.
16. The Council is concerned that several bedrooms are of a size capable of
    accommodating more than one occupier, potentially resulting in a more intensive

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008553


       form of occupation than that assessed. However, the appeal proposal is for an
       eight-bedroom HMO with a maximum occupancy of eight residents and the
       appellant has confirmed that occupation would be limited accordingly. As the
       acceptability of the proposal is closely related to its occupancy level, I am satisfied
       that a condition limiting occupation to a maximum of eight residents would
       adequately address this matter.
17. Drawing these matters together, including the lawful baseline position, the modest
    increase in occupancy, the proposed parking arrangements and the absence of
    any persuasive evidence demonstrating unacceptable impacts, I conclude that the
    proposal would not result in unacceptable harm to the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers through noise, activity or disturbance.
18. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would not conflict with Policy D25 of the
    LP, which seeks to secure an appropriate standard of amenity for existing and
    future occupiers.
Other Matters
19. Third-party representations raise a number of other concerns. In relation to
    highway and parking matters, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that
    the proposal would result in unacceptable highway safety impacts, parking
    pressure or associated disturbance.
20. Concerns have also been expressed regarding crime and anti-social behaviour.
    However, I have been provided with no substantive evidence demonstrating that
    the proposal would be likely to give rise to such effects.
21. Concerns have also been expressed regarding the concentration of HMOs and the
    loss of family housing. However, the appeal property already benefits from a lawful
    HMO use. The proposal would not result in the loss of a dwellinghouse from the
    housing stock but would instead represent a relatively modest intensification of an
    existing authorised HMO use. Furthermore, I have not been provided with
    persuasive evidence demonstrating that the proposal would result in an
    unacceptable concentration of HMOs in the area. Any future proposals for HMO
    development in the area would be subject to assessment on their own merits
    having regard to the circumstances prevailing at that time.
22. Reference has been made to a previous appeal relating to a 9-bedroom HMO at
    the site. However, that decision has not been provided to me and, in any event, I
    must determine the current proposal on the basis of the evidence before me.
Conditions
23. I have considered the conditions suggested by the parties having regard to the
    tests set out in the revised Framework and Planning Practice Guidance.
24. In addition to the standard conditions relating to commencement and approved
    plans, I have imposed a condition requiring the approved parking spaces to be
    provided prior to the commencement of the use hereby permitted and retained
    thereafter.
25. I have also imposed a condition limiting occupation of the HMO to no more than
    eight residents at any one time. This is necessary to ensure that the impacts of the
    use do not exceed those assessed in this decision.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008553


26. Whilst I have had regard to the submitted management arrangements, many of the
    measures relate to day-to-day property management rather than land-use planning
    considerations. A condition requiring compliance with the management plan would
    therefore fail to meet the relevant tests for planning conditions.
27. I have not imposed conditions requiring management contact details to be
    provided to neighbouring occupiers, restrictions on further subdivision of rooms, or
    separate controls over cycle and bin storage. These matters are either not
    necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms or are
    adequately controlled through the approved plans condition.
28. Nor have I imposed a condition requiring the communal kitchen, dining and sitting
    area to be retained. The internal layout forms part of the approved plans and is
    therefore adequately controlled through the approved plans condition.
Conclusion
29. For the above reasons, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.


M Aqbal
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
