Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by L Fern BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008859
Land south of The Elms, Chatteris PE16 6JN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Abbeymill Homes against the decision of Fenland District Council.
•   The application Ref is F/YR23/0697/FDL.
•   The development proposed is the erection of 152 two-storey dwelling houses, with construction of
    new accesses off the A142, together with garaging, parking, LEAP, landscaping, infrastructure and
    all enabling works.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission granted for the erection of 152 two-
   storey dwelling houses, with construction of new accesses off the A142, together
   with garaging, parking, LEAP, landscaping, infrastructure and all enabling works at
   land south of The Elms, Chatteris PE16 6JN in accordance with the terms of the
   application Ref F/YR23/0697/FDL and subject to the conditions in the attached
   schedule.
Application for Costs
2. An application for an award of costs has been submitted by Abbeymill Homes
   against Fenland District Council, which is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. A Unilateral Undertaking (UU), dated 30 July 2026, was submitted by the appellant,
   which seeks to provide various contributions towards infrastructure and affordable
   housing. I consider it later in my decision.
4. Evidence in the form of updated traffic survey data and associated assessment was
   submitted by the appellant with their appeal. It does not materially alter the scheme,
   provides a focussed update to the Transport Assessment that was before the
   Council during determination of the planning application, and the Council has had
   the opportunity to comment on it. For these reasons it has been accepted.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on highway safety and capacity; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the site and
                the surrounding area, regarding the settings of the grade I listed Church of
                St Peter and St Paul (the church), the grade II listed Manor House, and its

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008859


                associated grade II listed barn, stable, cow house, wall and icehouse, and
                the Chatteris Conservation Area (CCA) as designated heritage assets, and
                the parkland associated with the Manor House as a non-designated
                heritage asset (NDHA).
Reasons
Highway safety and capacity
6. The evidence does not reference policy or guidance that, as a matter of course,
   would preclude vehicular access from the A142 as part of the strategic road
   network that is subject to a 60mph restriction. Instead, primarily Policy LP15 of the
   Fenland Local Plan (2014) (LP), but also LP Policies LP17 and LP2, amongst other
   things, require development schemes to provide well designed, safe and
   convenient access for all and directs development that has transport implications to
   be refused unless effective and deliverable mitigation measures would be secured.
   This policy is broadly consistent with Policy TR6 of the revised National Planning
   Policy Framework (2026) (Framework) that states development proposals should
   be refused if they would have a severe adverse impact on the transport network or
   an unacceptable impact on highway safety, taking into account any mitigation
   measures and wider network improvements.
7. It is not for the planning system to identify the best or optimal highway access
   solution but instead to consider the planning merits of the proposal submitted. It is
   acknowledged that the Broad Concept Plan (BCP) for the development of the wider
   East Chatteris Strategic Allocation (ECSA) under LP Policy LP10, which includes
   this site, confirms that the intended route of vehicular access was from Wenny
   Road. However, it does not preclude alternatives, such as that under this appeal.
8. Whilst acknowledged to be restricted to those incidents where personal injury
   occurred, the data provided shows that only a small number of incidents, of mainly
   slight severity, have occurred on the A142 since 2017, with no fatalities. There is
   clearly a public perception of danger to users of the A142. However, only anecdotal
   observations have been provided regarding actual incidents, rather than
   substantiated evidence.
9. In addition, the presence of speed cameras nearby does not necessarily translate
   into a safety issue but appears to relate to a driver speed compliance problem.
   Moreover, the presence of signage implying the A142 is a high casualty route has
   been indicated by the local highway authority (LHA) to be a method used to ensure
   drivers use the route safely, which is supported by the low number of recorded
   incidents.
10. It is acknowledged that the original traffic surveys were undertaken during the
    aftermath of the Covid pandemic, during a school holiday and more than three
    years prior to determination of the planning application. However, the updated
    traffic survey data and associated assessment clearly demonstrate that the A142
    would operate at approximately 0.27 ratio of flow to capacity (RFC) post-
    development, which is substantially within the tolerance level of 0.85 RFC.
11. Furthermore, appropriate highway improvements and junction design solutions,
    such as the pedestrian crossings, the ghost island for vehicles turning into the site
    across the flow of traffic and the tapered junction design, have been proposed
    taking account of the typology of the A142, the speed of vehicles using the road

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008859


        and the anticipated uplift in vehicle movements that would be generated by the
        scheme.
12. Interventions by the LHA to control speed and driver behaviour indicate that
    precaution should rightly be taken. However, the significant capacity of the A142 to
    comfortably accommodate the anticipated additional vehicle movements, together
    with the safety measures that would be put in place, indicate that access would be
    achieved without severe adverse impacts on the transport network nor
    unacceptable impact on highway safety.
13. For these reasons, the proposed development would not be detrimental to highway
    safety or capacity. Thus, it would comply with LP Policies LP15, LP17 and LP2.
Heritage
14. LP Policy LP18 seeks to protect, conserve and seek opportunities to enhance the
    historic environment. It requires all development proposals that would affect a
    heritage asset to be determined in accordance with, amongst other things, national
    planning policy and is therefore consistent with the Framework.
15. Manor House is grade II listed and dates from the late 18th century. It is orientated
    to front onto Wenny Road and the barn, stables and cowshed to the rear are also
    grade II listed and date from a similar period. The Manor House complex is
    architecturally significant and is a fine example of a substantial Georgian property,
    likely developed and occupied by the wealthy.
16. Historic maps show that part of the appeal site formed an element of the mid-19th
    century landscaped park to the rear of and associated with the Manor House
    complex. The parkland included expanses of grassland with tree-lined boundaries
    and was interspersed with specimen deciduous trees, synonymous with the style
    and fashion of wealthy landowners at the time, who sought to replicate the works of
    leading landscape designers.
17. Parkside is a collection of more modern properties that were developed on part of
    the parkland, which now form partially intervening built structures between the
    Manor House complex and the closest part of the appeal site. This has resulted in a
    partial severing of the physical and visual connection where the parkland once
    wrapped around the Manor House.
18. Most of this part of the parkland would be lost by the proposed development, which
    is acknowledged to be irreversible. However, a substantial amount of parkland
    would be retained by the housing scheme1, which is located on the remaining
    ECSA land, and which was identified as requiring retention in the BCP on heritage
    and archaeological grounds. Furthermore, the mature and veteran trees that are
    characteristic of the parkland would be retained within the scheme and the
    proposed housing set back from the rear of the Manor House complex by the
    introduction of public open space. Nevertheless, the effect of the proposed
    development on the parkland as a NDHA and the associated effect on the setting of
    the Manor House and its associated outbuildings as designated heritage assets
    would be to a moderate level of harm.
19. The harm identified to the significance of the listed buildings and the NDHA should
    be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal. In this regard,
1
    Council Ref F/YR21/0981/F.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008859


     the proposed development would bring forward a significant number of dwellings,
     both market and affordable, as part of a large strategic housing allocation in the LP
     that the Council relies on being delivered to meet its housing requirements.
     Furthermore, the site features in the Council’s five-year housing land supply
     calculations and therefore relies partially on its delivery within a reasonable
     timeframe to ensure it maintains a healthy supply and delivery of housing in the
     shorter term. In addition, the scheme would bring forward a significant amount of
     public open space on land that is largely not publicly accessible at present and
     would provide pedestrian crossings over the A142 to enhance connectivity to the
     countryside beyond via the existing public footpaths. Collectively, these public
     benefits outweigh the moderate harm found to the significance of both the
     designated and non-designated heritage assets identified above.
20. The icehouse is a grade II listed structure that was located within the grounds of
    Manor House. It still exists but is now mainly surrounded by the dwellings on
    Parkside and the connection it once had with the Manor House and parkland has
    therefore been largely physically and visually severed. Similarly, the listed wall that
    forms the front boundary to the Manor House complex and wraps around into
    Wenny Road Recreation Ground (WRRG) is separated from the appeal site and
    there is very little intervisibility due to the substantial vegetation boundary along
    WRRG.
21. The Church is grade I listed and is located on Market Hill, a substantial distance
    from the appeal site and is separated from it by a significant amount of intervening
    built development. An extremely long-distance view of the church exists from the
    site in the vicinity of the proposed access onto the A142. The orientation of the
    proposed access road and adjoining open space would ensure the view of the
    church is retained.
22. Furthermore, public open space, built development and substantial vegetation
    boundaries exist between the appeal site and CCA. The substantial vegetation
    boundary with WRRG would be retained and intervening public open space would
    be provided on the appeal site.
23. For the above reasons, the proposed development would have no effect on the
    significance of the settings of the icehouse, wall, church or the CCA as designated
    heritage assets.
24. To conclude this main issue, the proposed development would cause a moderate
    level of harm to the parkland and the settings of the Manor House and associated
    barn, stable and cow house, which is of considerable importance. However, the
    public benefits are substantial and outweigh the harm to the heritage assets that is
    identified above. Thus, the proposal complies with LP Policy LP18.
Other Matters
25. The appeal site forms part of an important wider strategic housing allocation within
    the LP that was formally adopted following independent examination, which would
    have been the most appropriate process to consider the suitability of alternative
    brownfield sites to meet the identified housing need within Chatteris and the wider
    district. It is not therefore a matter for this appeal. Nor is it for this appeal to
    consider potential alternative uses for the appeal site.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008859


26. It is acknowledged that public services and facilities, such as doctors, schools,
    dentists and emergency services, are often under operational strain. Appropriate
    assessments have been undertaken by the relevant authorities to determine any
    potential deficiencies. Where necessary, financial contributions have been sought
    that would be delivered by the UU to ensure adequate services and facilities are
    provided to sustain the anticipated increase in population that would be generated
    by this scheme. I return to the UU later in my decision.
27. Interested parties have expressed concern regarding the loss of green space. The
    fields and paddocks that make up the appeal site are understandably features of
    great value to residents from a pleasure, health and wellbeing perspective. At
    present the land is privately owned and is only partially publicly accessible by
    largely peripheral formal Public Rights of Way (PROW). The scheme would retain
    the existing PROWs and secure funding for targeted works to Public Footpath 14.
    Furthermore, the development would deliver more than 22% on-site public open
    space in compliance with local requirements, which would include a Locally
    Equipped Area of Play and landscaped buffers enabling the retention of significant
    and valued trees, including those subject to Tree Preservation Orders (TPOs).
28. The appellant has comprehensively assessed the effect of the scheme on ecology,
    including habitats and protected species such as bats and reptiles that have been
    found to be present on site. Identified mitigation measures and the ongoing
    management of habitats and species could be secured by planning condition.
29. The planning application2 subject to this appeal was submitted prior to Biodiversity
    Net Gain (BNG) becoming mandatory for all major development on 4 February
    2024. Nevertheless, the appellant seeks to provide at least a 10% net gain in
    biodiversity, which would be of significant benefit. Concerns have been raised
    regarding vegetation clearance that would need to be undertaken outside of the
    appeal site to facilitate the required vehicular visibility splays onto the A142 that
    was not considered in the submitted BNG metric. However, the site is large and
    would contain a substantial amount of land outside of the areas proposed for built
    development. In this regard, I am content that any required uplift in units could be
    secured on site and that the standard BNG condition could be discharged
    successfully with an appropriate Biodiversity Gain Plan after the determination of
    this appeal and prior to implementation of the scheme.
30. A Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Strategy accompanied the application that
    demonstrates that surface water from the proposed development could be
    managed using appropriate measures such as a detention basin, swales and
    permeable paving, despite the site being at a medium to high risk of surface water
    flooding. Furthermore, there is an existing surface water flow path within the site
    that would be retained. To ensure that drainage is adequately designed, a condition
    should be imposed requiring details to be submitted to and approved by the local
    planning authority. Such a condition would ensure that the drainage mechanisms
    adequately deal with surface water and prevent flooding elsewhere, including on
    the adjacent site within the ECSA.
31. Substantial existing vegetation boundaries are present between the appeal site and
    the existing residential neighbourhoods of The Elms and Parkside. This, together
    with the separation distances and the provision of additional soft landscaped

2
    Council Ref F/YR23/0697/FDL.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008859


     buffers would ensure the living conditions of existing residents are maintained.
     Furthermore, activities during the construction phase could be controlled by
     planning condition to ensure disturbance is kept to a minimum.
32. Objections from interested parties have been acknowledged and their contents
    considered in the determination of this appeal. However, the volume of objections
    does not necessarily equate to harm that would indicate the appeal should be
    dismissed, and it has been determined on its planning merits.
33. The matters of the appellant’s motivations for bringing forward this scheme, the
    loss of views for existing residents and the requests for individual TPOs to be
    assigned to each Elm tree as an alternative to a blanket designation are not
    matters for consideration under this appeal.
Unilateral Undertaking
34. The UU is complete and makes the required contributions towards the provision of
    on-site affordable housing and open space. Furthermore, the UU provides the
    requisite financial contributions towards local primary and secondary education, the
    Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Integrated Care System, Chatteris Library,
    bus stop improvements on Wenny Road and targeted works to Public Footpath 14.
35. Chatteris Town Council requested a financial contribution of £2,000 per housing
    plot for facilities in Chatteris in accordance with the Local Plan and CIL Viability
    Assessment (2019). However, this document is not before me, and no specific
    details have been provided of what the financial contribution would be used for. I
    am therefore not convinced that it would be necessary to make the scheme
    acceptable in planning terms.
36. Furthermore, the East of England Ambulance Service NHS Trust requested a
    contribution towards the provision of Emergency Ambulance Service Infrastructure.
    However, it is not clear what specific infrastructure is required and what harm would
    arise from the proposed development should it not be provided.
37. Having regard to the above, the various components of the UU would be necessary
    to make the development acceptable in planning terms, are directly related to the
    development and are fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind, in accordance
    with the CIL Regulations.
Conditions
38. I have had regard to the planning conditions suggested by the Council and
    considered them against the tests in the Framework and the Planning Practice
    Guidance. I have consolidated several similar conditions and omitted any excessive
    and unnecessarily prescriptive text and requirements for conciseness.
39. In addition to the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to impose a condition
    specifying the approved plans for clarity. Several pre-commencement conditions
    should be imposed that have had express approval from the appellant, which have
    been imposed as such because the information is required prior to initial ground
    works and/or site clearance being undertaken. They relate to a Construction
    Method Statement, details of a surface water drainage scheme, an archaeological
    Written Scheme of Investigation (WSI), a Construction Ecological Management
    Plan, a Reptile Management and Monitoring Plan (RMMP) and an Arboricultural
    Protection Method Statement (APMS).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008859


40. Conditions relating to construction practices, noise mitigation measures, external
    lighting design and an RMMP have been imposed in the interests of protecting the
    living conditions of existing residents, habitats, protected species and retained
    trees. Details of a surface water drainage scheme are required to ensure the site is
    adequately drained without causing flood risk within the site or elsewhere. A WSI is
    necessary to ensure any unforeseen archaeological remains are protected and
    appropriately recorded.
41. Details of the materials to be used in the construction of the buildings and a
    Landscape Environmental Management Scheme, including details of hard and soft
    landscaping are required to ensure the character and appearance of the area is
    satisfactory and to ensure the ecological mitigation and enhancement
    recommendations are incorporated into the scheme. Conditions relating to details
    of the roads, footpaths and cycleways, the maintenance of vehicular and pedestrian
    visibility splays, the provision of on-site vehicle parking spaces and garages, cycle
    storage details and the provision of Welcome Travel Packs are required in the
    interests of highway safety, pedestrian connectivity, promotion of sustainable forms
    of transport and to ensure emergency services can access future residents in the
    event of the main access road being inaccessible.
42. Conditions requiring details of the provision of fire hydrants, a scheme for security,
    details for refuse collection and in relation to the discovery of unforeseen land
    contamination are necessary for the safety, health and wellbeing interests of future
    residents and the public. Lastly, a condition should be imposed requiring details of
    sustainable energy measures for each dwelling to reduce carbon emissions.
Conclusion
43. This allocated site is within the settlement of Chatteris and therefore Framework
    Policy S4 is relevant. The benefits of the scheme are not substantially outweighed
    by any adverse effects and consequently the proposal benefits from the
    presumption in favour of sustainable development as articulated at Framework
    Policy S3.
44. The proposal is in accordance with the development plan and there are no material
    considerations that would indicate a decision should be made contrary to it. Thus,
    the appeal is allowed.

L Fern
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008859


                                           Schedule of Conditions
    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following drawings:

         CHA-PL01 Rev E – Location Plan
         CHA-PL02 Rev AB – Proposed Site Layout (Block Plan)
         CHA-PL03 Rev B – House Type A (End) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL04 Rev C – House Type A (End) Elevations
         CHA-PL05 Rev B – House Type A (Mid) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL06 Rev B – House Type A (Mid) Elevations
         CHA-PL07 Rev B – House Type B (End) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL08 Rev C – House Type B (End) Elevations
         CHA-PL09 Rev B – House Type B (Mid) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL10 Rev B – House Type B (Mid) Elevations
         CHA-PL11 Rev A – House Type C (Det) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL12 Rev A – House Type C (Det) Elevations
         CHA-PL13 Rev C – House Type C (End) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL14 Rev C – House Type C (End) Elevations
         CHA-PL15 Rev B – House Type C (Mid) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL16 Rev B – House Type C (Mid) Elevations
         CHA-PL17 Rev A – House Type C1 (End) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL18 Rev A – House Type C1 (End) Elevations
         CHA-PL23 Rev C – House Type D (Det-SG) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL24 Rev C – House Type D (Det-SG) Elevations
         CHA-PL25 Rev A – House Type D Floor Plan
         CHA-PL26 Rev A – House Type D Elevations
         CHA-PL27 Rev B – House Type D1 (Det) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL28 Rev B – House Type D1 (Det) Elevations
         CHA-PL29 Rev A – House Type D1 Floor Plans (Det/Corner)
         CHA-PL30 – House Type D1 Elevations (Det/Corner)
         CHA-PL33 Rev A – House Type E (Det) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL34 Rev A – House Type E (Det) Elevations
         CHA-PL35 Rev A – House Type E (Corner) Floor Plans
         CHA-PL36 Rev A – House Type E (Corner) Elevations
         CHA-PL37 Rev A – House Type F Floor Plans
         CHA-PL38 Rev A – House Type F Elevations
         CHA-PL39 Rev A – House Type G Floor Plans
         CHA-PL40 Rev B – House Type G (Brick) Elevations
         CHA-PL41 Rev B – House Type G (Render) Elevations
         CHA-PL42 – Apartments GF Plan
         CHA-PL43 – Apartments FF Plan
         CHA-PL44 – Apartments Elevation 1
         CHA-PL45 – Apartments Elevation 2
         CHA-PL46 – House Type J and J1 Ground Floor Plan
         CHA-PL47 – House Type J and J1 First Floor Plan
         CHA-PL48 – House Type J and J1 Elevations 1
         CHA-PL49 – House Type J and J1 Elevations 2
         CHA-PL50 Rev A – Double Garage Floor Plan and Elevations

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         8
Appeal Decision 6008859


         CHA-PL51 – Single Garage Floor Plan and Elevations
         CHA-PL52 Rev A – House Type C Floor Plans (Det 2)
         CHA-PL53 Rev A – House Type C Elevations (Det 2)
         CHA-PL54 – House Type C1 Elevations (End 2)
         CHA-PL55 – House Type D Plans (Det/Corner)
         CHA-PL56 – House Type D Elevations (Det/Corner)
         CHA-PL57 Rev A – House Type D1 Floor Plans (Det/Corner)
         CHA-PL58 Rev A – House Type D1 Elevations (Det/Corner)
         CHA-PL60 Rev H – Materials Plan
         CHA-PL61 Rev H – Parking Layout
         CHA-PL62 Rev H – Affordable Housing Plan
         CHA-PL64 Rev I – Boundary Treatments Plan
         CHA-PL65 Rev D – Street Scenes A-A and B-B
         CHA-PL66 Rev C – Street Scenes C-C and D-D
         CHA-PL67 Rev I – Street Hierarchy Plan
         CHA-PL68 Rev B – Street Scenes E-E and F-F
         CHA-PL69 Rev B – Street Scenes G-G and H-H
         CHA-PL70 Rev C – FFL Plan
         CHA-PL72 Rev C – Proposed Site Section
         CHA-PL73 Rev E – Proposed Ground Levels
         8059/ASP3/LSP Rev C – Landscape Strategy Plan
         8220280/6104 Rev M – Proposed Access A142
         8220280/6110 Rev C – Vegetation Clearance Plan
         8220280/6201 Rev D – Swept Path Analysis 16.5m Articulated Vehicle
         8220280/6202 Rev D – Swept Path Analysis 8.2m Fire Tender
         8220280/6208 Rev E – Swept Path Analysis 16.5m Articulated Vehicle
         8220280/6210 Rev F – Swept Path Analysis 11.5m Refuse Vehicle
         8220280/6211 Rev F – Swept Path Analysis 11.5m Refuse Vehicle
         8220280/6212 Rev G – Swept Path Analysis 11.5m Refuse Vehicle

    3) No development shall take place until a Construction Method Statement (CMS)
       has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
       The approved CMS shall be adhered to throughout the construction period for
       the development.

    4) No development shall take place until a detailed surface water drainage scheme
       for the site, based on sustainable drainage principles, an assessment of the
       hydrological and hydrogeological context of the development, and the principles
       within the Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Strategy, prepared by JPP
       Consulting (Ref: R-FRA-25493-01-F) and dated June 2025, has been submitted
       to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The submitted details
       shall:

             i.    Provide information about the design storm period and intensity, the
                   method employed to delay and control surface water discharged from the
                   site and the measures taken to prevent pollution of the receiving
                   groundwater and/or surface water;

            ii.    Include a timetable for its implementation; and




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
Appeal Decision 6008859


           iii.    Provide a management and maintenance plan for the lifetime of the
                   development which shall include the arrangements for adoption by any
                   public authority or statutory undertaker and any other arrangements to
                   secure the operation of the scheme throughout its lifetime.
         The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
         The sustainable drainage system shall be managed and maintained thereafter in
         accordance with the approved management and maintenance plan.

    5) No development shall take place until:

             i.    An archaeological Written Scheme of Investigation (WSI) has been
                   submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority; and

            ii.    Any necessary safeguarding measures to ensure the preservation in situ
                   of important archaeological remains and/or further archaeological
                   investigation and recording identified in the WSI have been undertaken in
                   accordance with a specification and timetable that shall first have been
                   submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
         The development shall be carried out in full accordance with the approved
         details within the WSI.
    6) No development shall take place until a Construction Ecological Management
       Plan (CEMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
       planning authority. The CEMP shall incorporate the recommendations of the
       Preliminary Ecological Appraisals and species surveys and reports and include:

             i.    A plan showing wildlife and habitat protection zones;

            ii.    Details of development and construction methods within the wildlife and
                   habitat protection zones and measures to be taken to minimise the impact
                   of any works; and

           iii.    Details of phasing of construction.
         Within no more than three months prior to the commencement of each phase of
         the development, repeat badger and water vole surveys shall be undertaken. If
         badgers and/or water voles are shown to be present, the CEMP shall be
         amended to include mitigation measures for these species. The amended CEMP
         shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority prior
         to the commencement of that phase of development.
         The details of the CEMP shall be adhered to throughout the construction period.
    7) No development shall take place until a Reptile Management and Monitoring
       Plan (RMMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
       planning authority, which shall include details of how public access to the reptile
       receptor area will be restricted. The development shall be carried out in
       accordance with the approved RMMP and the methods retained thereafter.
    8) No development shall take place until an Arboricultural Protection Method
       Statement (APMS) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
       planning authority, which shall include details for the protection of the retained


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    10
Appeal Decision 6008859


         trees, appropriate working methods and necessary tree surgery works. The
         development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved APMS.

    9) No development shall take place above ground level until details of the
       emergency vehicular access, including a delivery phasing plan and timetable,
       have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
       The emergency access shall be implemented in accordance with the approved
       details and retained as such thereafter.

    10) No development shall take place, save for the works to facilitate access to the
        site, until all ground obstructions above 0.6m in height that fall within the visibility
        splays shown on Drawing No 8220280/6110C (Vegetation Clearance Plan) have
        been permanently removed and trees overhanging the visibility splays have had
        their crowns raised to at least 2m above ground level. The above requirements
        shall be maintained thereafter.

    11) No development shall take place above ground level until details of the materials
        to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the buildings have been
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
        development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved materials.

    12) No development shall take place above ground level until details of the
        standards to which the roads, footpaths and cycleways are to be constructed,
        and details of their ongoing maintenance, have been submitted to and approved
        in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall be carried out in
        accordance with the approved details and maintained as such thereafter. Prior to
        first occupation of any dwelling, the road, footway and/or cycleway required to
        access that dwelling shall be constructed to at least binder course surfacing level
        from the dwelling to the existing highway.

    13) No development shall take place above ground level until a Landscape
        Environmental Management Scheme (LEMS) has been submitted to and
        approved in writing by the local planning authority, which shall include details of
        hard and soft landscaping works, a timetable for implementation of the works
        and details of maintenance and management.

         The LEMS shall incorporate the mitigation and enhancement recommendations
         in the: Great Crested Newt eDNA Survey (Ref 9299 v1.0 dated July 2023); the
         Reptile Survey (Ref 9299 v1.0 dated September 2023); the Bat Survey (Ref
         9299 v1.0 dated November 2023); and the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (Ref
         9299 v3.0 dated May 2025).

         The LEMS works shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details
         prior to first occupation and in accordance with the maintenance and
         management details thereafter.

    14) No development shall commence above ground level until an access scheme for
        non-motorised user routes to The Elms via Public Footpath No 32 and to Public
        Footpath No 14, including a delivery phasing plan and timetable, has been
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6008859


         development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details and
         the routes retained thereafter.

    15) No development shall take place above ground level until details for the
        provision of fire hydrants have been submitted to and approved in writing by the
        local planning authority. No dwelling shall be occupied until the fire hydrant
        serving it has been installed and made operational in accordance with the
        approved details.

    16) No development shall take place above ground level until details of the
        sustainable energy measures for each dwelling have been submitted to and
        approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved measures shall
        be installed prior to the first occupation of each dwelling.

    17) Prior to first occupation of the development, a Lighting Design Strategy (LDS)
        shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. All
        external lighting shall be installed in accordance with the approved LDS.

    18) Prior to first occupation of the development, a scheme for security shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
        approved measures shall be installed prior to first occupation of each dwelling
        and retained thereafter.

    19) Prior to first occupation of the development, cycle storage details for each
        dwelling shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
        authority. The cycle storage facilities shall be provided prior to first occupation of
        each dwelling.

    20) Prior to first occupation of each dwelling, the proposed on-site vehicle parking
        space(s) and/or garages shall be provided in accordance with Drawing No CHA-
        PL61 Rev H. Thereafter, those spaces and garages shall be retained for the
        parking of vehicles only.

    21) Prior to first occupation of the development, details of a Welcome Travel Pack
        (WTP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
        authority. A WTP shall be provided to the first occupant(s) of each dwelling prior
        to occupation.

    22) Prior to first occupation of the development, details of refuse collection shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
        development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details, and
        shall be retained thereafter.

    23) Prior to first occupation of each dwelling, 2m x 2m pedestrian visibility splays,
        measured from the back of the footway, shall be provided free of obstruction
        above a height of 0.6m above ground level, and retained thereafter.

    24) The mitigation measures set out in the Acoustics Assessment (Ref 27592-ENV-
        0402 Rev C, prepared by MEC Consulting Group and dated July 2025) shall be
        implemented prior to the first occupation of the associated dwelling and retained
        thereafter.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6008859


    25) Any contamination that is found during construction of the development hereby
        permitted that was not previously identified shall be reported immediately to the
        local planning authority. Development on the part of the site affected shall be
        suspended until a risk assessment has been carried out and submitted to and
        approved in writing by the local planning authority. Where unacceptable risks are
        found, the development shall not resume or continue until remediation and
        verification schemes have been carried out in accordance with details that shall
        first have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
        authority.

                                           **End of Conditions**




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        13
