Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008432
Cornish Marquees, Higher Trevellas, St Agnes, TR5 0XS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Richard Dagnall against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/05840.
•    The development proposed is the construction of two dwellings on previously developed land.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    I have taken the description of development in the banner heading above from the
      application form. However as ‘in the small settlement of Higher Trevellas.’ is not an
      act of development, I have removed this element.
3.    During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) was published. The main parties have had the opportunity to
      comment on the implications of this change, and no parties will have been
      prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
4.    Planning Practice Guidance advises that permission in principle is an alternative
      way of obtaining planning permission for housing-led development. The
      permission in principle consent route has 2 stages: the first stage (or ‘permission in
      principle’ stage) (PIP) establishes whether a site is suitable in-principle, and the
      second (‘technical details consent’ stage) (TDC) is when the detailed development
      proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2 stages.
5.    The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
      land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
      considered as part of a subsequent TDC application if PIP is granted.
Main Issue
6.    The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
      regard to its location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development.
Reasons
7.    Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010- 2030 (LP) Policy 2 sets out the
      Council’s spatial strategy and seeks to sustainably accommodate growth based on
      the role and function of each place, with LP Policy 3 aiming to steer the majority of
      new housing towards the main towns. However, LP Policy 3 does enable a limited

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008432


      amount of new development to take place outside the main towns in particular
      circumstances.
8.    This includes rounding off of settlements and development of previously developed
      land (PDL) within or immediately adjoining settlements. As such, to gain support
      from LP Policy 3, the appeal site needs to be within or immediately adjoining a
      settlement.
9.    The Chief Planning Officer’s Advice Note – Infill/Rounding Off (December 2017)
      (CPOAN) does not form part of the statutory development plan and is to be
      regarded as informal guidance. Nonetheless, it does provide some clarity on the
      locally adopted approach in relation to matters such as settlements and PDL, and
      as such I have had regard to it in the determination of this appeal.
10. The appeal site is outside of any settlement boundary as defined within the
    development plan and Trevellas is not a ‘named’ settlement within LP Policy 3.
    Notwithstanding, the CPOAN notes that a settlement is a place where people
    collectively live in permanent buildings and has a form and shape and clearly
    definable boundaries, not just a low-density straggle of development.
11. Moreover, the Framework definition of settlement also states that settlements do
    not include hamlets and scattered groups of houses located outside predominantly
    built-up areas, unless specifically defined as a settlement in the development plan.
12. I observed that people live collectively in permanent buildings within the grouping
    of buildings at Trevellas. Whilst there are a small number of dwellings in the area
    of the appeal site, including those I observed currently under construction as well
    as commercial buildings, there is no clearly recognisable settlement centre. In-
    combination with a low density and the wider spatial separation of buildings
    without a clear settlement form, the character of the grouping of buildings is more
    akin to a dispersed scatter of development.
13. Consequently, I find that this grouping of buildings is not a settlement for
    development plan purposes. Therefore, even if the appeal site constitutes PDL, it
    does not meet the requirements of LP Policy 3 in terms of development of PDL or
    indeed rounding off.
14. Nevertheless, LP Policy 21 seeks to ensure the best use of land, providing support
    for development that, amongst other things, use PDL. At my site visit I observed
    commercial vehicles parked at the appeal site, and also a small amount of hard
    standing.
15. The definition of PDL in the glossary of the Framework notes that PDL is land
    which is or was occupied by a ‘permanent’ structure and any fixed surface
    infrastructure associated with it, as well as also including land comprising large
    areas of fixed surface infrastructure such as large areas of hardstanding which
    have been lawfully developed.
16. The Council state that the existing use of the land and associated structures do not
    benefit from any planning permissions and are therefore unauthorised. No
    substantive evidence has been put before me to lead me to a differing view.
17. In the absence of any planning permissions or lawful use, I cannot be certain that
    the hardstanding would be on the land permanently or the use continue given the
    potential for the Council to take enforcement action to seek removal and cease the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008432


      use of the land if they found it expedient. Therefore, on the evidence before me, I
      find that for the purposes of this appeal, the appeal site is not PDL as defined
      within the Framework.
18. In this regard, it is open to the appellant to apply to have this matter determined
    under sections 191 or 192 of the Act, and such an application would be unaffected
    by my determination of this appeal.
19. Nevertheless, even if I were to find that the appeal site to be PDL, LP Policy 21
    requires such proposals to be ‘sustainably located’. In this regard I observed at my
    site visit the proximity of the appeal site to services and facilities and public
    transport links.
20. Whilst there is a nearby café, campsite and driving centre, services and facilities
    required for day-to-day living are stated by the Council, and not refuted by the
    appellant, to be in Perrranporth (stated as 2.6km away) or St Agnes (stated as
    3.4km away). Due to the distance and the surrounding highway network featuring
    a mix of rural lanes and classified road largely lacking pedestrian footways or
    streetlighting, future occupiers of the proposal would unlikely access these
    services and facilities by foot or bicycle.
21. Additionally, even if the nearest bus stop is 300m away as stated by the appellant,
    the route to the bus stops would involve either walking or cycling along the
    highway without any significant pavement or large distances without refuge or
    street lighting.
22. Consequently, walking and cycling from the site to bus stops particularly in the
    dark, would be unattractive to most future occupiers and result in potential conflict
    between pedestrians and vehicles. Therefore, future occupiers of the proposal
    would be heavily reliant on private vehicles to access wider services and facilities
    for day to day living.
23. To conclude, the site is not suitable for residential development, having regard to
    its location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development. The proposal
    is contrary to LP Policies 2, 3, 7 and 21, Policy T1 of the Climate Emergency
    Development Plan Document 2023 (CEDPD) and policies 2 and 7 of the St. Agnes
    Neighbourhood Development Plan 2018-2030. As well as the purposes of the
    policies already noted above, these seek, amongst other things to achieve
    sustainably located development and take a hierarchical approach to direct
    development based on the role and function of places and minimise the need to
    travel and support sustainable travel options.
Other Matters
24. The proposal would conflict with the spatial strategy of the development plan,
    together with policies that seek to maximise sustainable transport options. It would,
    therefore, conflict with the development plan as a whole.
25. The Framework says that development plan policies should not be given reduced
    weight simply because they were adopted prior to publication of the Framework.
    The development plan policies the proposal conflicts with that govern the spatial
    location of housing are broadly consistent with the Framework’s aims to meet
    development needs through sustainable patterns of development and limiting
    development away from settlements.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008432


26. However, the Council cannot currently demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites, with the evidence before me indicating a 3.8 year
    supply. The spatial strategy is therefore not delivering a sufficient supply of homes
    in accordance with the other aims of the Framework. Consequently, I can only
    afford moderate weight to the conflict with the development plan policies that
    govern the spatial location of housing.
27. CEDPD Policy T1 is consistent with the aims of Policy TR3 of the Framework to
    ensure that development is located where it can support sustainable patterns of
    movement, enable good accessibility for different users, and make the most of
    existing and proposed transport infrastructure. I therefore give substantial weight
    to the harm resulting from the conflict with this Policy.
28. Set against the harm that I have identified, there would be benefits associated with
    the development. Although two dwellings would help to address the housing
    shortfall and could be delivered quickly. In giving substantial weight to the delivery
    of housing in accordance with Policy HO7 of the Framework, due to the limited
    scale of the proposal for two dwellings this would be a modest benefit.
29. There would also be economic and social benefits, through the creation of jobs
    and it has been put to me, support of the Cornish Marquees business. Future
    occupiers would also thereafter contribute to the rural economy through ongoing
    spending and support for local services. The scope and scale of the development
    mean that these benefits carry modest weight.
30. It is also contended that the proposal would meet sustainability standards set out
    in Policy SEC1 of the Council’s Climate Change Development Plan Document.
    However, this would be a matter for TDC, and would in any case be a policy
    requirement of the proposal. As such this would not amount to a benefit in the
    consideration of this case and does not add to the benefit afforded to two
    additional dwellings.
31. As I have found that the site lies outside a settlement, Framework Policy S5 is of
    relevance which advises that outside settlements only certain forms of
    development should be approved . Nevertheless, for the reasons given above, the
    appeal site is not physically well-related to a settlement. Consequently, the
    approach to decision-making in Policy S5.1.j of the Framework does not apply.
32. Moreover, I have found that for the purposes of this appeal, the appeal site cannot
    be considered as PDL. Furthermore, in respect of limited infilling within groups of
    houses, whilst the site is adjacent to dwellings, the proposal would be an extension
    to the group of buildings, rather than being within the group, so would not be
    infilling.
33. The proposal does not therefore fall within any of the categories of acceptable
    development set out in Policy S5. In these circumstances, the policy advises that
    development should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects, including
    in relation to promoting sustainable patterns of movement. When assessed against
    the policies in the Framework, taken as a whole, the benefits of the proposal do
    not substantially outweigh the harm.
34. The appeal site is within the zone of influence of the Fal and Helford Special Area
    of Conservation (SAC) and Penhale Dunes SAC. In such an area, new residential

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008432


      development would lead to increased levels of recreational activity. This would be
      likely to have a significant effect on the designated features of the sites either on
      its own or cumulatively with other similar development, without avoidance
      measures.
35. Notwithstanding, Regulation 63(1) of the Conservation of Habitats and Species
    Regulations 2017 indicates the requirement for an Appropriate Assessment is only
    necessary where the competent authority is minded to give consent for the
    proposal.
36. Given my conclusions, it is not necessary for me to consider this matter any further
    as the proposal would not take place and would not affect the habitat sites.
    Moreover, even if I were to find that suitable mitigation had been appropriately
    secured, a lack of harm would only be a neutral factor.
37. Several other appeal decisions and permissions granted by the Council are cited
    by the appellant. However, these materially differ from the current proposal in
    several ways. In respect of APP/D0840/W/25/3366033, the Inspector found that
    the appeal site immediately adjoined the settlement of Gilbert’s Coombe.
    Furthermore, it concerns a greater number of dwellings and given the differing site
    context, a differing planning balance.
38. Similarly, with regard to APP/D0840/W/25/3362082, the Inspector found the
    appeal site to lie on the edge of the named town of Penryn and therefore the
    context of the case and associated planning balance also materially differs.
    Moreover, the above appeals were all considered under previous version of the
    Framework.
39. Whilst full details of the permissions granted by the Council are not before me, in
    respect of PA25/07798, the reason for approval states that the location is well-
    related to an identified settlement. PA25/05816 states that the proposal was on
    land immediately adjoining the settlement of Redruth. This limits the equivalence
    of the other cases to the current proposal.
40. I have insufficient information in relation to PA25/08930 and PA26/00968 of their
    sites or context to ascertain any material relevance to the case before me.
    Nevertheless, the current appeal proposal has its own circumstances, and I shall
    determine it on its own merits.
Conclusion
41. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan, read as a whole. No material considerations, individually or
    cumulatively, indicate that a decision should be taken otherwise than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



S Harrington
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
