 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6008542
 22 Woodside View, Thundersley, Benfleet, SS7 4PB
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mrs Lindsey Vassallo against the decision of Castle Point Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/0028/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is change of Use of a C3 dwellinghouse to a children's care home (Use
      Class C2) for a maximum of 2 children to accommodate 7-17 year olds and external alterations.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a change of Use of a
   C3 dwellinghouse to a children's care home (Use Class C2) for a maximum of 2
   children to accommodate 7-17 year olds and external alterations at 22 Woodside
   View, Thundersley, Benfleet, SS7 4PB in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref 26/0028/FUL, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the
   following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The owner or a nominated person shall live on the premises and be
              responsible for the general management thereof including the gardens and
              surroundings at all times unless otherwise agreed in writing beforehand by
              the Local Planning Authority.
     3)       The air source heat pump shall be maintained regularly to ensure the internal
              and external noise levels within the residential premises as set out within
              ‘Indoor ambient noise levels for dwellings’ and for amenity areas in
              BS8233:2014 are adhered to.
Main Issue
2. The main issue in this case is whether the loss of a single-family dwelling is justified
   by a local need for additional children's placements.
Reasons
3. The appeal site contains a three-storey, three-bedroom end-terrace dwellinghouse
   with a single vehicle car port in the under croft, and a north facing rear garden. The
   site has access to Woodside View via a single-vehicle width cross-over on the front
   boundary. Three-storey houses of a similar design characterise the area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6008542



4. I am told that the property would house 2 children as residents and have a
   minimum staff-resident ratio of 1:1 and a maximum of 3:1 during high-dependency
   or emergency placements. The property would therefore contain up to 5 individuals;
   2 residents and 3 staff members. Visitor attendance would be by appointment only.
   Details are contained in the Operational Management Plan & Transport Statement.
   There would be a 3-bin store and an air source heat pump to the side of the
   property, and a three-bicycle locker in the rear garden.
5. Local Plan Policy H2 states that land allocated for residential purposes within the
   Local Plan shall be retained primarily for that purpose. Development which would
   result in the loss of large sites allocated for residential purposes will be refused.
   This policy is clearly protective of family housing, but is by no means restrictive of
   other residential uses akin to normal residential accommodation. The proposed use
   would not be very different to a house being used by a single family of five
   members. This, it seems to me, is a common sense understanding of this type of
   use, which has been found to be the case in a decision of the High Court. The
   decision, North Devon District Council v First Secretary of State (2003) EWHC 157
   (Admin), has been drawn to my attention. In that case the court established that a
   children’s home for a small number of children, living as a single household, is
   functionally indistinguishable from a use Class C3 dwelling.
6. I am also told that this property has provided a home for a “child in need” in recent
   years, but at the time of my site visit there was no external appearance which
   revealed any use of the property different to those of its neighbours.
7. The council makes reference to a ‘General Evidence’ document titled ‘Housing
   Topic Paper August 2025’ that demonstrates that the borough has a historical
   undersupply of homes and the needed homes cannot be achieved without leading
   to overdevelopment, loss of character, and infrastructure strain. There is also a
   letter submitted with the appeal from Essex County Council (ECC) titled “The
   Supported and Specialist Housing and Accommodation Need Assessment (August
   2025) which identifies the specific local need for residential care homes in Castle
   Point. Tables 5 and 49 in that document detail that Castle Point required 6
   children’s home placements in 2024 and requires 15 placements until 2029, with no
   identified need after 2029. The document also confirms in Table 47 that there were
   16 children’s home placements between September 2020 and September 2024 by
   Children in Care, ECC, alone. Only 20% of registered children’s homes capacity in
   Essex is being used by Essex Children in Care, implying that additional capacity
   exists locally.
8. I am also told that 33 places for local children’s care obtained planning approval in
   the 2022/2024 period. However, a letter from ECC, submitted with the appeal,
   confirms that the appeal proposal "aligns with our current sufficiency needs". The
   "In-District" Deficit: ECC data reveals that while children from Castle Point require
   residential care, zero are currently supported within their home district, and the
   borough council’s refusal hinders the ECC's ability to meet its statutory "Sufficiency
   Duty" under the Children Act 1989.
9. Whilst there may be only 20% of registered children’s homes capacity in Essex
   being used by Essex children in care, that can be for a variety of reasons such as
   ownership, tenure, etc. My conclusion is that, taking into account the data supplied,
   and that it appears that this property has recently been successfully providing


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6008542



     accommodation for children in need, together with the fact that the use is
     indistinguishable from a C3 dwelling, no harm in planning terms would occur from
     granting permission. Therefore, the appeal will be allowed.

Conditions
10. The statutory condition that provides a time limit on the start of development must
    be imposed. The local planning authority has not provided any suggested
    conditions. However, the Environmental Health Department has suggested 2
    conditions in the event that the appeal is upheld. I have considered these in the
    light of Planning Practice Guidance. These conditions concern the management of
    the premises and the maintenance of the heat pump. These are necessary to
    ensure proper management of the use and to protect the residential amenity of
    neighbouring occupiers.



Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
