Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 26 June 2026
by M Cryan BA(Hons) DipTP MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026

Appeal A Ref: 6008701
St John Street, outside No 407, London EC1V 4EX (Easting 531452,
Northing 183094)
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application reference is P2025/3607/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the removal of an existing Kiosk, and the deployment of a replacement
     Street Hub 3 unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6008697
St John Street, outside No 407, London EC1V 4EX (Easting 531452,
Northing 183094)
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application reference is P2025/3608/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is two digital 75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
     Street Hub unit.

Decisions
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the removal of an
       existing Kiosk, and the deployment of a replacement Street Hub 3 unit at St John
       Street, outside No 407, London EC1V 4EX (Easting 531452, Northing 183094) in
       accordance with the terms of the application, reference P2025/3607/FUL, subject
       to the conditions in the attached Schedule.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of two digital
       75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit, at St John
       Street, outside No 407, London EC1V 4EX (Easting 531452, Northing 183094) in
       accordance with the terms of the application, reference P2025/3608/ADV. The
       consent is for five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five
       standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations, and the
       additional conditions in the attached Schedule
Preliminary and Procedural Matters
3.     I have been appointed to determine two appeals at the same site, relating to a
       proposal for a new BT Street Hub to replace an existing telephone kiosk. Appeal A

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6008701 and 6008697


         relates to the application for planning permission for the hub itself, while Appeal B
         relates to the application for advertisement consent for the integrated digital
         displays.
4.       The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England)
         Regulations 2007 (“the Regulations”) set out that powers shall be exercised only in
         the interests of amenity and public safety, taking into account the provisions of the
         development plan, so far as they are material; and any other relevant factors.
         While I have had regard to relevant policies of the 2023 Islington Local Plan
         Strategic and Development Management Policies (“the SDMP”) and the London
         Plan 2021 which were brought to my attention, they have not been determinative
         in Appeal B.
5.       The appeal site is within the New River Conservation Area (“the NRCA”) and, in
         accordance with section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
         Areas) Act 1990 (“the PLBCAA 1990”) I have a statutory duty to pay special
         attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance
         of the conservation area. This duty applies in respect of the consideration of
         whether to grant planning permission (Appeal A), and to advertisement
         applications and appeals (Appeal B) insofar as it relates to the consideration of
         amenity.
6.       The appeal site is also close to, and the development would be within the setting
         of, the Grade II Listed Old Red Lion public house and theatre1. For Appeal A I
         therefore also have a statutory duty under section 66(1) of the PLBCAA 1990 to
         have special regard to the desirability of preserving the listed buildings or their
         setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest which they
         possess. That statutory duty does not apply in respect of Appeal B, though I have
         nevertheless taken the presence of the listed building into account as a material
         consideration in my assessment of the effect of the proposed advertisement.
7.       On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
         Framework (“the Framework”). While the new Framework included substantial
         changes from the previous version, the effect of the provisions most relevant to
         this appeal was not altered significantly. I therefore consider that there has been
         no need for me to seek submissions on the revised Framework, and am satisfied
         that no party’s interests have been prejudiced by my taking this approach.
Main Issues
8.       For both applications the decision notice issued by the Council gave the same two
         reasons for refusal, encompassing matters of appearance/visual amenity and
         safety. The main issues in the appeals are therefore the effect of the proposal on:
         •    The character and appearance of the NRCA and the setting of the nearby
              Grade II listed Old Red Lion, or visual amenity; and
         •    Pedestrian and highway safety.




1
    Official List Entry number 1195738


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decisions 6008701 and 6008697


Reasons
Character and appearance of NRCA and setting of listed building/visual amenity
9.     The appeals relate to the proposed replacement of a BT telephone kiosk within the
       Angel town centre, a busy part of central London. The appeal site is in front the
       Angel Building, a modern five-storey commercial block on the west side of St John
       Street; buildings opposite the site on the eastern side of St John Street (including
       the Old Red Lion, to which I return in more detail in moment) are older, and
       typically three or four storeys in height.
10. The NRCA covers an area around the site of the New River Head, from which it
    takes its name, and its associated industrial and water supply buildings. The
    Council’s 2002 NRCA Design Guidelines describe it as one of the largest
    conservation areas in Islington, predominantly comprising late 18th and early 19th
    century residential development in some of the finest terraces and squares in the
    borough, although it also contains some shopping and commercial areas including
    St John Street. Based on all the evidence before me I consider that the
    significance of the NRCA, insofar as it relates to these appeals, is derived from the
    overall quality of the urban environment, and the general consistency of scale,
    materials, design and detailing throughout the area.
11. The existing telephone kiosk on the appeal site is set at the front of the footway,
    close to the kerb. As might be expected, there is a variety of other street furniture
    nearby, including lighting columns, litter bins, slim posts carrying traffic signs,
    traffic signals, and various equipment cabinets. A short way south of the site on
    St John Street is a bus stop with shelter. At the rear of the footway, in front of the
    Angel Building, is a hard-surfaced forecourt with seats and tables serving a bar,
    planter boxes and areas of low shrub planting, inset with a row of trees.
12. The proposed development is the removal of the existing telephone kiosk and the
    installation of a BT Street Hub 3 unit. This would be set approximately 0.5m from,
    and perpendicular to, the edge of the footway, the same as the existing kiosk. It
    would be a freestanding structure, approximately 3.0m high, 1.2m wide and 0.4m
    deep, clad in powder-coated aluminium panels in a dark grey finish. The hub
    would provide free Wi-Fi and telephone calls, among other services. There would
    be two digital screens, one on each side of the unit, which would be of tempered
    and toughened laminated glass; these would display advertisements.
13. The hub unit would be taller and broader than the kiosk it would replace, though its
    slim profile would moderate its visual impact. In views in either direction along
    St John Street, the hub unit would be seen with other street furniture in the
    foreground and background, and mostly in the context of the modern Angel
    Building alongside. Its modern design and restrained dark finish mean that the hub
    unit would not in itself be an unduly prominent or intrusive feature in the
    streetscape – indeed, in replacing the somewhat tired kiosk currently on the site
    there would be likely to be a modest improvement to the townscape.
14. Neither the existing telephone kiosk on the appeal site, nor the nearby bus shelter,
    carry digital advertisements (though the kiosk does have stuck-on vinyl panels).
    Indeed, I did not see any other similar screens in the immediate vicinity of the
    appeal site – two bus shelters with digital advertisement displays referred to in the
    appellant’s statement are in City Road which, although close by, is neither in the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6008701 and 6008697


       same setting nor within the NRCA – so the appeal scheme would mark the
       introduction of that type of illuminated display to this particular location.
15. The NRCA Design Guidelines state that “internally illuminated signs will not
    normally be permitted”, as they can often detract from the visual amenity of the
    conservation area. In this case, not only would the screens be alongside a busy
    main road with a commercial character in a central London location, where shops,
    restaurants and offices have a variety of fascia and projecting signage (some of
    which is illuminated), in most circumstances the advertisements would be seen
    against, or in a very close relationship with, the modern Angel Building. This
    consideration could not, of course, apply to most other locations within the NRCA
    but here, in their vibrant, commercial and modern urban context, the
    advertisements would not be an unexpected, intrusive or otherwise incongruous
    element. As such, I am satisfied that it would be appropriate to set aside the
    Design Guidelines’ advice on this matter in this instance.
16. Turning to the Old Red Lion, it is a public house dating from 1899 (though the
    institution is evidently much older than the building – a roof gablet bears the
    inscription “The Old Red Lion 1415 rebuilt 1899”). The building has four storeys;
    the ground-floor pub frontage is of granite and red-painted stucco, with timber
    doors and window frames, and a stucco relief above the original main entrance.
    The three upper floors have banded stucco rustication and pilasters divided by
    rubbed and finely cut red brick panels, with some terracotta decoration. The
    building is described in the official List entry as being in “free-classical style with
    Neo-Jacobean and other Renaissance motifs”, as well as retaining much of the
    original interior including barback and division screens.
17. The Old Red Lion has a degree of architectural richness and variety which means
    that it stands out alongside its simpler and more sedate neighbours on the eastern
    side of St John Street. The building brings a considerable degree of animation and
    visual interest to the streetscape. Neither main party has provided any information
    about the significance of the Old Red Lion2 but in my view, insofar as it relates to
    this appeal, it is derived from its architectural quality and its positive contribution to
    the streetscene.
18. As I have described above, the existing telephone kiosk on the appeal site has a
    tired appearance, and does not make a positive contribution to the setting of the
    listed building. For the same reasons I have set out in paragraph 13 in respect of
    the townscape more generally, I consider that the appearance of the proposed hub
    unit would be somewhat more sensitive to its surroundings, including the setting of
    the Grade II listed building, than the existing kiosk. The digital display
    advertisements would be separated from the Old Red Lion by the width of St John
    Street, and as such would not normally be seen in close juxtaposition with the
    listed building; they would not therefore detract from its setting.
19. Taking these points together, I conclude that the character and appearance of the
    NRCA, and the setting of the Grade II listed Old Red Lion public house, would be
    preserved, in accordance with the expectations of the PLBCAA 1990; there would
    be no harm to visual amenity. There would therefore be no conflict with PLAN1,
    SP4, DH1, DH2, DH6, T4 or ST3 of the SDMP, or with Policies D3, D4, HC1 and
    T2 of the London Plan 2021. Together, and among other things, these policies
2
 Indeed, it was incorrectly described in the appellant’s statement as being only a locally-listed building; as I have set out here, it is
a designated heritage asset.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    4
Appeal Decisions 6008701 and 6008697


       seek to ensure that development is well-designed and appropriate for its context,
       including in respect of the public realm, that advertisements and
       telecommunications installations are not visually or physically intrusive, and that
       the historic environment, including designated heritage assets as conservation
       areas and listed buildings and their settings, is conserved and enhanced. These
       policies are material to Appeal B insofar as they seek to protect amenity.
Pedestrian and highway safety
20. The Council’s particular concern in respect of public safety is that the proposed
    hub would impede safe use of the footway by constraining pedestrian movement.
    The hub unit would be wider than the existing telephone kiosk it would replace
    and, the submitted drawings show a footway approximately 5.3m wide (with
    around 4.4m of clear space between the edge of the hub unit and the nearest
    edge of a flower bed). However, the Council notes that this space includes the
    privately-owned forecourt area in front of the Angel Building and, as this land is not
    part of the public highway, it cannot be assumed that it will remain usable by
    passers-by. The Council also referred to Transport for London’s Pedestrian
    Comfort Guidance (“the TfL Guidance”) which recommends a minimum
    unobstructed footway width of 4.2m next to telephone kiosks, and that such units
    “should not be fitted on streets where footway unobstructed widths would be
    reduced to below 2,000mm”.
21. As I have already described above, the appeal site is in a busy location within
    Angel town centre. I accept the Council’s comments in respect of the private
    ownership of the land at the back of the public footway, and that it may not always
    be available for pedestrian movement. I am not therefore persuaded by the
    appellant’s argument that “a pedestrian highway of 4400mm will be retained
    immediately adjacent to the appeal site”. I also note that, beyond this comment,
    the appellant’s statement did not really address the specific objections raised by
    the Council on this matter. However, during my site visit I was able to see the
    boundary between the public footway and the private forecourt of the Angel
    Building, marked by different paving types and textures as described in the
    Council’s officer report. At present, it is possible to pass the appeal site by entering
    the Angel Building forecourt (though it is not necessary to do so), and the
    distinction between the public highway and the private land may not be apparent to
    many of those who pass by.
22. While no specific figures have been put to me, nothing I have seen (whether in
    written submissions or on site) indicates that, without including the private
    forecourt, the unobstructed footway width would fall short of the absolute minimum
    2m sought by the TfL Guidance. At the same time, it is also clear to me that
    without the private forecourt the TfL Guidance recommended minimum footway
    width of 4.2m past the hub unit could not be achieved. However, either side of the
    appeal site the effective width of the public footway on St John Street is also
    limited to rather less than this “ideal”: to the north by equipment cabinets and
    various lighting and congestion charge camera columns; to the south by the
    nearby bus stop and shelter.
23. Even if the part of the Angel Building forecourt next to the appeal site were to be
    closed off to the public (by whatever means and for whatever reason), the existing
    constraints elsewhere on the public footway very close by are in my view the more
    significant “limiting factor” in terms of pedestrian flow. I am therefore satisfied that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6008701 and 6008697


       the installation of a new Street Hub unit in place of the current telephone kiosk
       would not have any significant adverse effects on pedestrian or highway safety.
24. As such, I find no conflict with Policies PLAN1, DH6, T1, T2 or T4 of the SDMP,
    nor with Policies T2 or T4 of the London Plan 2021. Together, and among other
    things, these policies seek to ensure that development (including advertisements)
    does not have an unacceptable adverse impact on pedestrian flows and desire
    lines, or otherwise increase road danger. These policies are material to Appeal B
    insofar as they seek to protect public safety.
Conditions
25. The Council proposed a number of conditions in the event of my allowing the
    appeals, which I have considered in the light of the tests set out in the National
    Planning Policy Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. The appellant did
    not comment on the Council’s suggestions, though they had already proposed
    their own conditions in their planning statement. Where necessary in the interests
    of effectiveness, I have made changes to the wording or ordering of conditions.
26. For Appeal A, as well as the standard time limit condition (1), in the interests of
    certainty it is appropriate that there is a condition requiring that the development is
    carried out in accordance with the approved drawings and documents (2). I have
    incorporated into Condition 2 references to the anti-social behaviour management
    plan and other supporting documents submitted as part of the application – a
    separate condition addressing this matter as proposed by the Council is not
    therefore necessary. Conditions relating to materials (3) and to the reinstatement
    of pavements (4) are necessary to protect the quality of the public realm, and the
    character and appearance of the area.
27. For Appeal B, the appellant suggested in the Planning, Design and Access
    Statement that a 10-year advertisement consent should be granted. However, the
    arguments put forward for this did not, in my view, amount to a substantive
    justification for a departure from the five-year period set out in the standard
    conditions. I have imposed conditions relating to the overnight brightness of the
    display screens (1) and to the control of images and suchlike (2, 3 and 4) in the
    interests of amenity. A condition prohibiting the use of images resembling road
    traffic signs and signals (5) is imposed in the interest of highway safety.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that both appeals should be allowed.



M Cryan
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6008701 and 6008697


Schedule of Conditions – Appeal A
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be installed in accordance with the
              following approved plans:
              • Site Location Plan (Dwg: 25005448_PLN_LOC_1.1, 1 December 2025)
              • Proposed Site Plan (Dwg: 25005448_PLN_SI_2.1, 1 December 2025)
              • Elevation Plan (Dwg: 25005448_PLN_EL_3.1, 1 December 2025)
              • Proposed BT Streethub 3 Unit (Dimensions drawing, 21 March 2025)
              Except where otherwise required by these conditions, the Street Hub 3 unit
              shall be installed, operated and maintained in full compliance with the
              following approved documents for the lifetime of the installation:
              • Planning, Design and Access Statement (Dalcour Maclaren, Ref: ISL-19)
              • Institute of Lighting Professionals Professional Lighting Guide 05/23 The
                  brightness of illuminated advertisements including digital displays
              • BT Street Hubs Beyond Connection v2.2 November 2025
              • BT Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan Version 3
              • BT Street Hub Noise Management Plan v2.1 February 2025
     3)       The development shall be constructed in accordance with the schedule of
              materials noted on the approved plans and within the Design and Access
              Statement. The development shall be carried out strictly in accordance with
              the details so approved and shall be maintained as such thereafter.
     4)       Pavements surrounding the installation hereby permitted shall be made good
              to the same condition as, and in new or replacement surface materials
              matching as closely as possible, the adjacent land.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decisions 6008701 and 6008697


Schedule of Conditions – Appeal B
     1)       The intensity of the illumination of the two digital display screens shall not
              exceed 600 candelas per square metre (cd/m2) between dusk and dawn in
              line with the maximum permitted recommended luminance as set out in The
              Institute of Lighting Professionals Professional Lighting Guide 05/23 The
              brightness of illuminated advertisements including digital displays
     2)       The digital display screens shall not display any moving, or apparently
              moving, images (including animation, flashing, scrolling, three-dimensional,
              intermittent or video elements).
     3)       The minimum display time for each piece of content on the digital display
              screens shall be 10 seconds.
     4)       The interval between each piece of content on the digital display screens
              shall take place over a period no greater than one second; the complete
              screen shall change with no visual effects (including swiping or other
              animated transition methods) between displays and the display will include a
              mechanism to freeze the image in the event of a malfunction.
     5)       No content on the digital display screens shall resemble traffic signs, as
              defined in section 64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
