Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by N Bromley BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008540
Tzigane, Freeston Avenue, St Georges, Telford, Telford and Wrekin TF2 9EF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Aman Aujla, of Ashlee Homes Supported Living Ltd, against the decision of
     Telford and Wrekin Council.
•    The application Ref is TWC/2026/0126.
•    The application sought planning permission for change of use of 4no. dwellinghouses (Use Classes
     C3 and C3(b)) to Residential Institutions (Use Class C2) without complying with a condition attached
     to planning permission Ref TWC/2025/0368, dated 19 September 2025.
•    The condition in dispute is No 4 which states that: The development shall occur in accordance with
     the ‘Planning, Design and Access Statement’ submitted with the planning application with reference
     to Staff Numbers, Staff Movements and Parking Arrangements and shall be managed in this manner
     for the lifetime of the development.
•    The reason given for the condition is: In order to manage the use of the premises in the interest of
     the amenities of the area.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
      4no. dwellinghouses (Use Classes C3 and C3(b)) to Residential Institutions (Use
      Class C2) at Tzigane, Freeston Avenue, St Georges, Telford, Telford and Wrekin
      TF2 9EF, in accordance with the application Ref TWC/2026/0126, without
      compliance with condition number 4 previously imposed on planning permission
      Ref TWC/2025/0368, dated 19 September 2025 and subject to the conditions set
      out in the schedule to this decision.
Applications for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by Aman Aujla, of Ashlee Homes Supported
      Living Ltd against the decision of Telford and Wrekin Council. This application is
      the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matter
3.    The Council’s decision notice refers to policies of the emerging Telford and Wrekin
      Local Plan 2020–2040 (the emerging LP). The Council has confirmed that the
      emerging LP is at an advanced stage, having undergone examination. The
      identified policies of the emerging LP carry forward similar objectives to the
      existing development plan policies listed in the decision notice. Therefore,
      although considerable weight can be given to those relevant policies, the emerging
      LP has not yet been adopted. In these circumstances, I have had regard to current
      development plan policy in reaching my decision.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008540


Background and Main Issues
4.    Planning permission was granted for the change of use of four bungalows into
      care homes in September 2025 (the original permission). The scheme permitted a
      maximum of four children, one per bungalow, with five staff members per shift
      operating across the site.
5.    Condition 4 of the original permission set out and confirmed the Staff Numbers,
      Staff Movements and Parking Arrangements for the proposed development within
      a Planning, Design and Access Statement (the DAS). The proposal, in essence,
      now seeks to vary Condition 4 so as to remove a restriction on staffing numbers.
      The number of children in each of the bungalows would remain the same as
      originally permitted, and no other changes are proposed. A submitted Operational
      Management Plan (the OMP), dated 31 March 2026, sets out a series of new
      management and mitigation measures, which would replace the DAS.
6.    Due to the forgoing, the main issues are the effect that the variation of Condition 4
      would have on;
            •    highway safety, with regard to parking, and
            •    the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties, with
                 regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
Highway safety
7.    The appeal site comprises a small development of four bungalows, located within
      a residential area. Off road car parking for the bungalows, as well as turning
      arrangements, is provided within the site via a single vehicle access onto Freeston
      Avenue.
8.    Each bungalow would be occupied by one child, and the four bungalows would be
      staffed by 10 support workers during each day and night shift, with a manager also
      present during certain times of the day.
9.    Policy C3 of the Telford and Wrekin Local Plan, 2018 (the Local Plan) requires all
      development to mitigate site specific highway issues, and Policy C5 of the Local
      Plan requires all development to demonstrate that parking has been designed as
      integral to the proposal. Criterion iv) of Policy C5 seeks to ensure that the location,
      quantity and quality of car parking reflect the density, nature, character and context
      of the development as well as its intended usage and relationship with the
      surrounding area including any foreseeable parking issues in the local area.
      Appendix F of the Local Plan provides parking standards and in the case of the
      proposal there would be a requirement for one space per four bed spaces and one
      space per staff member.
10. Occupied as specialist care accommodation, employing specialist staff, the
    majority of staff may drive from outside the area. Even so, with 10 delineated
    spaces, including one space dedicated to a ‘house vehicle’, the majority of staff for
    each shift pattern would be able to park within the site.
11. Furthermore, located within a residential area, with bus stops nearby, staff would
    have the opportunity to access the appeal site via a range of sustainable transport


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6008540


      modes. In particular, despite concerns about journey times, particularly for night
      staff, the bus service is frequent and would offer a realistic alternative to car use
      for some staff members. Likewise, staff members living nearby would have the
      opportunity to walk and cycle to the site, and it would be inappropriate to assume
      that all staff would travel by car.
12. While the road outside the appeal site is narrow, the remainder of Freeston
    Avenue is wider, as are other roads nearby, and there is an ability to park on the
    road near to the property. I also observed during my site visit that many
    neighbouring properties have off road parking and there was a good level of on
    street parking availability close to the appeal property. Therefore, in the event that
    all staff for each shift did drive, there is no substantiated evidence that two vehicles
    parked on adjacent roads would exacerbate an existing on-street parking problem
    nearby.
13. During shift changeover times, it is suggested that a maximum of 13 staff would be
    on site. As such, during these periods there would be a shortfall of four spaces
    compared to the parking standards.
14. The parking standards recognise that they are a guide which can be applied
    flexibly depending on a range of factors, including proximity to public transport,
    district centres and availability of existing parking. While a shortfall of four spaces
    would not be a substantial under provision of spaces, due to the constrained
    nature of the access driveway and turning areas, some incoming staff travelling by
    car would need to wait to access the site, and a parking space. With a narrow
    width and located close to a bend in the road, waiting vehicles on the site frontage
    would likely cause obstruction to other highway users, and could, on rare
    occasions, restrict access for emergency vehicles.
15. Paragraph 56 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) advises
    that local planning authorities should consider whether otherwise unacceptable
    development could be made acceptable through the use of conditions or planning
    obligations.
16. The OMP, sets out, amongst other things, staggered shift changeover times for the
    bungalows. As well as a travel plan, which encourages car sharing and public
    transport use. The registered manager for the bungalows would manage the
    parking spaces and there is a mechanism to secure an annual review of the OMP.
17. Undoubtably a 15-minute change over slot per bungalow would stagger vehicle
    movements and free up car parking spaces during changeover times. Therefore,
    although the Council raise concerns that each 15-minute period is not sufficient, I
    am satisfied that the staff change over periods can satisfactorily manage vehicle
    movements to avoid highway obstruction and safety. Likewise, despite concerns
    by St Georges & Priorslee Parish Council about the design of the parking spaces,
    the permitted arrangements are not proposed to be amended, and increased
    staffing numbers would not raise greater concerns in how the spaces are used.
    The OMP would also control the use of the parking spaces within the site.
18. With clear management measures set out, as well as a monitoring process, I am
    satisfied that the OMP is a robust document and that a condition to secure the
    implementation of the identified management and mitigation measures would be
    enforceable. Additionally, located in an accessible area, the use of sustainable
    transport and non-car use could be further encouraged by the implementation of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008540


      the travel plan for staff. The registered manager would also act as a travel plan
      coordinator, as set out in the OMP. As such, the implementation of the OMP would
      ensure that the proposal would not lead to highway safety implications.
19. Consequently, for the above reasons, and on the evidence before me, I conclude
    that the variation of Condition 4 would not have a harmful effect on highway safety,
    with regard to parking. Therefore, it would not be contrary to Policies C3 and C5 of
    the Local Plan.
Living conditions
20. Located within a residential area, the environment surrounding the appeal site is
    relatively quiet. Indeed, the site is bounded by dwellings and gardens to either side
    and to the rear. There are also houses opposite.
21. With an increase in staff numbers, comings and goings to and from the site
    collectively would be notable. Particularly during shift changeover times in the
    morning and the evening. However, occupied as small family houses, each of the
    bungalows would generate vehicle movements during the morning period as
    occupiers travel to work and school, as well as in the evening when occupiers
    return home or undertake other activities. As such, the level of vehicle movements
    would remain proportionate to the residential context, and the level of activity
    would not significantly exceed typical residential patterns.
22. Furthermore, in a residential street such as this, the other properties on the street
    are likely to have associated trips during these times also. Therefore, a reasonable
    amount of activity during these times can be expected and comings and goings at
    these times would not be unusual.
23. To a certain degree, the OMP would control and mitigate the level of vehicle
    movements, thus reducing noise and disturbance levels also. As such, when
    compared to the originally approved staffing levels, or use of the houses as small
    family houses, the proposal would not significantly increase noise and disturbance.
24. For the reasons given, I conclude that the variation of Condition 4 would not harm
    the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties, with regard to
    noise and disturbance. Therefore, the proposal would not conflict with Policy BE1
    of the Local Plan, as the development demonstrates that no significant adverse
    impact would be caused to neighbouring properties as a result of noise.
Conditions
25. The Planning Practice Guidance makes clear that decision notices for the grant of
    planning permission under section 73 should also restate the conditions imposed
    on earlier permissions that continue to have effect.
26. For clarity, I have included a time limit condition based on the date of the original
    permission.
27. As I have no information before me about the status of the other conditions
    imposed on the original planning permission, I shall impose all of the other
    conditions for certainty, and I endorse the reasons for their imposition, as stated in
    the original decision notice. In the event that some have in fact been discharged,
    that is a matter which can be addressed by the parties.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008540


Conclusion
28. For the above reasons, having taken account of the development plan, along with
    all other relevant material considerations, the appeal should be allowed.



N Bromley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008540


                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than 19 September 2028.

    2) Prior to first occupation/use of the development hereby approved, the areas
       shown on the approved plans for parking, loading, unloading and turning of
       vehicles has been properly laid out, hard surfaced and drained. The space shall
       be maintained thereafter free of any impediment to its designated use for the
       lifetime of the development.

    3) The development shall be carried out in accordance with the deposited plans
       and drawings as stated below:

              •    Plan Number: A024/103/BR01 Rev D. Date Received: 20/05/2025
              •    Plan Number: A024/103/BR/101 Rev A. Date Received: 20/05/2025
              •    Plan Number: AO24/103BR/102 Rev A. Date Received: 20/05/2025
              •    Plan Number: A024/103/BR/100. Date Received: 22/05/2025
              •    Plan Number: A024/103/BR/122 Rev A. Date Received: 18/07/2025
              •    Plan Number: A024/103/BR/02 Rev E. Date Received: 18/07/2025

    4) The development hereby permitted shall be operated in accordance with the
       Operational Management Plan, dated 31 March 2026, prepared by Ashlee
       Homes Supported Living Ltd, and shall be implemented and managed in this
       manner for the lifetime of the development.

    5) The premises shall be used as a children’s care home (and restricted to the care
       of a maximum of 4 young persons aged 5-18 years) and for no other purpose
       including any other purpose in Class C2 of the Schedule to the Town and
       Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, or in any provision equivalent to
       that Class in any statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with or
       without modification.


                                              ***END OF SCHEDULE***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          6
