Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008634
Barn House, Warren Road, Fairlight, East Sussex TN35 4AN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms C Masters against the decision of Rother District Council.
•    The application ref is RR/2025/1552/P.
•    The development proposed is change of use to create a residential dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. Accordingly, I sought the views of the parties on the implications of
       the new Framework on the appeal. I have taken these submissions into account in
       reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the provision of
       holiday accommodation within the district.
Reasons
4.     Policy EC6 criterion (iv) of the Rother District Core Strategy (2014) (CS) seeks to
       ensure proposals do not involve the loss of tourism accommodation, unless there
       is no prospect of its continued use. Policy DCO1 of the Rother District
       Development and Site Allocations Local Plan (2019) (LP) sets out that proposals
       that involves the loss of sites of social or economic value must demonstrate that
       there is no reasonable prospect of a continued use, backed by evidence including
       a comprehensive and sustained marketing campaign, which clearly indicates a
       lack of demand for the existing use for normally at least 18 months and evidence
       that clearly demonstrates that the unit is not or is not capable of being financially
       viable.
5.     No marketing exercise has been undertaken by the appellant. Instead, a graph has
       been provided which shows the occupancy rates from February 2024 to December
       2025. Broadly, the graph shows the property was occupied throughout much of
       2024 before declining to occupancy rates predominantly at 0% throughout 2025. In
       addition, it is stated that the business is unviable and has high running costs and
       that there are other holiday lets on site which makes the unit subject to this appeal
       redundant.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008634


6.       The evidence before me does not explain or provide any context as to why there
         was such a contrast in the occupancy rates between the two years. In addition,
         one year of low occupation does not definitively demonstrate the site can no longer
         function as a holiday let. This is particularly the case given the higher occupancy
         rates the previous year and that no quantified evidence has been provided
         regarding the running costs or how the other holiday accommodation specifically
         impacts the letting of the appeal building. Therefore, based on the evidence
         presented, it has not been clearly demonstrated that there is no reasonable
         prospect of the continued use of the building and that it is not capable of being
         financially viable as a holiday let.
7.       Therefore, the proposal would result in the unjustified loss of an established
         economic use, adversely affecting the provision of holiday accommodation in the
         area. It would therefore conflict with Policy EC6 of the CS and Policy DEC3 and
         DCO1 of the LP. These policies set out the Council’s evidence based and plan led
         approach to tourism and economic development within the district.
Other Considerations
8.       The site is situated within the High Weald National Landscape (HWNL). Section 85
         of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act (2000), as amended by section 245 of
         the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act (2023), requires relevant authorities to seek
         to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of National
         Landscapes. The proposal is for a change of use only and therefore the property
         would retain its appearance as a rural property set in a low density rolling pastoral
         landscape. The proposal would therefore conserve the natural beauty of the
         HWNL.
9.       The appellant accepts that the site is situated within an isolated location1. In these
         circumstances Policy HO11 of the Framework2 is engaged. This policy supports
         isolated homes in the countryside where one or more of a defined list of
         circumstances apply. Of particular relevance to this appeal is paragraph 1(c) of
         Policy HO11 which supports the reuse of a redundant or disused building where it
         enhances its immediate setting.
10. In the first instance, as discussed above, the evidence before me does not
    sufficiently establish the holiday let is disused or redundant. Furthermore, the
    proposal is for a change of use only, and the site as it physically currently exists is
    in keeping with the rural landscape with no clear harm to it in its existing form. I
    have no evidence before me that a future landscaping scheme as a result of the
    appeal proposal would result in any tangible enhancements to the immediate
    setting of the building. The proposal therefore does not meet the circumstances of
    Policy HO11 in which an isolated home is supported by the Framework.
11. The appellant has highlighted Policy S5 paragraph 1(c), relating to the reuse of
    buildings which they contend applies to the appeal proposal. However,
    paragraph 3 of Policy S5 is clear that in the case of development proposals
    comprising isolated homes, these should not be approved other than in
    accordance with Policy HO11, which the proposal does not benefit from its
    support.


1
    Paragraph 3.9 Planning Statement by Town & Country Planning Solutions August 2025
2
    Formerly paragraph 84


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6008634


12. The appellant has referred to a recent appeal within the district3, where an
    Inspector in this case allowed an appeal for the change of use of a holiday let to a
    permanent dwelling despite marketing information not being provided in this case.
    However, in this appeal the evidence demonstrated to the Inspector that there was
    no prospect for the continued use of the property as a holiday let. Therefore, the
    Inspector in that case gave considerable weight to the future sustainability of the
    building being secured by the conversion. This is different from the appeal before
    me where it has not been demonstrated that there is no prospect for the continued
    use of the property. This other appeal is therefore not directly comparable to the
    appeal before me and carries limited weight.
13. The appellant has also referred to a planning permission within the wider site4,
    where the Council engaged with the former paragraph 84 of the Framework for this
    building. However, in this case the evidence shows that the building was in a poor
    state of repair and that the conversion would enhance the immediate area. This
    example is also not directly comparable to the appeal before me and therefore
    also carries limited weight.
Planning Balance
14. The proposed development is not in accordance with the aforementioned policies
    of the CS and LP. Annex A of the Framework sets out development plan policies
    which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies in the
    Framework should be given very limited weight.
15. CS Policy EC6 and LP Policies DEC3 and DCO1 are consistent with section 7 of
    the Framework in seeking to build a strong, effective economy including Policies
    E2 and E4 of the Framework. On this basis the identified conflict with these
    policies carries significant weight against the development and the proposal would
    conflict with the development plan as a whole.
16. In cases where development proposals outside of settlements do not fall within
    one of the categories set out in Policy S5, paragraph 4 advises that such
    development should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects.
17. The evidence before me shows that the Council cannot demonstrate a five year
    housing land supply, with the appellant providing an unchallenged range of 2.63 -
    2.79 years. Given the narrow range, it is not determinative in my decision to reach
    a finding on an exact figure. In addition, the appellant highlights the Council’s
    Housing Delivery Test result is 35% representing a considerable under delivery of
    housing.
18. Policy HO7 of the Framework sets out that substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the
    evidenced accommodation needs of the community. Whilst the provision of a
    dwelling would be an important benefit given the Council’s deficits in both the
    delivery and supply of housing, it would not substantially outweigh the conflict with
    the evidence based and plan led approach to tourism and economic development,
    a matter of significant weight against the proposal. As such, exceptional
    circumstances as required by paragraph 4 of Policy S5 do not exist.

3
    APP/U1430/W/25/3361201
4
    LPA ref RR/2025/435/P


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008634


Conclusion
19. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.



C Housden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
