Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by C Evans MTCP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008382
14 Sunningdale Way, Little Neston, Neston, Cheshire West and Chester CH64
0UY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Michael Davies against the decision of Cheshire West and Chester Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00672/FUL.
•    The development proposed is first floor rear extension to create an additional floor with master
     bedroom and en-suite. Garage conversion and internal alterations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.
Main Issues
3.     The Council has raised no concerns regarding the garage conversion and link
       extension. Based on the information before me, I see no reason to take a different
       view. The main issues in dispute are the effect of the proposed first floor extension
       on:
        •    the character and appearance of the host dwelling and wider area; and
        •    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to outlook,
             loss of privacy, sunlight and daylight.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.     The appeal site is located in a predominantly residential area. There are a range of
       house types, including bungalows and two-storey properties, which share common
       design features in the area. The host property is a detached bungalow with two-
       storey dwellings either side. They are sited in close proximity to each other.
5.     The proposed first-floor extension would add a second storey to the rear of the
       property. It would add significant mass, which would be an over-dominant addition



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008382


       that would not appear subordinate to the host dwelling. Consequently, it would not
       be appropriate to the size of the plot or relate well with the street scene.
6.     Whilst no significant changes are proposed to the front elevation, and the
       proposed first-floor extension would be to the rear of the dwelling; it would be
       clearly visible from the street scene. The mix of one and two storeys would result
       in a dwelling, which would be an incongruous addition, at odds with surrounding
       dwellings and the wider street scene.
7.     I conclude that the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the
       character and appearance of the host dwelling and wider area. It would conflict
       with Policy ENV6 of the Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan Part One Strategic
       Policies (adopted 2015) and policies DM3 and DM21 of the Cheshire West and
       Chester Local Plan Part Two Land Allocations and Detailed Policies (adopted
       2019) (Local Plan Part 2). Collectively, amongst other things, these require
       development proposals to respect local character and existing buildings within the
       site; and for extensions and alterations to dwellings to be subordinate to the
       original dwelling.
Living conditions
8.     A small side alley separates the proposal site from the adjoining property of No 12
       Sunningdale Way. The frontages of both properties follow a similar build line;
       however, the host dwelling projects further into the rear garden when compared to
       No 12. The substantial mass of the extension, sited close to the boundary, would
       make the development overly dominant and oppressive for the occupiers of No 12.
       It would result in an unacceptable loss of outlook from their rear windows and
       garden.
9.     The proposed height and mass of the extension would likely cause overshadowing
       and effect the levels of daylight and sunlight in the gardens of both adjoining
       properties and habitable rooms of No 12 for at least part of sunny days. No
       daylight and sunlight study has been submitted to quantify the impact on adjoining
       properties, and so I must rely on my own planning judgement. The likely loss of
       sunlight and daylight would unacceptably harm the affected rooms and rear
       gardens of neighbouring properties.
10. The new roof would feature rooflights and windows are proposed to the side
    elevations of the extension. Whilst separation distances are maintained and this is
    a suburban environment where properties are in close proximity, due to the siting
    of the host dwelling in relation to No 12, there would be a substantial loss of
    privacy from the resultant overlooking.
11. The appellant contends that existing boundary treatments provide a degree of
    screening. Be that as it may, this would not overcome the harm that I have
    identified above.
12. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposed development would
    cause material harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with
    particular regard to outlook, loss of privacy, sunlight and daylight. It would
    therefore conflict with policies DM2 and DM21 of the Local Plan Part 2, insofar as
    they support development where it does not result in a significant adverse impact
    upon residential amenity.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008382


Other Matters
13. I note the comments regarding the Council’s handling of the planning application.
    These are matters between the respective parties, and it cannot have any bearing
    on my determination of this appeal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
14. The proposal would make efficient use of a generously sized residential plot and
    provide improved and sustainable living accommodation for the occupants. These
    benefits, however, would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and wider area and the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
15. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



C Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
