Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 July 2026
by S F Barnes MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008878
9 Lyndhurst Road, Corringham SS17 7SJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Victoria McGregor against the decision of Thurrock Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00922/FUL.
•    The proposed development is an outbuilding for use as habitable space.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for an outbuilding for
       use as habitable space at 9 Lyndhurst Road, Corringham SS17 7SJ in accordance
       with the terms of the application, Ref 25/00922/FUL, subject to the following
       condition:
       1) The development hereby permitted is shown on the approved drawings:
             9SS177SJ_SP1.0 (Site Plan); 9SS177SJ_BP1.0 (Existing Block Plan);
             9SS177SJ-DR1.1A (Existing Ground Floor Plan); 9SS177SJ-DR1.1F
             (Existing Elevation and Roof Plans).
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description used in my decision above is taken from the application form. I
       have omitted the phrase ‘retention’, as it does not describe an act of development.
3.     The application form states that the development has been completed. I saw at my
       visit that the outbuilding on site aligns with the plans before me. However, the
       extent of boundary fence across the rear garden does not. For clarity, I have
       assessed the appeal based on the plans, rather than what has been carried out.
4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026 after the statements in relation to this appeal had been exchanged
       and final comments made. However, as the changes that were made are not
       material to the outcome of this decision, the cases of the parties have not been
       prejudiced by not being able to comment on the new Framework. I have therefore
       determined the appeal on the basis of the statements and comments that were
       received with the appeal.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is whether or not the proposal would result in a separate, self-
       contained dwelling.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008878


Reasons
6.     The appeal site comprises a 2-storey end-terrace dwelling. The subject outbuilding
       has been constructed at the end of its rear garden. The site is a corner plot with a
       side frontage to Hawthorne Road, where there is a wide external gate that aligns
       with the position of the outbuilding. The gate would permit direct access from the
       street for pedestrians, but this could also be gained via the dwelling.
7.     The Thurrock Design Guide ‘Residential Alterations & Extensions Supplementary
       Planning Document’ (2017) sets out, so far as relevant, that uses of outbuildings
       will be restricted to ancillary residential functions, including garages or storage.
       They should not be designed in a way that facilitates use as independent
       dwellings, retaining a clear dependency at all times with the existing dwelling.
8.     The appellant states that the outbuilding was originally constructed some time ago
       using permitted development rights and then used as a garage for car parking and
       storage associated with the appeal property. The Council has not sought to
       dispute this account. It was later subject to internal alterations to facilitate the use
       by the appellant’s son as a habitable space, including for sleeping. Although the
       Council asserts that the subject outbuilding has been rented out separately, there
       is no substantive evidence before me of this. In any event, permission is not being
       sought for a self-contained dwelling.
9.     I also acknowledge that the Council provided a photograph taken some years ago
       that appears to show a cooker within the outbuilding. However, I am assessing the
       proposal on the submitted plans. These show the outbuilding would comprise a
       lounge and ‘utility area’, together with a bedroom with en-suite. Whilst it is true that
       a fence could be erected across the width of the garden to subdivide the site, that
       is not the proposal before me.
10. Although the proposal affords some of the facilities necessary for day-to-day
    private existence, principally for sleeping and recreation, the drawings indicate that
    no cooking appliances would be present. In the absence of facilities for preparing
    food, its ability to function as a self-contained dwelling would be limited.
11. I observed on site that the main dwelling has a kitchen and large combined dining
    and lounge room. Whether the main dwelling is occupied as a single household or
    by individuals as a house in multiple occupation, those essential facilities would be
    a short distance away from the proposal, accessed via an existing paved footpath
    leading to the dwelling over the shared, private rear garden. That arrangement
    indicates a clear dependency on the main dwelling. This is reinforced by the fact
    that the outbuilding would share the postal address, utility services and waste
    storage and collection arrangements of the main dwelling.
12. Whilst the proposed use would not be ancillary in the manner envisaged by the
    SPD, the principal concern of that guidance is to prevent outbuildings from
    functioning as independent dwellings. For the reasons set out above, the proposal
    would remain dependent on the main dwelling and would not operate as a
    separate planning unit. Consequently, there would be no conflict with the
    objectives of the SPD overall.
13. Concluding on this, the proposal would not result in a separate, self-contained
    dwelling. Accordingly, there would be no conflict with relevant provisions of Policy
    PMD2 of the Thurrock Local Development Framework Core Strategy (2015) (‘CS’),

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008878


       which seeks to ensure design and layout of new development responds to the
       sensitivity of the site and its surroundings.
Other Matters
14. The Council’s Decision Notice provides a further reason for refusal concerning the
    effect of the proposal on adequate provision of on-site parking and highway safety.
    However, reading the evidence as a whole, it seems to me that the Council
    assessed the effects of the proposed development as if it concerned a self-
    contained dwelling. I have found that this would not be the case. Nor would the
    proposal alter the provision of parking on site. Furthermore, I have not been
    presented with any pertinent evidence which demonstrates that it would result in a
    significant change to the appeal site’s parking demands. For these reasons, there
    would be no conflict with Policies PMD8 and PMD9 of the CS.
15. An interested party raises highway safety concerns too, including that vehicles
    park at the junction of Hawthorne Road and on footways. However, I have been
    provided with little substantive evidence to demonstrate that these allegations
    clearly relate to the appeal site or this specific proposal. Therefore, these factors
    would not justify withholding permission.
Conditions
16. I have considered the Council’s suggested conditions in light of the tests for
    planning conditions set out in the Framework and made amendments as
    necessary in line with those provisions. In the interests of certainty, a condition is
    necessary to identify the approved plans which show the proposed arrangement.
17. I have considered the Council’s suggested condition relating to the date of the
    effect of the permission. However, as this would be sufficiently clear from my dated
    decision letter, a condition is unnecessary. The proposal does not relate to the
    subdivision of the site and nor would it provide sufficient facilities for independent
    living. Therefore, the proposal would be part and parcel of the existing
    dwellinghouse. Consequently, a suggested condition to restrict occupancy and
    prohibit subdivision would also be unnecessary.
18. A further condition was suggested to prevent extensions to the proposal. As it
    would form part of the existing dwellinghouse, potential effects on the privacy of
    occupants of the same dwellinghouse would not provide the clear justification
    required by the Framework to remove permitted development rights. Furthermore,
    no pertinent evidence has been presented to demonstrate that the conditions and
    limitations on permitted development rights would be inadequate to guard against
    harm to the character and appearance of the area. Therefore, this condition is
    unnecessary.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be allowed.

S F Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
