 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 August 2026
 by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6008744
 Land rear of 1 Nelson Road, North Walsham, Norfolk NR28 9HL
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Gavin Payne against the decision of North Norfolk District Council.
 •   The application reference is PF/25/2503.
 •   The development proposed is detailed on the Application Form as ‘Proposed replacement of 8No.
     garages/storage sheds with 5No. shipping storage containers.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Throughout the planning process the address has been changed from ‘Nelson
   Road’ on the Application Form to ‘Land rear of 1 Nelson Road’ which is detailed on
   the Council’s Decision Notice, and on the appeal documents, including the
   Appellant’s Appeal Statement. I have therefore taken ‘Land to the rear of 1 Nelson
   Road’ as the property address as this provides more accuracy to the site than the
   address stated on the Application Form. I shall make my decision on this basis.
3. Upon my site visit I noticed that there were two black shipping containers in situ. It
   is unclear whether these containers are part of the proposal, given that the
   proposal concerns green, rather than black shipping containers. Despite this, I have
   assessed the scheme taking into account existing conditions.
4. There is dispute between the parties with regards to the legal planning use class of
   the appeal site and the proposed development of shipping containers which is
   being applied for. The Application Form states that the existing use of the site is for
   storage with no discussion as to whether the storage amounts to that which one
   would find at a garage site as part of a planned residential estate (common during
   the mid-late twentieth century where garages are rented to nearby dwellings) or
   whether there has been a material change of use of the appeal site to a storage
   facility which has more in common with a B8 use. Whilst it is not for me under a
   Section 78 appeal to determine the current correct and legal use class of the
   appeal site, to me the site has the appearance of a residential garage site. To that
   end it is open to the Appellant to apply for a determination under sections 191/192
   of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 if they believe the lawful use is
   different and my determination of this appeal under s78 does not affect the issuing
   of a determination under s191/192 regardless of the outcome of this appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            1
 Appeal Decision: 6008744


Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposed shipping containers upon:
    •    The character and appearance of the site, including the greater locality; and
    •    The living condition of surrounding residents, with particular regard to noise,
         privacy and outlook.
Reasons
6. The appeal site is a parcel of land to the rear of No’s 1-9 (odd) Nelson Road; a row
   of two storey terraces. An unmade vehicular access track exists between No.1
   Nelson Road and No.23 Park Avenue which enables access to the appeal site as
   well as to the rear of No’s 7-23 (odd) Park Avenue which are also residential
   dwellings. There are a number of garages and accesses to the rear of dwellings
   from this unmade access track. To the north of the appeal site is Masters Court and
   Bloom Court, a development of retirement housing accessed from Saddlers Way
   and Brick Kiln Road. The overriding character of the locality is residential with
   dwellings fronting main road edges with setbacks from the road with vegetated front
   gardens, mature street trees with gaps in and around dwellings giving glimpses of
   vegetation to rear gardens. To the rear of dwellings are residential gardens with
   some gardens having rear accesses that provide for small domestic sheds. These
   are some of the positive elements that contribute to the character and appearance
   and local distinctiveness of the area.
7. The appeal site consists of a parcel of land that is grassed and has the remnants of
   timber storage sheds to the rear of dwellings. The appeal documents state that
   there were more sheds, however some have been removed, and two shipping
   containers have been placed on the land alongside fencing and security cameras.
   Whilst it is unclear whether these sheds were once utilised by nearby dwellings, the
   appearance is of a subservient nature to the dwellings surrounding.
8. In assessing development proposals, relevant policies of the North Norfolk Local
   Plan (LP) includes Policy ENV8 which sets a number of design principles, where
   applications are expected to achieve integrated design approaches that reflect the
   characteristics of the site, reflect the local environment and create a sense of place
   with distinctive character, respond to the local context in terms of scale, finish,
   massing, materials and architectural details, amongst others.
9. Given the positive elements of the character and appearance of the locality, the
   installation of shipping containers would present more of an industrial aesthetic to
   the area as can be experienced by the two shipping containers already in situ. I
   disagree with the Appellant’s statement that the assessment is about preference of
   one style of building over another, as shipping containers are rarely an accepted
   style of development when it comes to assessing appropriate materials and
   installations in a residential environment. Shipping containers are common to
   commercial and industrial environments, and are not a common domestic
   installation. Additionally, shipping containers have a very defensive and harsh
   appearance which is unlike sheds, garages and storage facilities commonly found
   within a residential environment which seek to be more subservient to the
   surrounding residential context. The presence of shipping containers would elevate
   the status and hierarchy of the site from a rear garden land environment to a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision: 6008744


     commercial appearance which would not be in keeping with the character and
     appearance of the area.
10. I can appreciate that there is a willingness to paint the containers green, and also to
    plant screening around the site to attempt to hide the development from view with
    there being limited view to the public realm of the proposed shipping containers.
    However, LP Policy ENV8 does not limit harm or impact towards character and
    appearance to purely the public realm or what can be seen. The proposed
    containers would be experienced in a negative way within this residential
    environment, with proposed mitigation measures to reduce impact not being able to
    overcome the poor appearance and experience of the shipping containers in this
    location.
11. Taking the above into account, the installation of shipping containers within the
    appeal site would be inappropriate and contrary to LP Policy ENV8, as described
    previously.
Living Conditions
12. There is no detail in the appeal documents as to how the existing sheds were used,
    however the Planning Officer Report states that the Appellant has agreed to the
    site ‘being used only for household storage purposes with no commercial or
    logistics-based operations taking place.’ Despite this, currently the site is grassed,
    and does not appear to have had any hard surfacing and that the proposed use
    would operate with the grass surface and a total of 5 shipping containers, with
    remaining storage sheds being removed.
13. The shipping containers would be placed towards the entrance of the appeal site
    where there is a large setback from dwellings along Nelson Road, Park Avenue
    and retirement development to the north. Given that the use would be defined to 5
    users of a domestic storage type use, the use of these units is unlikely to generate
    the amount of activity than one would have from a commercial/business operation
    of the site. I agree with comments from interested parties that shipping containers
    do sound different to sheds, such as a shipping container having solid heavy steel
    doors that typically have a louder ‘clanging’ noise when opening and closing than a
    domestic shed, but to me would not lead to adverse detriment to living conditions
    given the setback and frequency of use of the containers to the residential uses
    surrounding. Additionally, if approved, the use of the containers could be
    conditioned so that they were not being utilised at inappropriate times of the
    day/night.
14. I can appreciate that the surrounding residents are concerned around the use of
    security cameras, however this also needs to be balanced with the security of the
    site, in that interested parties have also raised concerns about people breaking into
    sheds of a nighttime. The use of CCTV would be one way of making a site secure,
    particularly if a site is not well utilised and that there is a fear of crime. The CCTV
    installation would therefore be a practical way of achieving security for the site and
    not result in an adverse loss of privacy for surrounding residents.
15. Turning to outlook, as described previously, the shipping containers are not
    experienced favourably within a residential environment. The positioning of the
    containers on site would present a negative outlook and experience which does not
    reinforce the positive qualities of the residential environment.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision: 6008744


16. In conclusion of this matter, I do not consider that the proposal would cause
    adverse detriment to living conditions and would be compliant with LP Policy ENV7
    with regards to noise and privacy. However, the outlook and experience of the site
    towards surrounding residents as a result the proposed development would be
    inappropriate and contrary to LP Policy ENV7 which seeks to ensure no adverse
    impacts towards living conditions of current and future users is caused.
Other Matters
17. I note discussion within the Appellant’s Statement of Case with regards to the
    conduct of Councillors during a planning committee meeting concerning this
    decision. Matters around the conduct of Council Members is not a planning
    consideration and has not been taken into account in the determination of this
    appeal.
18. I note comments from interested parties around the storage of hazardous materials
    on the site and that the land is contaminated. Whilst such hazardous storage may
    constitute a different planning use for commercial activities, there is no information
    within the appeal documents that the Appellant seeks to utilise the site for the
    storage of hazardous materials. As such any approval could be conditioned, and
    appropriate enforcement action taken as a result. As such this has not been a
    determinant to this appeal.
19. The appeal documents contain concerns from interested parties around highway
    safety, such as the use of the access, and that Nelson Road is utilised by school
    children and that increased use of the site could cause near misses and safety
    concerns. Given that the proposed scheme has failed on grounds of character and
    appearance and living conditions, I have not needed to delve into highway issues. I
    also note that the Council’s Highways Team were consulted and did not have any
    issues regarding domestic storage which could not be resolved by condition.
20. I note discussion from interested parties around a covenant on the land which
    prohibits commercial activity of the site. Covenants are civil matters and are not
    material considerations from a planning perspective. As such this has not been
    considered within this determination.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons given above, whilst I have agreed with the Appellant in that the
    proposal would not result in detriment to living conditions in terms of noise and
    privacy, the proposal would be inappropriate in terms of character and appearance,
    and outlook. Taking this into account, I conclude that the appeal be dismissed.



J Somers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
