Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 June 2026
by S Simms BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008643
19 Southbourne Grove, Southend-on-Sea SS0 9UW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Joseph Williams against Southend-on-Sea City Council.
•    The application reference is 26/00245/FUL.
•    The development proposed is to change the use of a dwellinghouse C3 to a 7-bed sui generis HMO,
     provision of cycle and refuse storage on site and minor external alterations to fenestration pattern.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to change the use of a
       dwellinghouse C3 to a 7-bed sui generis house in multiple occupation (HMO),
       provision of cycle and refuse storage on site and minor external alterations to
       fenestration pattern at 19 Southbourne Grove, Southend-on-Sea, SS0 9UW in
       accordance with the terms of the application reference 26/00245/FUL and the
       plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal relates to a planning application that was not determined by the
       Council within the prescribed period. I note that the Council would have granted
       planning permission should it have made a decision. Objections relate to effects
       on character, family housing supply, parking, access and refuse. The Council
       concludes that the development is acceptable, compliant with relevant plan
       policies and guidance, and that there are no other material considerations that
       justify reaching a different conclusion than to grant permission. I have had regard
       to all parties’ submissions in establishing the main issues.
3.     A certificate of lawfulness for the conversion of the dwelling to a 6-person HMO
       and to remove the chimney, lay out cycle and refuse storage to the rear and alter
       elevations was granted in March 2026. I have noted the details of the certified
       scheme, which reflect the operational development in this appeal. I saw on site
       that works consistent with those certified had been completed and that seven
       doorbells were installed. Whilst I cannot be sure that seven people occupy the
       house, it seems likely that it is no longer used as a dwellinghouse and so I have
       treated the appeal as being at least partially retrospective.
4.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the
       latest Housing Delivery Test results were published on 17 August 2026. I invited
       the main parties to comment on any implications of these for their cases and took
       their responses into account in reaching my decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008643


Main Issues
5.     The main issues in this appeal are the:
           •    effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area,
           •    effect of the development on the provision of family-sized homes, and
           •    adequacy of the parking, access and refuse arrangements.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     The site is a two-storey linked detached house with a dual-pitched roof, front and
       rear eaves, and two-storey front bay windows. A low brick wall encloses the front
       garden, stepped in for wheelie bins. There is no external access to the rear. The
       adjoining house differs, with a steep dual-pitched roof and low side eaves.
7.     The house is near the end of the street, close to shops and a park on the main
       road. The street comprises mainly two-storey semi-detached houses, with some
       detached houses and bungalows, all built on a similar line with small front gardens
       and few driveways. Parallel and adjoining streets are similar. Some front gardens
       contain bin or cycle stores and several wheelie bins, which suggests some degree
       of conversion into flats or multiple occupation.
8.     The development changes the use to a seven-bed HMO, installs cycle and refuse
       stores in the rear garden, closes off a rear kitchen door and removes a chimney, a
       balcony over the front door and a canopy alongside the rear outrigger. Loss of the
       chimney causes limited harm to character, which is offset by the tidier appearance
       of the street elevation resulting from removal of the balcony and door. Removing
       the less visible canopy also somewhat declutters the rear elevation.
9.     The change of use is likely to result in a more intensive residential use, manifest in
       more comings-and-goings at a wider range of times than would be the case for a
       dwellinghouse occupied by a single family. However, in the alternative, the house
       could lawfully be occupied by up to six people as a small HMO within Class C4
       and I find this forms a realistic fall-back. The effect on character of an additional
       single-person household is therefore marginal.
10. The area does not appear to have a high proportion of multiply-occupied houses or
    flat conversions, and therefore cumulative impact is unlikely to unacceptably harm
    its character. Furthermore, the location limits impact to a section of street that is
    near to services and facilities and so already likely to be busier.
11. I conclude that the development does not harm the character and appearance of
    the area and therefore complies with Policies KP2 and CP4 of the Southend-on-
    Sea Core Strategy 2007 (CS) and Policies DM1 and DM3 of the Southend-on-Sea
    Development Management Document 2015 (DMD), which require development to
    add to and respect the quality and character of residential areas, whilst optimising
    the use of land in a manner that responds positively to local context.
Family-sized homes
12. The development results in the loss of a family house, for which interested parties
    state there is a recognised national and local need, pointing to national policy that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008643


       requires a sufficient supply of homes for different groups. The Council considers
       that inadequate housing land supply and delivery in the city lends weight to the
       provision of additional residential accommodation.
13. Policy HO1 of the Framework includes families with children in the list of different
    groups, for whom a sufficient supply of homes must be provided and Policy HO7
    requires substantial weight to be given to the benefits of providing homes that will
    meet evidenced accommodation needs. CS Policy CP8 resists loss of residential
    resources, having regard to the need to safeguard an adequate stock of single
    family dwellinghouses and the character of residential areas.
14. The development results in neither a loss of nor a gain in dwellings, but rather a
    change in the type of accommodation. I have no evidence of a shortage of family
    homes in this city, that they are needed more than HMOs or that a less balanced
    or sustainable community results. Consequently, I find no harm in terms of the
    effect on the provision of family-sized homes or conflict with policy.
Parking, access and refuse
15. The street was heavily parked with few or no spaces during my visit in the early
    afternoon of a weekday in term time. Parking near junctions with the main road
    and a side road across from the site is prohibited at any time. The street itself is
    one-way and forms part of a main north-south route.
16. The development is likely to result in a marginal increase in travel and parking
    demand compared to the fall-back. This will be limited somewhat by proximity to
    local facilities, including shops and a park, and services including bus stops about
    120m away served by main routes to the city centre.
17. The Council’s highway officer has not objected, and I have no evidence that the
    additional demand will create the safety issues suggested by interested parties.
    Nonetheless, the development adds parking pressure in a location where demand
    exceeds supply and so is likely to affect nearby living conditions.
18. Lack of external access to rear gardens in houses nearby is likely to be the cause
    of the number of wheelie bins I saw in front gardens. Whilst not ideal, I saw no
    evidence of any overflowing or left on the footway. The submission includes a bin
    store in the rear garden, and there is also space for storage off the footway.
19. Overall, whilst access and refuse arrangements are likely to be adequate and
    comply with DMD Policies DM8 and DM15 in those respects, I find that parking
    provision will not. This will cause harm contrary to DMD Policy DM15, which allows
    reliance upon on-street parking only where capacity can be demonstrated.
Other Matters
20. The development effects a more intensive residential use of the property, providing
    capacity to accommodate a greater number of households, which is a benefit.
21. Interested parties state that a restrictive covenant prevents implementation, that
    having an HMO nearby may adversely affect property values and that permitting
    one could set a precedent. However, covenants are private matters between the
    parties and not within my jurisdiction. Similarly, it is a well-founded principle that
    the planning system does not exist to protect private interests such as the value of
    land and property, and each case is dealt with on its own merits.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008643


22. Concerns are raised that works were carried out prior to application or decision. I
    have no details of these works or whether they form any part of the development
    applied for, but they may have been permitted development or not development. In
    any event, any enforcement is a matter for the Council.
23. The appeal site is within the zone of influence of habitats sites to which the Essex
    Coast Recreational Disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy relates, but the
    development does not result in a net increase in dwellings, so is unlikely to have a
    significant effect on the integrity of these sites.
Planning Balance
24. Policy S4 of the Framework requires development within settlements to be
    approved unless the benefits are substantially outweighed by adverse effects,
    such as a failure to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which
    state that development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
25. In this case, the adverse effects of inadequate parking on living conditions, rather
    than on safety, would not have the severe adverse impact on the transport network
    necessary to warrant refusal under Policy TR6 of the Framework and do not
    substantially outweigh the benefits of greater housing capacity.
Conditions
26. In addition to the standard time limit and approved drawings, the Council suggests
    conditions in relation to cycle and bin stores, a waste management plan, water and
    energy efficiency, an occupancy limit, construction hours and landscape details.
    The appellant does not object to these, which I impose with amendments.
27. With no external rear access, bins from the rear store shown on the drawings will
    need to be taken through the house for collection. I have therefore added a
    requirement to the waste management plan condition for periodic bin cleaning to
    enable hygienic transfer and increase the likelihood of compliance. I have also
    amended conditions to account for the possibility that first occupation has already
    occurred and for greater clarity, brevity and enforceability.
28. These conditions are to secure a satisfactory design, suitable cycle parking and
    waste storage in the interests of sustainability and amenity, to promote efficient
    resource use, to secure satisfactory living conditions, and in the interests of visual
    amenity, to comply with CS Policies KP2, CP3 and CP4, and with DMD Policies
    DM1, DM2, DM3, DM8 and DM15.
Conclusion
29. The proposal conflicts with the development plan, but material considerations, in
    particular the Framework, indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. Consequently, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



S Simms
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008643


Schedule of Conditions
1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from the
       date of this decision.
2)     The development shall only be undertaken in accordance with the following
       approved plans: Location Plan, 1047-100, 1047-104, 1047-101, 1047-105/02.
3)     The development hereby approved shall not be occupied during any period in
       which the secure, covered cycle store shown in approved plans 1047-104 and
       1047-100 is not provided and made available for use or in which alternative
       secure, covered cycle storage to serve the residential development hereby
       approved is not provided and made available for use in accordance with details
       which have been submitted to and agreed in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority. The store shall be retained as such for the lifetime of the development.
4)     The development hereby approved shall not be occupied during any period in
       which the refuse and recyclable storage facilities shown in approved plans 1047-
       104 and 1047-100 are not provided and made available for use or in which
       alternative refuse and recycling storage facilities are not provided and made
       available for use in accordance with details which have been submitted to and
       agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved stores shall be
       retained as such for the lifetime of the development.
5)     The development hereby approved shall not be occupied other than in
       accordance with a Waste Management Plan, which must first be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The submitted Waste
       Management Plan shall include but not be limited to:
       i) Where the waste and recycling will be presented on collection day.
       ii) How the waste and recycling will be transported to the refuse collection point
       and by whom.
       iii) How the waste and recycling will be collected and by whom.
       iv) Who will manage the readying, placing and any tidying up afterwards of waste
       and recycling on refuse and recycling collection days.
       v) Arrangements for the periodic cleaning of any waste receptacles that will be
       taken through the house for presentation or storage.
6)     The development hereby approved shall incorporate water efficient design
       measures set out in Policy DM2 (iv) of the Development Management Document
       to limit internal water consumption to 105 litres per person per day (lpd) (110 lpd
       when including external water consumption), including water efficient fittings,
       appliances and recycling systems such as grey water and rainwater harvesting.
7)     The development hereby approved shall not be occupied other than in
       accordance with energy efficiency and other sustainability measures, which must
       first be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority,
       including the provision of at least 10% of the energy needs of the development
       hereby approved being provided from onsite renewable sources.
8)     The house in multiple occupation subject of this permission shall not at any time
       be adapted to enable formation of more than seven (7) bedrooms and the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008643


       property shall not be occupied by more than seven (7) residents at any one time
       with all seven (7) bedrooms for single occupancy only.
9)     Construction work shall not take place outside the hours of 8am - 6pm Monday to
       Friday or 8am - 1pm on Saturdays. No works shall be carried out on Sundays or
       Bank or Public Holidays.
10) The development hereby approved shall not be occupied during any period in
    which approved hard landscaping works have not been carried out or during any
    period after the first planting season following this permission in which approved
    soft landscaping works have not been carried out. Full details of both hard and
    soft landscape works must first be submitted to and approved in writing by the
    Local Planning Authority under the terms of this condition. The details submitted
    shall be for the front and rear of the site and include, but not be limited to:
       i) means of enclosure of the site including any gates or boundary fencing;
       ii) hard surfacing materials;
       iii) details of the number, size and location of the trees, shrubs and plants to be
       retained and planted together with a planting specification;
       iv) details of measures to enhance biodiversity within the site; and
       v) existing and proposed site levels.
       Any trees or shrubs dying, removed, being severely damaged or becoming
       seriously diseased within five years of planting shall be replaced with trees or
       shrubs of such size and species as agreed in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority under the terms of this condition.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
