Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by Chris Mayes CMLI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008465
Land at Moorhouse Lane, Oxenhope, Keighley, West Yorkshire BD22 9RY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•   The appeal is made by the Holmes Family Trust (August 2017) against the decision of City of
    Bradford Metropolitan District Council.
•   The application reference is 25/03766/PIP.
•   The development proposed is permission in principle for the development of up to nine dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for Costs
2. An application for costs was made by the Holmes Family Trust (August 2017)
   against the City of Bradford Metropolitan District Council. This is the subject of a
   separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. Since the appeal was submitted, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) has been published. The parties were given the opportunity to
   comment on the implications of the revised Framework, and their responses have
   been taken into account. I have considered the appeal against the policy context
   now in place, including the revised Framework.
4. The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
   advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-
   led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages: the first
   stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-
   principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the detailed
   development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2
   stages.
5. The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
   land use and the amount of development permitted. I have determined the appeal
   accordingly.
6. The application form indicates that the proposal is for a maximum of 9 dwellings. I
   have considered the proposal on this basis.
7. For the avoidance of doubt, I have used the address as it appears on the appeal
   form as it most clearly identifies the site.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008465


Main Issues
8. The main issues are:
          •    The effect of the proposal upon the South Pennine Moors Special Protection
               Area and Special Area of Conservation.
          •    Whether the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt, with
               specific regard to whether the development would be in a sustainable
               location.
Reasons
Habitats Development
9. The appeal site lies close to the South Pennine Moors Special Protection Area
   (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC). It falls within the 0km-2.5km zone
   (Zone B) and the 0km-7km zone (Zone C) which establish approaches towards
   development and mitigation as set out in Policy SC8 of the Local Plan for the
   Bradford District Core Strategy Development Plan Document (July 2017) (CS) and
   the South Pennine Moors SPA/SAC Planning Framework Supplementary Planning
   Document (January 2022) (SPD).
10. The South Pennine Moors comprise overlapping European sites. The SAC is
    designated for northern Atlantic wet heath, European dry heath, blanket bog,
    transition mire and quaking bog, and old sessile oak woodland. The South Pennine
    Moors Phase II SPA is classified for breeding merlin and golden plover, together
    with a breeding bird assemblage that includes curlew, lapwing, dunlin, twite, short-
    eared owl and other moorland birds.
11. Policy SC8 establishes a zonal approach to development around the European
    sites, for which the SPD provides detailed guidance. Within Zone B consideration
    must be given to whether land outside the designation provides habitat supporting
    the bird populations for which the SPA is classified. Within Zone C development
    resulting in a net increase in dwellings must address the recreational effects arising
    from the additional population, either through the strategic mitigation scheme or
    bespoke mitigation.
12. Residential development of the type proposed could result in the loss or
    deterioration of land that supports qualifying SPA bird species outside the
    designated site boundary. A net increase in dwellings within Zone C is also likely to
    increase recreational use of the European sites, with potential effects including
    disturbance to breeding birds, trampling and erosion of sensitive habitats,
    increased fire risk and dog fouling. Policy SC8 seeks to address the different
    potential impact pathways arising from development.
13. The SPD explains that some categories of land may be discounted at the outset as
    supporting habitat. Where a site does not fall wholly within those categories, habitat
    survey work is required to establish whether supporting habitat may be present.
14. The SPD indicates that likely significant effects may be ruled out where the entire
    site falls within one or more specified categories, including woodland, land within a
    settlement boundary, within 25m of a settlement boundary or within 25m of a main
    road. The plans, aerial imagery and other evidence show that parts of the appeal
    site extend beyond 25m of both the nearest settlement boundary and the main

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008465


     road, neither is the entire site woodland. The site therefore does not fall wholly
     within any relevant category capable of being discounted at the initial screening
     stage. Ecological evidence is consequently required to determine whether likely
     significant effects on the SPA can be excluded.
15. A Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (PEA) has been submitted. The PEA concludes
    that the site is unsuitable habitat for SPA qualifying species and would not have an
    impact upon the SPA. I have no substantive reason to question the professional
    competence of the ecologists or the factual survey findings. However, the
    adequacy of the evidence supporting the report’s conclusion is a separate matter.
16. Nevertheless, the SPD identifies habitats including semi-improved pasture, rough
    grazing and wet grassland as indicators of a credible risk that supporting habitat
    may be present. The submitted PEA identifies pasture and areas of rushy pasture
    on the site and also refers to a larger area of rushy pasture on adjoining land. The
    SPD further explains that consideration should extend beyond the red-line
    boundary where adjacent land may be relevant to the assessment of supporting
    habitat.
17. Although the PEA concludes that the site is unsuitable for qualifying SPA species,
    the evidence does not establish beyond reasonable scientific doubt that the appeal
    site and immediately adjoining land do not provide supporting habitat for those
    species. I cannot therefore exclude likely significant effects on the SPA.
18. Consequently, while the ecological evidence points towards the site having limited
    ecological value, I am not provided with sufficient evidence to conclude, beyond
    reasonable scientific doubt, that the appeal site and immediately adjoining land do
    not provide supporting habitat for SPA qualifying species. As such, I cannot
    conclude that likely significant effects on the SPA can be excluded.
19. I cannot therefore exclude likely significant effects on the SPA. No appropriate
    assessment has been undertaken through which the implications of the proposal
    for the SPA’s conservation objectives could be assessed. In the absence of an
    appropriate assessment, I cannot conclude that the proposal falls outside the
    definition of habitats development in Article 5B of the Town and Country Planning
    (Permission in Principle) Order 2017 (as amended). I therefore conclude that
    permission in principle cannot be granted.
Green Belt
20. My findings on the first main issue are determinative of the appeal. In these
    circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to reach a definitive conclusion on whether
    the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Other Matters
21. The appellant has drawn my attention to other ‘permission in principle’ decisions on
    nearby sites and argues that those decisions demonstrate that supporting habitat
    survey work was not considered necessary in comparable circumstances.
    However, I have not been provided with the full details of those proposals, the
    ecological evidence that accompanied them, or the reasoning which led to the
    decisions reached. I am therefore unable to determine whether those cases are
    directly comparable to the appeal before me. In any event, each proposal must be



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008465


     considered on its own merits and having regard to the evidence available in the
     particular case. Accordingly, those decisions do not alter my conclusions.
Conclusion
22. The proposal constitutes habitats development for which permission in principle
    must not be granted. For this reason, and having considered all other matters
    raised, the appeal is dismissed.



Chris Mayes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
