Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by L Fleming BSc (Hons) MRTPI IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 08 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6008494
28 Main Street, Lyddington, LE15 9LT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Andrew & Tracey Mair against the decision of Rutland County Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/1699/FUL.
•    The development proposed is replacement of the existing bedroom and kitchen windows, patio doors
     to the rear of the property and side entry door facing the garage.

Appeal B Ref: 6008495
28 Main Street, Lyddington LE15 9LT
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Andrew & Tracey Mair against the decision of Rutland County Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/1700/LBA.
•    The works proposed are replacement of the existing bedroom and kitchen windows, patio doors to
     the rear of the property and side entry door facing the garage.



Decisions
Appeal A
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for replacement of the
       existing bedroom & kitchen windows, patio doors to the rear of the property and
       side entry door facing the garage at 28 Main Street, Lyddington LE15 9LT in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 2025/1699/FUL, subject to the
       following conditions:
     1) The development shall be begun before the expiration of three years from the
        date of this permission.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall not be carried out except in complete
        accordance with the details shown on the submitted plans (Proposed Block
        Plan – received 29.12.2025, AM-2-101B – Proposed Elevations – received
        22.01.2026, Proposed Technical Specifications and Sections – received
        28.01.2026, Window and Door Sections – received 22.01.2026 and
        Replacement Door Details – received 22.01.2026) and the details submitted
        within the application form and the design and access and heritage statement.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6008494 & 6008495


Appeal B
2.     The appeal is allowed and listed building consent is granted for replacement of the
       existing bedroom & kitchen windows, patio doors to the rear of the property and
       side entry door facing the garage at 28 Main Street, Lyddington LE15 9LT in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 2025/1700/LBA, subject to the
       following conditions:
     1) The works shall be begun before the expiration of three years from the date of
        this permission.
     2) The works hereby permitted shall not be carried out except in complete
        accordance with the details shown on the submitted plans (Proposed Block
        Plan – received 29.12.2025, AM-2-101B – Proposed Elevations – received
        22.01.2026, Proposed Technical Specifications and Sections – received
        28.01.2026, Window and Door Sections – received 22.01.2026 and
        Replacement Door Details – received 22.01.2026) and the details submitted
        within the application form and the design and access and heritage statement.
Preliminary Matters
3. Both appeals relate to the same scheme under different but complementary
   legislation. I have therefore dealt with them together in my reasoning except where
   indicated otherwise.
4. Since the Council made its decision on the proposals, the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026 (the Framework) has been published. It is now material to my
   decisions and supersedes the version of the National Planning Policy Framework
   that was available when the Council made its decisions. However, insofar as they
   are relevant to these appeals, the policies have not materially changed. I have not
   therefore needed to seek the parties’ views on this change. I am satisfied that no
   party has been prejudiced by my approach.
Main Issues
5. The main issue is whether the proposed development/works would preserve the
   grade II listed 28, Main Street (No 28) and any of the features of special
   architectural or historic interest that it possesses, and whether it would preserve or
   enhance the character or appearance of the Lyddington Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons
6. No 28 is a traditional house, remodelled in the late C18-C19 from an earlier
   building, with the right bay being of different build. It is constructed of coursed
   ironstone rubble beneath a C20 concrete tile roof, with stone coping and a moulded
   kneeler to the left gable and two central brick chimneys. It is two storeys in height
   and has a C20 extension to the rear. Thus, insofar as is relevant to these appeals,
   its special interest and significance derives from its age, surviving traditional form,
   local materials and contribution to the group value of the surrounding historic
   buildings.
7. The CA covers the historic village core, with Main Street and the surrounding lanes
   containing a varied group of traditional buildings set within an established
   settlement pattern, interspersed with open spaces which contribute to its character
   and appearance. Use of local stone and traditional architectural details give the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6008494 & 6008495


     area a distinctive appearance. Insofar as is relevant to these appeals, the
     significance of the CA derives from the historic layout, the prevailing use of local
     materials, the architectural detailing of its traditional buildings and their collective
     contribution to the village street scene.
8. Section 14 of the Rutland County Council Window and Door Design Guidance
   (2025) (SPD) addresses replacement historic windows. It emphasises slimline
   framing and integral glazing bars, rather than externally applied astragal bars. I
   also acknowledge that replacing modern windows can provide an opportunity for
   enhancement where new units better reflect traditional proportions, profiles,
   materials and detailing.
9. However, the replacement side door would replace a later door and would replicate
   the form and appearance of the existing oak front door. The existing bedroom and
   kitchen windows and patio doors are clearly modern and of degraded appearance.
   They are clearly not historic fabric and not historic windows as referred to in the
   SPD.
10. The proposed framing and astragal glazing bars would not appear excessive,
    prominent or particularly noticeable, especially when seen in the context of the
    modern rear extension, and would be of an improved appearance compared with
    the existing windows and patio doors they would replace. The works would also
    have limited visibility outside the appeal site. The proposals would therefore
    preserve the special architectural and historic interest of the listed building. As
    there would be no harm to a traditional building within the CA, the character and
    appearance of the CA would also be preserved.
11. The scheme would therefore accord with Policy CS22 of the Rutland Core Strategy
    Development Plan Document (2011), Policy SP20 of the Rutland Site Allocations
    and Policies Development Plan Document (2014) and the SPD, which seek to
    ensure that development preserves and enhances the historic environment and is
    appropriately designed. For the same reasons, there would be no conflict with the
    heritage preservation aims of the Framework.
Conditions
12. I have imposed the standard conditions requiring the development and works to
    begin within the relevant three-year period, in accordance with statutory
    requirements. I have also imposed approved plans and details conditions in the
    interests of certainty, and to ensure that the significance of the listed building and
    the character and appearance of the CA are preserved.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development and works would accord
    with the development plan and, having had regard to all other matters raised, the
    appeals should be allowed.

L Fleming
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
