 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026

 by Megan Thomas KC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6008555
 36 Albany Crescent, Claygate, Surrey KT10 0PF
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr S Van Zyl against the decision of Elmbridge Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 2025/3209.
 •   The development proposed is the “erection of a first floor flat extension with accommodation
     within the roof space.”


Decision

1.   The appeal is dismissed.

Procedural Matters

2.   On 17 August 2026, the Government revised the National Planning Policy Framework ‘NPPF’
     and this post-dated the planning application and the appeal. The main parties were asked to
     comment on the relevance of the revised NPPF to the appeal if they so wished and I have
     taken comments into account in coming to my decision. In this decision letter I have used the
     term ‘flat’ but recognise that the term “maisonette” could equally be used. Nothing turns on
     this.

Main Issues

3.   The main issues in the appeal are the effect of proposal on the character and appearance of
     the host dwelling and surrounding area, and the effect on the living conditions of the
     occupants of 32 Albany Crescent with regard to outlook.

Reasons

Character and appearance

4.   36 Albany Crescent is a first floor flat/maisonette with access gained from a front door on the
     side flank of the building. No.34 is the flat on the ground floor and also has a front door on the
     side flank of the building. The two flats form a semi-detached property with the semi-pair
     adjoined on the south east side. The appeal site is on the south western side of Albany
     Crescent and dwellings to the rear face Gordon Road. The site is within the settlement of
     Claygate and the immediate area is characterised predominantly by detached and semi-
     detached residential properties.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6008555


5.   The property to the north west of nos 36 and 34 and therefore opposite their front doors and is
     in flats. No.30 Albany Crescent is the ground floor flat and 32 is the first floor flat. They form a
     semi and the semi pair also has two dwellings 26 & 28.

6.   36 is on two floors as it has accommodation in its roof space where there is a rear facing
     double dormer with a double gable pitch roof arrangement. The appeal proposal includes
     extending the main roof ridge sidewards to create a first floor and roof level side extension.
     There would be a void at ground floor level and the side extension would be supported on
     three columns which would be on, or close to, the common boundary with 30/32 Albany
     Crescent. At roof level at the rear a further pitched roof dormer is proposed in the new
     extension. The end of the extended main roof would be half-hipped. There would be a new
     window at first floor front level and a new rooflight. At the rear the proposed new dormer
     would have a window and there would be a new window below it at first floor level. The side
     elevation would have a new window inserted at first floor level.

7.   From Albany Crescent, 34 and 36 and 30 and 32 present as semi-detached properties each
     with a different semi-pair. The semi-detached properties read as cohesive paired forms and
     this general uniformity makes an important contribution to the rhythm of development along
     Albany Crescent and in the wider area. The proposed extension would add a substantial first
     and second floor mass to the side of 36 which would significantly increase the overall bulk
     and width of the semi-pair. This would unbalance the symmetry and visual coherence of the
     semi-detached pair and would result in an incongruous and disproportionate form that would
     fail to respect the established pattern of the host building and the streetscene. Whilst I
     acknowledge that it is good planning to make effective use of land and airspace, the form of
     the proposal on columns with a void at the ground floor tacked on to a semi would appear
     awkward and contrived.

8.   From the rear, the cumulative effect of the extension particularly at roof level with the
     additional dormer would also be particularly unbalancing of the paired semis and create a
     very top-heavy element to the already cluttered roof form. Whilst 34/36 is set behind a small
     front amenity area, from the front the scale and bulk of the proposal would harm the
     streetscene and appear out of kilter with the generally uniform gaps between properties on
     Albany Crescent. There would be failure to achieve the minimum one metre separation
     distance from a common side boundary above ground floor level contrary to the Elmbridge
     Design Code and in this case that would have detrimental impacts including disrupting the
     grain and pattern of development in the area. The Design Code is a Supplementary Planning
     Document and provides guidance for the determination of planning applications.

9.   My site visit confirmed my views above and I viewed 9 & 11 Gordon Road from the street. It
     has a void at ground floor level. It unbalances the semi-pair it is part of and it creates a
     terracing effect in the street. It is not typical of the area in character or appearance and does
     not persuade me that the appeal scheme should be granted planning permission.

10. On this first issue, I conclude that the proposal would unduly harm the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area and would be in conflict with policy
    CS17 of the Elmbridge Core Strategy 2011, policy DM2 of the Elmbridge Development
    Management Plan 2015 ‘DMP’ and the Elmbridge Design Code “DC” SPD.

Living conditions of occupants of 32 Albany Crescent

11. 32 Albany Crescent has its front door on the side elevation of the property facing the appeal
    site. Whilst acknowledging that at ground floor there would be a void and three supporting
    columns, the height, width and depth of the proposed side flanks, seen cumulatively, would
    nevertheless be unacceptably overbearing each time the occupant of no.32 enters or leaves
    their home. The stepped side flanks at first and second storey levels would loom above the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
 Appeal Decision 6008555


     occupant, be very close to the common boundary and would create an undue sense of
     enclosure. I am also concerned that a similar impact would be experienced by the occupants
     of no.30 Albany Crescent which is the flat at ground floor level with a front door also on the
     side flank. Simply because the proposed extension would not have a wall at ground level
     opposite these front doors does not negate the enclosing effects of the proposed extension
     walls at first and second storey levels.

12. The upper flat, no.32, has three windows on the side elevation facing the appeal site. The
    window which is above the front door to the ground floor flat serves a landing area within
    no.32. Whilst a landing area is not a habitable space, it does in this case provide an aspect to
    the appeal site. There would be a detrimental impact on that aspect given that there would be
    a wall only about 2.4m away from that window. That would cause an unacceptable sense of
    enclosure for the occupant(s). In relation to the other two windows on the first floor side
    elevation, I do not have sufficient evidence to be able to conclude whether the occupants
    benefit from aspects out of those windows and so I have not given outlooks from those
    windows any weight in the decision-making process.

13. One further matter which adds to my concern in relation to living conditions of neighbours,
    whilst not a clear reason for refusing the scheme in its own right, is the loss of outlook that the
    occupant would experience when entering or exiting the flat at 34 (ground floor). The
    occupant would lose a sense of openness and experience increased enclosure by there being
    effectively a ‘roof’ covering a space that is currently open to the sky. I note that this was a
    point raised by the existing occupier in his representation and I agree that it is another
    detrimental impact of the proposed scheme.

14. On this second issue, I conclude that the proposal would unacceptably harm the living
    conditions of the occupants of no.32 Albany Crescent by reason of loss of outlook. It would
    be contrary to policy DM2 of the DMP and the DC.

15. I have identified harmful impacts. The NPPF policy dealing with effective use of land includes
    L2(1)(d) which indicates that substantial weight should be given to the benefits where a
    development proposal would achieve, for example, additional floorspace within settlements
    but the proposal should be consistent with the overall street scene and other criteria. I do not
    consider L2(1)(d) is met in this instance.

16. NPPF Policy S4 also refers to development taking place within settlements. S4(1) states that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing
    so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. Whilst there would be benefits flowing
    from the proposal including enhancement of the living accommodation for the existing family
    and for future occupants, I consider the total benefits would be substantially outweighed by
    the harms I have identified above.

Conclusion

17. Having taken into account all representations made, for the reasons given above, I dismiss
    the appeal.



Megan Thomas KC
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              3
