Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008872
62 Birkbeck Road, Romford, Havering RM7 0QP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Herman Allen against the decision of the London Borough of Havering
    Council.
•   The application reference is P1553.25.
•   The development proposed is alterations to fenestration and a loft conversion with rear dormer; and
    change of use of single family dwelling-house (Use Class C3) to children's care home (Use Class
    C2).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for alterations to
   fenestration and a loft conversion with rear dormer; and change of use of single
   family dwelling-house (Use Class C3) to children's care home (Use Class C2) at 62
   Birkbeck Road, Romford, Havering, in accordance with the terms of the application,
   reference P1553.25, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the following
   conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 100 Rev B, 101 Rev A, 111 Rev A, 112 Rev A
              & 113 Rev B.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces shall
              match those used in the existing dwelling with the dormer face and cheeks
              being in tile to match.
     4)       The use shall not commence until the approved works are complete; and the
              extended premises shall not accommodate more than five children receiving
              care at any given time.
     5)       Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (Use
              Classes) Order 1987 (or any order revoking and re-enacting that order with
              or without modification) the premises shall only be used as a children’s care
              home and for no other purpose including any other use falling within Class
              C2 of the Order.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr Herman Allen against the London
   Borough of Havering Council and is the subject of a separate decision.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6008872


Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect on housing mix; and the effect on the living
   conditions of neighbouring residents with regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
4. The existing dwelling is a four bedroom detached house. The proposed additional
   loft accommodation would provide a further two bedrooms. The proposal is to use
   the extended property as a children’s home for up to five children between 8 and 17
   years old. Whilst the appellant suggests that the use does not require consent, the
   lawfulness of the proposal is not a matter for this appeal. A separate procedure is
   available for such an assessment. The two appeal decisions submitted in support
   of the proposal relate to lawfulness. As this proposal is for planning permission, it
   must be considered on that basis.
Housing Need
5. The council’s main concern is that there is no identified need for this particular use.
   The first requirement of Policy 6 of the Havering Local Plan 2016-2031 (2021)(HLP)
   is that it be robustly demonstrated that there is an identified need for the proposed
   use for it to gain support. This places the onus on the appellant and the evidence
   submitted does not provide a detailed assessment of current capacity, demand or
   projected need.
6. The consultation response from Start Well, part of the North East London Health
   and Care Partnership, advises that there are 19 children’s homes in Havering
   offering accommodation for 72 children. Havering have used only one of those
   homes and it is considered that there is an oversupply that is putting pressure on
   local schools and health services. It is suggested that there is an over-provision of
   66 spaces locally.
7. The National Planning Policy Framework seeks to meet an area’s identified
   housing need, including with an appropriate mix of housing types for the local
   community. Within this context of establishing need, the size, type and tenure of
   housing needed for different groups in the community should be assessed and
   reflected in planning policies. These groups include looked after children. It advises
   that the evidence of need, for looked after children, can be found in the relevant
   Children’s Social Care Sufficiency Strategy.
8. The appellant has provided the Children's Services Sufficiency Needs Assessment
   & Strategy (2025 to 2028) (the Strategy) which was published on 18 January 2025.
   It sets out that Havering has experienced a 22% rise in the children in care
   population, rising from 232 in 2020 to 284 in March 2024. The Strategy sets out
   that in March 2024, the borough was home to 235 children in care, placed by other
   council’s; and 158 children from Havering were placed in other council areas. Such
   care is offered in a number of ways and children’s homes are only an element of
   the provision.
9. The Strategy indicates that in 2024 there were 13 private homes in Havering with
   55 places and the council had only 4 children in those homes. It also sets out that
   42 children from Havering where in children’s homes overall and that the number of
   children living in children’s homes as a proportion of the children in care, has
   increased year on year since 2018. The actual number of children in children’s


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision: 6008872


     homes is shown to have doubled in that period. Action 3 of the Strategy seeks to
     develop commercial relationships with home providers to create local capacity so
     children can remain in the borough.
10. Action 7 includes a similar requirement to Action 3 but also advises that the council
    should develop its own provision, although this is described as relating to two
    specific specialist care requirement areas. The appellant has referred to an article
    on the council’s web site, dated March 2026, which relates to Havering creating two
    new children’s homes to avoid children having to leave the borough. The article
    relates to homes for the placement of children with complex social, emotional and
    mental health needs which would accord with Action 7 of the Strategy.
11. The appellant describes that data published by the Department for Education,
    indicates that the number of looked-after children in England has continued to rise
    year on year. This is reflected in the Strategy commentary. It is also suggested that
    the provision of children’s care is part of a national need, not one that can be
    artificially constrained within borough boundaries; and that there is well-
    documented and ongoing pressure on children’s social care placements across
    London with many local authorities placing children outside the confines of their
    boroughs, including Havering. This is also reflected in the figures within the
    Strategy.
12. Reference has been made to changes to Ofsted registration and changes to
    provision categorisations which the appellant suggests has reduced capacity and
    increased demand for registered premises. The appellant refers to the duty under
    the Children Act 1989 to provide sufficient accommodation, of suitable quality; and
    the need for it to be located appropriately. This forms part of the Strategy with the
    council seeking to develop commercial relationships with local providers.
13. The appellant has referenced the quality of care that would be offered and the
    ability to accommodate children with challenging needs including those with
    emotional and behavioural difficulties, trauma presentations, neurodevelopmental
    conditions, and complex co-occurring needs which are the cohort most at risk from
    placement instability.
14. Notwithstanding the information provided by the appellant, the Framework indicates
    that the Strategy should be the source of evidence for need. The evidence within it,
    does indicate that the borough may numerically have sufficient local provision.
    However, much of this is taken up by placements from outside the borough. Whilst
    the council have a strategy to seek to redress this balance, by establishing
    relationships with local providers; and by providing specialist homes themselves,
    there is nothing before me, including within the Strategy, to indicate how quickly
    such a re-balance would be achieved or the extent to which it can be achieved.
    There is also nothing before me to indicate that this children’s home, if allowed,
    would provide services to the children of Havering rather than those from further
    afield.
15. On the basis of the information provided, there is an over-supply of children’s
    homes in the borough, and this oversupply will have a disproportionate impact on
    local health and education services. On this narrow interpretation, there is not a
    need for further homes but a need for a re-balance in provision, at least with regard
    to the placement of the children of Havering. What is also evident is that in the past,
    when such accommodation has been needed, there has been a lack of available or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision: 6008872


     suitable provision for children in Havering who have then had to be placed
     elsewhere. This indicates a need for available places in Havering, for the children
     of Havering.
16. Despite the lack of certainty that the proposed provision would remain available for
    Havering children, I am satisfied that the reported provision imbalance is sufficient
    to demonstrate a need at this time. The Strategy does not provide an assurance
    that the measures to tackle this need would achieve its objectives, of re-balancing
    provision, in the short term. Having reviewed the Strategy and the other information
    provided, I accept that part (i) of Policy 6, with regard to need, is generally satisfied.
    Furthermore, whilst the council consider that they have an oversupply of children’s
    homes, there is no evidence to suggest that these children’s homes are not
    providing important benefits to the wider area.
17. The proposal would result in the loss of a family sized dwelling to the existing
    housing supply and as the supporting text to the HLP identifies the high level of
    demand for family housing, this is a concern. Policy 3xi seeks to resist the net loss
    of residential development. It does not specify whether this excludes or includes
    residential institutions. However, it is the purpose of the development plan to
    manage conflicting demands. Whilst the loss of a dwelling to the overall supply
    weighs against the proposal, the use would remain residential in nature and there is
    nothing before me to suggest that the proposed use would not bring at least equal
    benefits, particularly given the support, with regard to need, from Policy 6.
Other Matters
18. Policy 6 has a number of other requirements that need to be satisfied before it
    offers support overall. Part viii is the only section with which the council has a
    concern. This relates to impacts on the surrounding area including levels of noise
    and disturbance to occupiers of nearby residential properties. It has been accepted
    that works to extend the dwelling would be acceptable and there would be no other
    outward changes. For the most part, the use would operate as a large family
    dwelling and in this respect, there would be no change to the character of the area
    as has been accepted by the council.
19. Given the scale of the use, for 5 children of up to 17 years of age; and the
    associated levels of staffing required, the property would be likely to have a greater
    intensity of use than a family dwelling. This is however a detached house and the
    property adjacent to the east, is not residential. The main issue would therefore be
    the impact on the neighbouring property to the west. Although staff may arrive and
    leave at unsociable hours, I am not persuaded that this activity would be overly
    intrusive in this residential environment. It would be expected that the resident
    children would follow routines that would not be dissimilar to those of a large family.
    There may be additional professional visitors, but these would not necessarily differ
    from movements associated with a large household. The children themselves may
    have challenging backgrounds, but they would be professionally supervised, and, in
    any event, large families are not exempt from challenging behaviour from family
    members.
20. Overall, whilst the use may be more intensive than a family dwelling and result in
    more comings and goings at different times, I am not persuaded that this is likely to
    result in unacceptable harm to the living conditions of the neighbouring property or



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
Appeal Decision: 6008872


     indeed to those opposite and behind. It would not therefore conflict with Policy 6viii
     or Policies 7, 16 and 34 which also relate to residential amenity.
21. The council has not raised concerns with regard to the other elements of Policy 6
    and I am satisfied that there would be no conflict with them. The proposal therefore
    gains support from that policy and also Policy H12(2) of the London Plan 2021 (LP)
    relating to accommodation for young people with support needs; and LP Policies
    S1(C) and S2(B&C) which support service delivery strategies and the provision of
    health and social care facilities to meet identified need.
22. The council has made reference to appeal reference 6000705 at 113 Pretoria
    Road, Romford which was for a similar use although a smaller property. The need
    for a children’s home was not accepted as having been demonstrated. However, it
    was reported that the evidence was limited and there is no reference to the
    Strategy. Appeals must be decided on the basis of the evidence submitted. In this
    case, the evidence is that there has been an unmet need for local accommodation.
    The evidence provided by the council does not persuade me that this would not
    remain the case.
Conclusions and Conditions
23. In conclusion, the evidence available indicates that when demand for such housing
    arises, there is often an unmet need for the use proposed. The property is in an
    area that is appropriate for such a use. I have had regard to the concerns raised
    that such uses, when occupied by children from other areas, put stress on public
    services such as education and health in this area. However, in the absence of any
    mechanism to restrict placements, which would be a matter for other agencies, I
    am not satisfied that the use would be unacceptably harmful, would result in
    significantly greater harm with regard to noise or disturbance or would change the
    character of the property unacceptably. As the property offers appropriate
    accommodation for such a use and as the matters that weigh against it do not
    outweigh the benefits of the proposal, I allow the appeal.
24. I have imposed conditions relating to the commencement of development and the
    details of the approved plans for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of
    proper planning. I have also required that the materials would match the existing
    dwelling with the dormer face and cheeks being in tile to match, as previously
    approved. A condition regarding flank windows is not considered necessary.
25. I have imposed conditions requiring the completion of works before the use
    commences; and that the use be restricted to the care of up to five children in need
    of care within Use Class C2, but that it is not used for other uses permitted by that
    class. This is to ensure that the quality of the accommodation is satisfactory; it
    would not be harmful to local residents; and would remain compatible with the
    character of the area. I have not included conditions suggested regarding internal
    noise insulation as this would remain a residential use and the works required
    would need to meet Building Regulation standards. I have also not required a noise
    management plan as I am not persuaded that this would be necessary.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
