Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 2 September 2026
Site visits made on 1 and 2 September 2026
by Zoe Raygen DipURP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008253
Land East of College Road South, Aston Clinton, Bucks HP22 5FZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Rectory Homes against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02250/AOP.
•    The development proposed is described as outline planning application with all matters reserved
     (aside from means of access), for the demolition of existing structures, and erection of up to 66
     dwellings, new vehicular access, car parking, pedestrian routes, sustainable urban drainage,
     landscaping and accessible onsite open space.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted for demolition of
       existing structures, and erection of up to 66 dwellings, new vehicular access, car
       parking, pedestrian routes, sustainable urban drainage, landscaping and
       accessible onsite open space at Land East of College Road South, Aston Clinton,
       HP22 5FZ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/02250/AOP
       subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal relates to a refusal of a planning application made in outline form with
       all matters reserved for future approval except for access. A parameters plan has
       been provided which gives a broad outline of the proposed developable area with
       two storey height housing, green space, Sustainable Drainage (SuDs)
       infrastructure and point of access. I have determined the appeal on the same basis
       and treated a layout plan as illustrative only.
3.     On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was
       issued. I asked the parties to submit supplemental statements regarding the
       changes relevant to the appeal. I also allowed interested parties time after the
       Hearing to submit any comments in writing which were then copied to the
       appellant for comment.
4.     As the proposal has the potential to impact on the setting of a listed building, I
       have had regard to the requirements of section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed
       Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
5.     The Council refused the planning application for eight reasons. Since the
       submission of the appeal the Council and the appellants have continued
       discussions, this has led to the submission of further information sufficient for the
       Council to withdraw its objection on a number of issues relating to the effect of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008253


       development on the Chiltern Beechwoods Special Area of Conservation, flooding
       and archaeology. In addition information was submitted to satisfy the Council’s
       concerns regarding the provision of Biodiversity Net Gain, on site open space and
       green infrastructure and ecological and noise mitigation. Finally the agreed S106
       agreement contains appropriate obligations to address the Council’s concerns
       regarding the effect of the development on local infrastructure. With agreement the
       final signed and sealed S106 agreement was submitted after the Hearing, and I
       return to this later in my decision.
6.     Based on the information that was submitted and the comments from statutory
       consultees I am satisfied that the information overcomes the Council’s concerns
       on these matters. In that context the main issues are:
       •   The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area
           including settlement pattern, setting and coalescence; and
       •   Whether the proposed location for the development would be acceptable
           having regard to local and national policy with regard to settlement boundary.
Reasons
Character and appearance
7.     The appeal site is located within the Vale Landscape Character Type (LCT) within
       the Vale Landscape Character Assessment 2008. This is described as being a flat
       low lying area, poorly drained by a network of streams often forming field
       boundaries, mixed agricultural use, with mature black poplar trees a feature of
       ditches and watercourses. The Vale LCT is divided into Landscape Character
       Areas (LCA), and the site falls within the Southern Vale LCA. This is partly
       described as “Large area of low lying vale landscape with limited topographic
       variation and containing transport corridors and large villages that due to the open
       nature and the urban edge of Aylesbury break down the rural character. This is
       least apparent between the A41 and the Grand Union Canal. The Chilterns to the
       south are the backdrop to many views”.
8.     The key characteristics are a flat landscape , streams and ditches marked by belts
       of mature black poplar, landscape continuity interrupted by development and
       communication corridors, large open arable fields and pockets of grazing land and
       smaller farm parcels associated with settlements. The condition of the LCA is
       described as poor with the landscape guidelines seeking to restore and enhance.
9.     The appeal site forms three relatively small fields of agricultural grass parcels on
       the northern edge of Aston Clinton typical of those within the LCA associated with
       settlements. They are mainly enclosed by mature hedgerows with a few trees and
       there is a water course along the eastern boundary. Although a relatively ordinary
       landscape it demonstrates many of the key characteristics of the LCA. It sits within
       the wider landscape between Aston Clinton and Aylesbury alongside a series of
       similar fields enclosed by hedgerows. The A41 running to the north while not
       particularly visible, is apparent from the noise and the mature landscaping which
       effectively screens it from the site.
10. The appeal site also has a function in contributing to the rural setting to Aston
    Clinton and in providing a buffer between Aston Clinton and Aylesbury. Having
    said that, there is very little of Aylesbury that can be seen from this edge of Aston


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008253


         Clinton. Due to the tree cover and topography, visible evidence of Aylesbury is
         limited to the large buildings of the Arla dairies. Furthermore, it is one small part of
         the wider rural setting of Aston Clinton. Both parties agree that the appeal site lies
         in an area of medium sensitivity, and I see no reason to disagree.
11. There would be harm to the landscape character of the appeal site itself due to its
    loss to housing. The illustrative layout shows that hedgerow to the first field would
    be largely maintained so that the existing field pattern in that location would still be
    legible. However, that to the second field would be lost. The landscaping strategy
    includes the reinforcement and management of existing hedgerow around the site
    as a whole, with a small loss for the proposed access. There would also be some
    black poplar trees planted. While therefore there would be some restoration and
    enhancement, I tend to agree with the Council it would not be sufficient to
    outweigh the harm caused.
12. While the harm would be to a small part of the LCA only, which is I acknowledge in
    better condition to the north, it would nevertheless result in the loss of part of the
    LCA in this location. Even though there are extremely limited long distance views
    towards the site from the wider area, the loss would nevertheless harmfully erode
    the LCA, the effect of which would not materially depreciate over time.
13. It is agreed that there are no long distance views of the appeal site that would be
    harmed and indeed the zone of theoretical visibility admirably demonstrates the
    limited visibility of the site in the wider area.
14. Views from Public Rights of Way1 (PROW) closest to the appeal site are likely to
    be of high sensitivity, as are in my opinion those from College Road South, given
    that it is largely used as a footway in the vicinity of the appeal site rather than a
    road carrying vehicles.
15. I saw at my site visit that views towards the appeal site from PROW ACL3/3 are
    predominantly rural in nature, albeit that you are aware you are approaching a
    settlement by virtue of the visibility of properties on Church Drive/Brandon Drive
    and College Road South, even though there is vegetation associated with this built
    form.
16. The proposal would extend that built form into the countryside beyond the existing
    housing, such that it would be visible above the existing hedgerows, even though
    they are higher than those on Chapel Drive. This would harmfully erode the open
    views across the countryside that walkers on this footpath currently experience. As
    a consequence, there would be substantial adverse harm that would be moderated
    over 15 years due to the potential for a maturing landscape buffer to be
    accommodated on the eastern boundary of the appeal site.
17. From PROW ACL1/4 the view is more oblique and a distance from the appeal site.
    Furthermore, due to existing vegetation there are very few areas of the footpath
    where the appeal site will be visible. However, here the extension of the built form
    into the countryside would interrupt the existing open views causing a moderate
    level of harm, given the distances involved. This would reduce to slight adverse
    effect after 15 years given the maturing landscaping.



1
    ACL3/3, ACL 46/1 & ACL 46/1


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
Appeal Decision 6008253


18. There are not many places where the appeal site is wholly visible from College
    Road South due to the vegetation along the western boundary. However due to
    proximity and the new access road, it will be apparent that there are houses on the
    site which will extend further into the countryside than currently exists. At the
    moment the change from built form to open countryside is relatively abrupt and
    College Road South becomes a verdant narrow country lane. This would be
    eroded through the introduction of housing. While it would be set behind
    vegetation, the height of the houses means they would still be visible and erode
    existing views, albeit existing housing can be seen in a similar pattern, it would just
    be closer to pedestrians as they approach the village. Consequently there would
    be a moderate adverse effect at year 1 reducing to slight at year 15.
19. From PROW ACL 46/1 there will be views towards the appeal site through a gap in
    the vegetation. From here, while existing housing is visible, the proposed
    development would extend that built form in the line of view bringing it closer to the
    footpath giving a substantial adverse effect which would reduce to moderate at 15
    years
20. While there is the potential for pedestrians to view the appeal site from the A41/slip
    road, it is difficult to access and, in my view, would be primarily associated with
    vehicle users meaning it has a low sensitivity. I saw that given the distance to the
    appeal site there would only be a slight adverse effect.
21. Views from Barker Lane would be experienced by pedestrians and drivers. This is
    particularly so given the access to public footpaths from Barker Lane which appear
    to have been formalised through the housing development and at the time of my
    site visits seemed to be well used. Currently the open countryside is reached
    quickly from Barker Lane. While the provision of housing on the appeal site would
    have an urbanising influence from this viewpoint, I am mindful that the application
    for the erection of nine dwellings accessed from this location has been delegated
    to grant planning permission subject to the signing of a S106 agreement.
    Therefore there would already be some disruption to this view and while the
    proposed development is larger and would extend further into the countryside,
    given the extent of existing and committed development in this view, there would
    only be a moderate adverse effect which would reduce to slight over 15 years.
22. Existing residents would experience a change to their outlook, particularly those on
    College Road South closest to the appeal site. However, these properties have
    long gardens, and the development would be sited some distance from the rear
    elevation of the properties. Nevertheless, the view would change and there would
    be a moderate adverse effect reducing to slight in 15 years as landscaping
    matured.
23. Taking all of the above factors into account, the proposal would have a localised
    adverse effect on the character and appearance of the area. Whilst the visual
    effects would be substantial in certain views during the early years of occupation,
    these effects would lessen over time as the proposed mitigation through
    landscaping becomes established and the development is assimilated into its
    surroundings. Furthermore, the appeal site is already influenced by the presence
    of adjacent residential development, within which the proposal would sit in visual
    and spatial terms. Overall, I conclude that the proposal would result in a moderate
    adverse effect on the character and appearance of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008253


24. The appeal site lies a similar distance to the bypass to the site on the western side
    of College Road South that was considered at appeal2. The Inspector at that time
    found that, were that appeal site to be developed, the sense of separation between
    the two settlements would be all but lost with consequent harm to the form and
    identity of Aston Clinton.
25. However, that decision was made some nine years ago, I have no doubt that trees
    and vegetation have grown since that time. Furthermore, that appeal site lies
    closer to the bypass access road. From my observations on site, there are very
    few visual cues that Aylesbury is close in this location because of the extensive
    vegetation cover, largely limited to the Arla factory appearing over the trees. This
    does not in itself suggest proximity to a large settlement. As a consequence to my
    mind the proposal would not either lead to coalescence or a perception of such.
26. The north western edge of the settlement here is fairly uniform with the fields
    where the appeal site is located forming an undeveloped rural setting to Aston
    Clinton along with fields in all other directions. Originally the settlement was linear
    in nature, but it has grown over time with development extending more radially
    giving more depth to the settlement. Consequently, the proposal would lead to the
    settlement expanding in a manner typical of the historic development of the village.
27. It is true that it would only adjoin housing on its southern boundary (when the
    planning permission to the south is implemented3), and for an extent on the
    western boundary at College Road South. As a result, the proposal would intrude
    into the countryside. While the proposed landscaping strategy would allow for a
    buffer strip on the northern and eastern boundaries, with some planting this would
    not hide the fact that the housing would extend beyond an established boundary
    without context, harming the rural setting of the village. However, given that almost
    half of the development would not protrude beyond existing housing on College
    Road South and there would be fields remaining both in this location and
    surrounding the village any harm caused would be limited.
28. I have found that the proposal would result in a moderate adverse effect on the
    character and appearance of the area as a consequence of the loss of agricultural
    land to housing and the resulting encroachment of built development into the
    countryside. However, those effects arise principally from the change in land use
    and the presence of development in this location rather than from any identified
    deficiency in the proposed design approach itself.
29. Part 1 of Policy DP3 of the Framework states that development proposals should
    respond well to their context (the history, character and features of their site and its
    setting) so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings such as
    through the arrangement of development plots and buildings the use of materials
    and architectural features and the restoration reuse and integration of heritage
    assets.
30. The Council's criticism under DP3 is directed primarily towards the principle of
    extending development into the countryside rather than any specific failing in the
    proposed design framework. In the case before me the proposal is in outline form
    with all matters reserved except access. Nevertheless, the submitted parameter
    plan identifies a development structure based around the retention and

2
    APP/J0405/W/16/3147513 (the previous appeal)
3
    25/00178/APP


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           5
Appeal Decision 6008253


       reinforcement of existing boundary vegetation, the incorporation of green
       infrastructure, the provision of substantial areas of open space and SuDS, and the
       creation of a landscaped settlement edge. While these principles would provide an
       appropriate basis for the future detailed design of the scheme, they would not
       overcome the limited harm I have found in relation to the context and setting of the
       village drawing it into conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework. Policy DP3 (3)
       states that development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification,
       they conflict with paragraph 1 of the policy. I return to this in my planning balance.
31. For the reasons above, I conclude that while the proposal would not cause
    coalescence, it would have a moderately harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area and a limited harmful effect on the settlement pattern and
    the setting of Aston Clinton. It would therefore be contrary to Policies S1, S3, D3,
    NE4 and BE2 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan 2013-2033 adopted 2021 (the
    Local Plan). These require that development minimises impacts on the landscape
    (S1), does not compromise the character of the countryside between settlements
    and avoids coalescence (S3), is of a scale and location that is in keeping with the
    existing form of the settlement and does not adversely affect its character and
    appearance (D3), respect and complement the setting of the settlement and
    respect local character and distinctiveness in terms of settlement form and field
    pattern and minimise impact on visual amenity.
Location
32. The spatial strategy is set out in Policy S2 of the Local Plan which allocates a total
    of 28,600 houses to be delivered across the district. Aston Clinton is defined within
    Policy S3 as a larger village which has reasonable access to facilities and services
    and public transport making it a sustainable location for development. There is no
    allocation within the Local Plan for Aston Clinton as a total of 624 houses were
    required which had already been provided through completions and commitments
    on adoption. The Local Plan was adopted on 15 September 2021 and therefore
    the housing requirement in the plan was valid until 15 September 2026.
33. Policy S3 of the Local Plan requires that the scale and distribution of development
    should accord with the settlement hierarchy. Development in the countryside
    should be avoided especially where it would compromise the character of the
    countryside between settlements, and result in a negative impact on the identities
    of neighbouring settlements or communities leading to their coalescence.
34. Policy D3 of the Local Plan allows for larger scale development beyond allocated
    sites and where located within or adjacent to the existing developed footprint of the
    settlement where the council’s monitoring of housing delivery across Aylesbury
    Vale shows that the allocated sites are not being delivered at the anticipated rate.
    This is except where a Neighbourhood Plan denotes a settlement boundary.
    Proposals will need to be accompanied by evidence demonstrating how the site
    can be delivered in a timely manner. The proposal must contribute to the
    sustainability of that settlement, be in accordance with all applicable policies in the
    Plan and fulfil all of a number of criteria some of which relate to the effect of the
    development on the character and appearance of the area.
35. Similarly Policy S8 of the Local Plan allows for development in circumstances
    where the spatial strategy is not delivering housing as expected. However, it also
    needs to accord with other relevant policies in the Local Plan.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008253


36. Policy S1 of the Local Plan sets out the principles of sustainable development for
    Aylesbury Vale, largely relying on the wording of the National Planning Policy
    Framework (the Framework) at that time. Although there have been changes to
    the exact wording of the Framework since that time, the principles of sustainable
    development remain at its core. The Policy also includes a list of criteria against
    which development proposals would be assessed one of which is that
    development minimises impacts on landscapes, with which the Council allege
    conflict. While the policy is out of date due to the lack of five year housing land
    supply, it is in broad accordance with the Framework, and I give any conflict in
    terms of landscape harm full weight.
37. The Aston Clinton Parish Neighbourhood Plan 2013-2033 made 2018 (ACNP)
    denotes a settlement boundary for the village. The appeal site lies outside of but
    close to the northern boundary of the settlement. Policy H1 of the ACNP restricts
    development outside of the settlement boundary unless it complies with three
    criteria. One of which is that it is consistent with development plan policies relating
    to landscape character and protecting the natural environment. Given that I have
    found the proposal would harm landscape character then the proposal is in conflict
    with this policy.
38. Consequently, given that the proposal is outside of a settlement boundary, and I
    have found harm to landscape character, then the proposal is in conflict with the
    spatial strategy. However, the parties agree that the Council is unable to
    demonstrate a five year housing land supply. While the exact figure is not agreed,
    whichever figure is favoured the shortfall is substantial as agreed by the Council in
    its statement of case. I am also mindful that since the 15 September 2026 the
    current adopted plan will be over five years old and therefore the standard method
    to calculate housing need would be used which the Council acknowledge would
    lead to a further reduction in housing land supply.
39. Consequently, while I understand that some of the spatial strategy policies include
    elements relating to character and appearance which are in broad accordance with
    the Framework, they derive from Policy S2 and concern the location of
    development in relation to the spatial strategy and, given that the housing land
    supply shortfall is substantial, I give conflict with the relevant policies limited
    weight.
40. As the proposal is outside of the settlement, then the principle of whether it is
    acceptable or not is covered by Policy S5 of the Framework and I return to this in
    my planning balance.
Legal agreement
41. A signed and dated legal agreement was submitted after the Hearing and secures
    a number of obligations. These include 25% affordable housing, contributions
    towards education, health care, bus service, skylark mitigation, sports and leisure
    and a SANG and SAMM contribution, as well as a monitoring fee, in respect of the
    Chiltern Beechwoods Special Area of Conservation and the legal agreement
    monitoring fee. In addition there are obligations regarding the provision of off-site
    highway works, SuDs and its management and different types of open and play
    space and its maintenance.
42. In the context of the delivery of 66 houses and the consequent increase in
    population, I am satisfied that the obligations are necessary, directly related to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008253


       development and fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the
       development. In addition I am content that the offsite highway works are necessary
       to enhance connectivity to local services and facilities.
Other Matters
Listed Buildings
43. The proposed housing would be in the setting of Sunnybrook Farm and 1-6
    Ballards Row, both Grade II listed buildings.
44. Sunnybrook Farm is a detached seventeenth century house with a timber framed
    structure, colourwashed brick casing and a modern tiled roof. Its significance is
    largely drawn from its remaining architectural detail as an example of an early farm
    building and its historic interest as a farmhouse on the edge of the village. The
    house is no longer used as a farmhouse or associated with land still in agricultural
    use. Furthermore, it has been mostly engulfed by modern housing, such that its
    once open setting is largely no longer apparent.
45. The appeal site, forming three open fields, would have formed part of the open
    setting of the building which would have contributed to its understanding as a farm
    house. Now that the property is no longer used as a farmhouse and the decision to
    delegate authority to grant planning permission for nine dwellings at the rear of the
    property will effectively cut of the link to the fields then the appeal site contributes
    very minimally to the significance of the listed building. Given this, and the
    distance the appeal site sits from the listed building I am satisfied that there would
    be no harm to its significance by the proposals.
46. Nos 1-6 Ballards Row forms a block of early nineteenth century cottages with later
    additions constructed of white washed brick with a thatched roof. The significance
    of the building is drawn from its architectural interest as a row of early domestic
    dwellings demonstrating the evolution of the village.
47. The appeal site is some distance from the listed building, and I saw it is not visible
    from within or around it. My attention has not been drawn to any functional link and
    therefore I am satisfied that the appeal site does not contribute to the significance
    of the listed building and therefore there would be no harm caused by the
    proposals.
Highway safety
48. Concerns have been raised regarding the effect of the proposal on highway safety.
    First, one of the reasons the Inspector on the previous appeal dismissed the
    appeal was in relation to highway safety and particularly in relation to traffic
    modelling that had not taken account of three sites that had been subject to
    approval or the restricted width of Brook Street due to on street parking. I visited
    the site a number of times and observed much on street parking similar to that
    described by the previous Inspector. Although I did not have the opportunity to visit
    at school drop off and pick up times, I do not doubt that circumstances have
    changed despite the provision of parking bays, particularly give the comments of
    local residents.
49. I appreciate that these existing situations are likely to lead to an increase in waiting
    times and local congestion. However, the level of increase in traffic at peak times,
    as identified by the appellant’s Transport Assessment (TA), agreed by the local

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6008253


       Highway Authority, demonstrated that the traffic movements associated with the
       proposal would be accommodated on the local highway network with all junctions
       remaining at capacity. I am also reassured that the TA took account of all
       committed developments with additional traffic added for background growth.
       Furthermore, the previous proposals were for 85 dwellings which would have had
       a higher level of peak traffic movements. I am satisfied therefore that the proposal
       would not have a severe adverse impact on the transport network in terms of
       capacity and congestion or an unacceptable impact on highway safety in this
       regard.
50. Concerns were also raised by residents regarding the lack of a footway along part
    of Green End Street which would potentially be used by pedestrians to access the
    play area and local school. As a result, at the Hearing, the appellant offered to
    consider this as part of the off-site highway improvements which could be
    incorporated into a suitably worded condition should the appeal be allowed. Such
    consideration would be necessary to ensure pedestrian safety for future residents.
Noise
51. Residents queried the effectiveness of the baseline data used in the appellant’s
    noise survey due to the lack of information regarding the weather conditions and
    hence whether the noise from aircraft would have been accurately recorded. The
    noise report has been carried out by an appropriate company with relevant
    acoustic experience and was commissioned principally to assess the impact of
    road traffic noise on the future residents. While aircraft noise is important,
    residents would be aware that they were moving into an area which is subject to
    such noise.
52. It is expected that the layout of the housing can be such that there would be no
    need for any noise mitigation requirements through the orientation of gardens
    away from the A41. However, if a fence were required, the appellant confirmed at
    the Hearing that it would be only 1.8 metres high which could be appropriately
    incorporated into the landscaping scheme.
Infrastructure
53. The Parish Council raise concerns regarding the extent of growth that Aston
    Clinton has already received which amounts to a 43% increase in the number of
    dwellings since the 2011 census with a consequent increase in population of 60%.
    As a consequence, the village has no spare infrastructure capacity including
    doctors, dentists and education places. However, the relevant authorities have no
    objections to the proposal before me which includes contributions to such services
    to account for the population growth.
Chilterns Beechwoods Special Area of Conservation
54. The appeal site is within the Zone of Influence of the Chilterns Beechwoods
    Special Area of Conservation (the SAC). The primary qualifying feature is the
    beech forests. The SAC is also important for semi-natural grassland and scrubland
    facies on calcareous substrates and the Stag beetle. Given the proximity of the
    site to the SAC it is likely to be subject to recreational pressure from the increased
    population levels. There is also potential for hydrological change from surface
    drainage and nitrogen deposition from increased traffic levels, all of which leads
    me to conclude that a likely significant effect on the qualifying features of the SAC

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6008253


       cannot be ruled out. I have therefore carried out an appropriate assessment
       including consultation with Natural England.
55. The S106 agreement includes an obligation to pay an appropriate contribution to
    both the Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM) strategy and
    towards an off-site Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) scheme at
    Kingsbrook which is within 4km of the appeal site. Together these are sufficient to
    encourage recreational use away from the SAC and to ensure recreational use of
    the SAC is appropriately managed.
56. There is no direct surface water connection to the SAC based on the distance and
    direction of water flow from the aquatic pathways on Site. Furthermore, the SuDS
    drainage strategy for the appeal site has been designed to support the
    development infrastructure. Consequently, there would be no likely significant
    effect on hydrology and therefore qualifying features.
57. The appellant’s TA states that the proposal will generate approximately 365
    additional vehicle trips within 4.65km of the SAC. While an increase in car
    movements can have the capacity to result in increased emissions of nitrogen
    oxides to the atmosphere which can have a harmful effect on the qualifying
    habitats, at the level proposed, and the distance involved, there is unlikely to be a
    likely significant on qualifying features. This is also the case given the appeal site
    is in an agreed accessible location and measures are incorporated to increase use
    of alternatives to the private car through a travel plan and travel packs.
58. Barbastelle bats are known to forage and commute within and around the SAC.
    The ecological studies have shown that bats are present within the development
    site foraging along hedgerows and tree features. Mitigation proposed includes the
    retention of the majority of the hedgerows together with a lighting strategy secured
    by condition securing dark corridors within the development. There is unlikely
    therefore to be a likely significant effect to bats.
59. Therefore, I am satisfied that with the proposed mitigation in place there will not be
    a likely significant effect to the qualifying features of the SAC either individually or
    in combination with other projects. Therefore, the proposal would not have an
    adverse effect on the integrity of the SAC. I note that Natural England shares this
    view.
Chilterns National Landscape
60. The Chilterns National Landscape is visible from certain parts of the appeal site.
    However, given the distance between the two and the presence of vegetation and
    built form, the appeal proposal would be read as a small extension to the existing
    village, if visible at all. Consequently I am satisfied that the natural beauty of the
    National Landscape would be conserved. Furthermore the appeal proposal would
    be sensitively located on the edge of Aston Clinton and would avoid adverse
    impacts on the National Landscape.
Conditions
61. An agreed list of conditions was included in the SOCG. After my comments prior to
    the Hearing, a revised list was issued to be discussed at the Hearing. I have had
    regard to the Framework and the advice in the Planning Practise Guidance (PPG)
    and imposed conditions accordingly.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6008253


62. Conditions requiring the submission of the reserved matters as well as one to
    secure compliance with the approved plans are necessary to ensure clarity. The
    requirement to submit the reserved matters for the first phase within 18 months is
    necessary to comply with the requirements of Policy D3 of the Local Plan for
    development to be delivered in a timely manner. Conditions requiring the reserved
    matters to be in accordance with the parameter plan and specifying what details to
    include are also required for clarity (1-7).
63. A condition requiring development to proceed in accordance with the noise
    mitigation plan is necessary to protect the living conditions of future residents.
64. A construction management plan is required to be agreed prior to commencement
    of works to ensure that the living conditions of existing residents and highway
    safety are protected (9).
65. The provision of a 10 metre wide buffer zone to the watercourse on the eastern
    boundary needs to be secured by a condition to protect ecology (10). An
    Arboricultural Method Statement is required prior to work commencing on site to
    ensure that existing trees and vegetation are adequately protected and not
    damaged during construction (11).
66. Conditions regarding whole site details for surface water drainage and the
    maintenance of the systems are necessary to appropriately manage flood risk and
    the layout of the development to enable the required infrastructure (12-13).
67. Conditions regarding highway matters are necessary to minimise danger,
    obstruction, and inconvenience to highway users, and to provide safe and suitable
    pedestrian and cycle access to encourage sustainable travel to and from the
    development (14-16).
68. Details of a Residents Travel Pack are necessary to promote principles of
    sustainable travel for future residents (17). A condition requiring the
    implementation of the landscaping details is necessary in the interests of the
    character and appearance of the area (18).
69. A condition is necessary to ensure compliance with part M4(2) of the Building
    Regulations and for 15% of the affordable units to accord with part M4(3) of the
    Building Regulations to ensure that the development is accessible and inclusive
    (19).
70. Condition 20 is necessary to be approved prior to work commencing on site in
    order to ensure protected species are not harmed by the development. A condition
    is also necessary to ensure that ecological mitigation measures are secured on the
    site as well as a Landscape and Ecological Management Plan in order to protect
    ecology (21 & 22). Conditions 23-26 are necessary to protect biodiversity and
    ecology on site.
71. A condition is necessary to restrict the level of water used per head to achieve
    water efficiency (27).
Planning Balance and Conclusion
72. I have found that the proposal would be in conflict with the spatial strategy and
    landscape character policies of the Local Plan drawing it into conflict with the
    development plan as a whole.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6008253


73. In assessing the weight to be attached to the landscape character harm, my
    attention is drawn to Policy AST01 of the Draft Local Plan for Buckinghamshire
    2024-2045 Regulation 19 Publication Version (the draft Local Plan). This allocates
    a site of about 52 hectares, including the appeal site, for a comprehensively
    planned, mixed use development including 1660 dwellings, employment, a local
    centre, two primary schools and health care facilities. Vehicular access will be
    provided to the slip road onto the A41, Aylesbury Road, Waring Crescent, Chapel
    Drive and New Road with improvements to College Road South.
74. The draft Local Plan is at an early stage. The Regulation 19 consultation ended on
    6 September 2026 and the plan is intended to be submitted for examination by 31
    December 2026. The proposed allocation therefore attracts limited weight. I have
    not treated it as establishing that the principle or detailed form of development on
    the appeal site has been settled. Nevertheless, the proposed allocation is a
    material consideration because it identifies the Council’s emerging strategic
    intentions for this broad location. Policy HO13 of the Framework is also relevant. It
    provides that development proposals should not be inconsistent with the proposed
    scale, location and phasing of strategic sites in an emerging development plan,
    however advanced that plan may be.
75. The allocated site extends from the northern edge of Aston Clinton to the A41 and
    will therefore have a marked effect on the setting of Aston Clinton and its separate
    identity from Aylesbury. The draft local plan is at an early stage with the Regulation
    19 consultation ending on 6 September and due to be submitted for examination
    by 31 December 2026, it therefore attracts limited weight. However, Policy HO13
    of the Framework which states that development proposals should not be
    inconsistent with the proposed scale, location and phasing of those strategic sites
    in an emerging development plan, however advanced.
76. The Council's concerns relate principally to the location of the appeal site within
    the wider allocation and the relatively low density proposed. However, although
    the Council attempted to explain where the uses could go based on the main road
    approaching from the A41 and demonstrating how the appeal proposal would
    conflict with such uses, no detailed masterplan, infrastructure strategy, viability
    evidence or other material has been provided which demonstrates that the appeal
    site is required for a particular land use, access arrangement, item of infrastructure
    or higher-density form of development that would be prejudiced by the proposal.
    Nor is there substantive evidence that the development of up to 66 dwellings on
    this part of the allocation would prevent the remainder of the site from being
    comprehensively planned or delivered.
77. The proposed development would occupy only a small proportion of the wider
    allocation and would retain flexibility regarding the future development of adjoining
    land. In the absence of persuasive evidence that it would compromise strategic
    infrastructure, prejudice the delivery of community facilities, prevent appropriate
    access arrangements, frustrate comprehensive masterplanning or materially
    undermine the intended scale and phasing of the allocation, I am satisfied that the
    proposal would not be inconsistent with NDMP HO13.
78. While I understand that the appeal proposals and the allocation are two very
    different forms of development, the allocation indicates that the Council itself now
    envisages substantial development in this broad location. Whilst not determinative,
    that context is consistent with my own assessment of the site's relationship to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6008253


       Aston Clinton. Hence, it reinforces my view that the harm caused to the character
       and appearance would only be moderate, and that to the context and setting of
       Aston Clinton limited and overall would attract moderate weight in any balance.
79. Policy S5 of the Framework concerns the principle of development outside of a
    settlement such as the appeal site. The Policy allows for certain forms of
    development to be approved outside of settlements unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against
    the National Development Management Policies in the Framework. Both parties
    agree that criterion j of Policy S5 is relevant which allows for development which
    would address an evidenced unmet need as in the case here. The development is
    required to be physically well related to an existing settlement and be of a scale
    which can be accommodated taking into account the existing or proposed
    availability of infrastructure. I have already found that contributions in the S106
    agreement together with the direct provision of services means that there would
    not be an unacceptable impact on local infrastructure; a view that is shared by the
    Council and the appellant.
80. The matter of whether the appeal site is physically well related to the settlement
    was discussed at length at the Hearing and it was agreed this can relate to a
    number of factors. In this instance the proposal is very close to the settlement. In
    addition it can be accessed from an existing road within the settlement and is well
    located in terms of facilities and services. However, I have found that not only
    would the proposal be harmful to the character and appearance of the area, it
    would also harm the setting and context of the village. Albeit only causing limited
    harm. Even so, in my view, it is not physically well related to the settlement and
    therefore does not comply with criterion j of Policy S5.
81. Policy S5(4) states that development proposals which do not fall within one of the
    categories set out in this policy should only be approved in exceptional
    circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to
    promoting sustainable patterns of movement.
82. The proposal would deliver 66 houses at a time when the Council has a
    substantial housing supply short fall. There would also be a policy compliant level
    of affordable housing secured by an obligation in the S106 agreement. I give both
    of these matters substantial weight as per Policy HO7 of the Framework.
83. Economic benefits associated with the build and the spend by future occupants in
    the local economy will be modest based on the number of houses and I attach
    moderate weight. There will be some environmental benefits including energy
    efficiency , provision of open space and play space which will be available to
    existing residents as well as Biodiversity Net Gain which attracts moderate weight.
84. The improvements to local transport infrastructure attract limited weight.
85. In my view therefore taken together the substantial benefits of the proposal would
    substantially outweigh the moderate weight I have applied to the adverse effects to
    the character of the countryside. I have not included the limited adverse effects to
    the spatial strategy I have identified in this balance given that the Policy itself is
    regarding development outside of settlement limits. However, even if I had, I am
    satisfied the substantial benefits would still outweigh the adverse effects and the
    requirements of Policy S5 are met.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6008253


86. Equally, I consider that the substantial benefits are sufficient to provide clear
    justification for the conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework, which would only
    cause limited harm. Therefore this policy is not a barrier to preventing the
    development.
87. Consequently, while the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a
    whole, there are material considerations, including the Framework which is a
    material consideration of critical importance, which outweigh that conflict and
    therefore the appeal should be allowed.

Zoe Raygen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
Appeal Decision 6008253


APPEARANCES
FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY
Ms Phillipa Jarvis                              Planning Consultant (PJPC Ltd) on behalf of
                                                Buckinghamshire Council
Mr Jonathan Bellars                             Landscape Architecture and Urban Design
                                                Team Leader, Buckinghamshire Council


FOR THE APPELLANT
Mr Matthew Fraser Counsel                       Instructed by:
Mr Matthew Corcoran                             Managing Director CDS Planning
Mr Mark Flatman                                 Landscape Architect Liz Lake Associates




INTERESTED PERSONS
Mr Sean Hayward                                 Resident
Mr Philip Bailey                                Resident
Ms Liz Lawrence Blake                           Preserve Aston Clinton Village Environment
                                                Action Group
Ms Pauline Young                                Resident
Mr Anthony Hare                                 Resident
Ms Tilly Hicks                                  Resident
Ms Sarah Prior                                  Resident




DOCUMENT SUBMITTED AFTER THE HEARING

Signed and dated Section 106 legal agreement

Revised Condition Number 5




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
Appeal Decision 6008253


              SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)       Details of appearance, landscaping, layout and scale, (herein after called “the
              reserved matters”) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority before any development begins and the development
              shall be carried out as approved.
     2)       Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the Local
              Planning Authority before the expiration of 18 months from the date of this
              permission.
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of 2
              (two) years from the date of the approval of the related reserved matters
              application.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: • Site location plan 1271 WW B1 00 DR A 00
              rev B, Highway Plan J32 8339 PS 001.
     5)       Plans and particulars submitted for any Reserved Matters application
              pursuant to Conditions 2 and 3 of this permission shall have regard to the
              parameter plan (drawing no. 1271 WW B1 00 DR A 003 Rev D) and shall
              include the following details:
              i)    any proposed access road(s) including details of horizontal and vertical
                    alignment;
              ii) any existing access points within the application site that are not
                    required for the development, and which are proposed to be closed
                    when new accesses forming part of the development are brought into
                    use;
              iii) the layout and specification of any internal roads not covered by the
                    above;
              iv) footpaths, access facilities for the disabled and individual accesses to
                    ensure safe movement for residents both on and off site particularly in
                    respect of access to local amenities;
              v) the materials to be used on the external faces of all the buildings to
                    which the details relate;
              vi) the positions, design, dimensions, materials and type of boundary
                    treatment (including all fences, walls and other means of enclosure) to
                    be provided, including details on excavations and methodologies
                    required for their implementation;
              vii) details for all hard landscaped areas, footpaths and similar areas,
                    including details of finished ground levels relative to existing land levels,
                    all surfacing materials, and street furniture, signs, lighting, refuse
                    storage units and other minor structures to be installed thereon;
              viii) contours for all landscaping areas, together with planting plans and
                    schedules of plants, noting species, sizes and numbers/densities,
                    details of all trees, bushes and hedges which are to be retained and a
                    written specification for the landscape works; and
              ix) Details of any external lighting to any building(s) or parking areas either
                    associated with those buildings or separate visitor spaces.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    16
Appeal Decision 6008253


     6)       The details to be submitted for the approval of the Local Planning Authority
              within any Reserved Matters application pursuant to Conditions 2 and 3 of
              this permission seeking to determine matters of Layout shall include:
              i)    Details on parking and manoeuvring for all necessary vehicle types
                    (including emergency vehicles and refuse collection vehicles);
              ii) Details on cycle parking/storage on site for each dwelling;
              iii) Details on electric vehicle charging infrastructure to be installed at each
                    dwelling;
              iv) Details of the mobility hub, which may include –
                    1. Potential Demand Responsive Transport Service pick up point /
                          stop (currently known as Village Connect service);
                    2. Noticeboards promoting active travel and providing information
                          regarding public transport services, car sharing, cycle route,
                    3. Cycling Racks / Sheffield Stands cycle parking;
                    4. Parcel pick-up and drop-off points; and
                    5. Parking space for potential vendor style van (ice cream van, hot
                          drinks etc) for community use.
              These details shall be fully in accordance with the adopted parking
              standards. The approved details shall be implemented and made available
              for use before any dwelling within the development associated with that
              Reserved Matters application is occupied and shall be retained as such
              thereafter.
     7)       The landscape details to be submitted pursuant to Conditions 2 and 3 above
              shall include the following:
              i)    a scaled plan showing all existing trees, shrubs and hedgerows to be
                    retained, including crown spreads and Root Protection Areas for trees
                    and plants to be planted;
              ii) location, type and materials to be used for hard landscaping including
                    specifications, to include location and type of play areas; and
              iii) a schedule detailing species, sizes and numbers/densities of all
                    proposed trees/plants.
     8)       Any Reserved Matters application submitted pursuant to Conditions 2 and 3
              shall adhere to the recommendations of the JMP Noise Impact Assessment
              (January 2026). A noise mitigation plan detailing measures for internal and
              external environments to ensure compliance with BS 8233:2014 shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing prior to development above ground and
              thereafter the development shall be implemented in accordance with the
              approved details
     9)       Prior to the commencement of any development works on the site, including
              site Clearance related to the development hereby permitted, a Construction
              Traffic Management Plan (CTMP) shall be submitted to and approved by the
              Local Planning Authority. The approved CTMP shall be adhered to
              throughout the construction period and shall include the following details:
              i)    Construction access;
              ii)   Construction traffic routing;
              iii) Delivery hours outside of highway network peak periods;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
Appeal Decision 6008253


              iv)   The parking of vehicles of site personnel, operatives, and visitors off the
                    highway;
              v)     Loading and unloading of plant and materials and storage of plant and
                    materials used in constructing the development off the highway;
              vi) Site specific measures to control and monitor impacts arising in relation
                    to noise, vibration, dust, smoke and fumes;
              vii) The erection and maintenance of security hoarding and gates;
              viii) Wheel-washing facilities; and
              ix) Before and after construction condition surveys of the highway and a
                    commitment to rectify and repair any damage caused.
     10)      The details to be submitted as part of the reserved matters shall include the
              provision of a minimum 10 metre wide buffer zone alongside the watercourse
              on the eastern boundary. The 10m buffer zone scheme shall be free from
              built development including lighting, domestic gardens, non-native plant
              species and formal landscaping including paths/cycleways and play
              equipment. The scheme shall include:
              i)    plans showing the extent and layout of the ecological buffer zone;
              ii) details of any proposed planting scheme (which should include only
                    native species);
              iii) details demonstrating how the buffer zone will be protected during
                    development and managed over the longer term including adequate
                    financial provision and named body responsible for management plus
                    production of detailed management plan; and
              iv) details of any proposed fencing, lighting, etc.
              Thereafter, the buffer zone shall be implemented and maintained in
              accordance with the approved scheme
     11)      As part of a reserved matters application submitted pursuant to conditions 2
              and 3 an Arboricultural Method Statement (AMS) with Tree Protection Plan
              (TPP) shall be submitted in accordance with current British Standard 5837
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Tree protection
              measures, including the erection of tree protective fencing and installation of
              ground protection, shall be in situ prior to the commencement of any works
              on site (including demolition) and shall conform to current British Standard
              5837 guidance. No work shall be carried out, or materials stored within the
              construction exclusion zone or other protected areas. The AMS and TPP
              shall include:
              i)    Details of trees to be removed and retained;
              ii) Detailed plans for demolition (if applicable) and construction showing
                    location of the tree protective fencing and any additional ground
                    protection whether temporary or permanent;
              iii) Details as to the location of proposed and existing services and utilities
                    including sustainable drainage, attenuation basins and swales, where
                    these are close to Root Protection Areas (RPAs); and
              iv) Details of the proposed level changes close to existing trees or their root
                    protection areas.
     12)      Development shall not commence until a surface water drainage scheme
              (including a water quality management plan) for the site based on the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   18
Appeal Decision 6008253


              principles set out within the submitted MJA Flood Risk Assessment
              (reference CP/ST/0279/7445) has been submitted to and approved in writing
              by the Local Planning Authority. The scheme shall include:


              i)      Water quality assessment demonstrating that the total pollution
                      mitigation index equals or exceeds the pollution hazard index; priority
                      should be given to above ground SuDS components;
              ii)     Ensure all SuDS components are lined to prevent the ingress of
                      groundwater;
              iii)    SuDS components agreed within the Drainage Strategy (drawing no.
                      7445-MJA-SW-XX-DR-C-099);
              iv)     Full construction details of all SuDS and drainage components;
              v)      Detailed drainage layout with pipe numbers, gradients, and pipe sizes
                      complete, together with storage volumes of all SuDS components; and
              vi)     Calculations to demonstrate that the proposed drainage system can
                      contain up to the 1 in 30 storm event without flooding. Any onsite
                      flooding between the 1 in 30 and the 1 in 100 plus climate change storm
                      event should be safely contained on site.
              The development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved
              scheme
     13)      No dwelling shall be occupied until a ‘whole-life’ maintenance plan for the
              sites surface water drainage scheme has been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. The plan shall set out how and when
              to maintain the full drainage system (e.g. a maintenance schedule for each
              drainage/SuDS component) during and following construction, with details of
              who is to be responsible for carrying out the maintenance. The plan shall also
              include as-built drawings and/or photographic evidence of the drainage
              scheme carried out by a suitably qualified person.
              The surface water drainage scheme approved pursuant to this permission
              shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details
     14)      No part of the development hereby permitted shall be occupied, until the
              principal means of vehicular access off College Road South has been
              provided in accordance with the approved planning drawing J32-8339-PS-
              001 and constructed in accordance with the Buckinghamshire Council
              highway standards
     15)      No part of the development shall be occupied, until the visibility splays shown
              on the approved drawings have been provided on both sides of the access
              and the area contained within the splays shall be kept free of any obstruction
              exceeding 0.6 metres in height above the nearside channel level of the
              carriageway
     16)      No dwelling shall be occupied, until the off-site highway works shown in
              principle on the planning drawing number J32-8339-PS-001 have been laid
              out and constructed in accordance with full details which shall have first been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Planning Authority. For the
              avoidance of doubt, the off-site highway works shall include a new footway
              and footway widening along College Road South and pedestrian dropped
              kerb crossing points in the wider area. The off-site highway works will need to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    19
Appeal Decision 6008253


              be constructed in accordance with Buckinghamshire Council highway
              standards.
     17)      No dwelling shall be occupied until details of a Residents Travel Pack have
              been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority
              and the approved Travel Pack distributed to all residents on occupation
     18)      All planting, seeding and turfing included in the approved landscaping details
              shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding season following the first
              occupation of the development/phase hereby permitted or the completion of
              the development/phase, whichever is the sooner. Any retained trees,
              hedgerows or shrubs forming part of the approved landscaping scheme
              which within a period of five years from the occupation or completion of the
              development/phase, whichever is the later, die, are removed or become
              seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the next planting season
              with others of similar size and species, unless the Local Planning Authority
              gives written consent to any variation
     19)      The proposed dwellings shall be designed to provide an appropriate level of
              accessibility and adaptability, with all dwellings compliant with Category 2
              (Part M4(2) of the Building Regulations and 15% of the affordable units
              compliant with Category 3 (Part M4(3) of the Building Regulations) unless
              demonstrated by an accompanying report that the development would be
              unviable to do so.
     20)      Development shall not commence until a robust non-licensed method
              statement (NLMS) or Reasonable Avoidance Measures (RAMs) strategy has
              been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
              Thereafter the development shall be implemented in accordance with the
              approved method statement.
     21)      Prior to occupation of any dwelling the mitigation measures proposed within
              the Ecological Impact Assessment (Wessex Ecology dated 30th June 2026)
              shall be carried out in full.
     22)      Development shall not commence until a Landscape and Ecological
              Management Plan (LEMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority. Both plans shall include details of the 10 metre
              buffer zone for the watercourse on the eastern boundary and include details
              of the river enhancement, any fencing and lighting and the design of the
              proposed pedestrian crossing points which should be clear span structures.
              The development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the
              approved plans.
     23)      No development shall take place, including any site clearance, until a revised
              Biodiversity Net Gain Report and associated Biodiversity Metric
              demonstrating that Biodiversity Net Gain can be achieved on site, has been
              submitted to, and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
              BNG Report should adhere to best practice and include:
              i)   A summary of key points;
              ii) Introduction to the site, project, planning status, certainty of design and
                   assumptions made, the aims and scope of the study and relevant policy
                   and legislation;
              iii) Methods taken at each stage; desk study, approach to BNG and
                   evidence of technical competence;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   20
Appeal Decision 6008253


              iv)   Baseline conditions of the site including important ecological features
                    and their influence on deliverability of BNG, baseline metric calculations
                    and justifying evidence, and a baseline habitat plan that clearly shows
                    each habitat type and the areas in hectares;
              v) Justification of how each of the BNG Good Practice Principles has been
                    applied;
              vi) Proposed Design to include a proposed habitat plan and details of what
                    will be created. This can be taken from the site layout plan, illustrative
                    masterplan, green infrastructure plan, or landscape plans. The plan
                    should clearly show what existing habitat is being retained and what
                    new habitat will be created. It should be easy to identify the different
                    habitat types and show the areas in hectares of each habitat or habitat
                    parcel;
              vii) Biodiversity Metric spreadsheet, submitted in excel form that can be
                    cross referenced with the appropriate plans.
              viii) Implementation Plan including a timetable for implementation;
              ix) BNG Management and Monitoring Plan.


              The development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details.
     24)      No development shall take place (including demolition, ground works,
              vegetation clearance) until a construction environmental management plan
              (CEMP: Biodiversity) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. The CEMP (Biodiversity) shall include the following.
              i)    Risk assessment of potentially damaging construction activities;
              ii) Identification of “biodiversity protection zones,” including natural buffers
                    for watercourse and native hedgerows (in accordance with NE8),
                    hedgerow priority habitat and retention of the black poplar tree etc;
              iii) Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working
                    practices) to avoid or reduce impacts during construction (may be
                    provided as a set of method statements). To include precautionary
                    working method statements for nesting birds, badgers, reptiles, and
                    other mammals;
              iv) The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
                    features;
              v) The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be
                    present on site to oversee works;
              vi) Responsible persons and lines of communication;
              vii) The role and responsibilities on site of an ecological clerk of works
                    (ECoW) or similarly competent person; and
              viii) Use of protective fences, exclusion barriers, and warning signs.
              The approved CEMP shall be adhered to and implemented throughout the
              construction period strictly in accordance with the approved details.
     25)      No development shall take place (including demolition, ground works,
              vegetation clearance) unless and until the Habitat Management Monitoring
              Plan (HMMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The content of the HMMP shall include the following:

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   21
Appeal Decision 6008253


              i)    Description and evaluation of features to be managed;
              ii) Ecological trends and constraints on site that might influence
                    management;
              iii) Aims and objectives of management;
              iv) Appropriate management options for achieving aims and objectives,
                    informed by soil sampling (particularly for other neutral grassland);
              v) Prescriptions for management actions;
              vi) Preparation of a work schedule (including an annual work plan capable
                    of being rolled forward over a thirty-year period);
              vii) Details of the body or organization responsible for implementation of the
                    plan;
              viii) Details of natural buffers for watercourse and hedgerows in accordance
                    with NE8, also dark corridor;
              ix) Details of appreciate integrated biodiversity enhancement features
                    which require location and model specifications in accordance with the
                    Ecological Impact Assessment (Wessex Ecology, 30th June 2026),
                    along with hedgehog holes within proposed fences/barriers; and
              x) Ongoing monitoring and remedial measures.
              The HMMP shall also include details of the legal and funding mechanism(s)
              by which the long-term implementation of the plan will be secured by the
              developer with the management body(ies) responsible for its delivery. The
              plan shall be for no less than 30 years. The plan shall also set out (where the
              results from monitoring show that conservation aims and objectives of the
              HMMP are not being met) how contingencies and/or remedial action will be
              identified, agreed, and implemented so that the development still delivers the
              fully functioning biodiversity objectives of the originally approved scheme.
              The development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved
              details
     26)      Prior to first occupation, a “lighting design strategy for biodiversity” shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              strategy shall:
              i)    identify those areas/features on site that are particularly sensitive for bat
                    species and that are likely to cause disturbance in or around their
                    breeding sites and resting places or along important routes used to
                    access key areas of their territory, for example, for foraging, and
                    commuting;
              ii) show how and where external lighting will be installed (through the
                    provision of appropriate lighting contour plans and technical
                    specifications) so that it can be clearly demonstrated that areas to be lit
                    will not disturb or prevent the above species using their territory or
                    having access to their breeding sites and resting places;
              iii) Secure measures to exclude lighting from 1st May through to 30th
                    September to remove impacts on foraging and commuting bats and
                    provide details on how this will be achieved; and
              iv) Details of dark corridors along watercourses and native hedgerows




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    22
Appeal Decision 6008253


              All external lighting installed shall be in accordance with the specifications
              and locations set out in the strategy and maintained thereafter in accordance
              with the strategy
     27)      The development, hereby permitted, shall be designed and constructed to
              meet a water efficiency standard of 110 litres per head per day.




*******************************END OF CONDITIONS**************************************




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   23
