Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 26 August 2026
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by A Knight BA PG Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008895
Twelve Acre Farm & Livery Moor Drove (East), Thetford, Norfolk IP26 4JU
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Barrett against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk Borough
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/01933/F.
•      The development proposed is the permanent retention of mobile home and ancillary mobile unit
       housing customer w.c.s, office and tack room.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The description of development in the banner heading above was agreed by the
         parties at the Hearing. The version on the application form included the term
         ‘retrospective/retention’ which I have omitted as that is not a form of development.
3.       Whilst the application form indicates that the development has not started, the
         submissions are clear that the mobile home and ancillary mobile unit are already in
         use at the site. I saw as much during my site visit.
4.       Since the planning application was refused the appellant has become the owner of
         both the appeal site and the wider landholding edged in blue on the site location
         and layout plan.
5.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
         August 2026. The main parties were given the opportunity to comment on any
         implications for the appeal.
Background and Main Issue
6.       The appeal site is a hardsurfaced area within the wider landholding along with the
         access from the road. The landholding, which is largely split into paddocks
         containing simple field shelters, is used for the appellant’s equine care and livery
         business following a previous grant of planning permission1 (the previous
         permission). This allowed the permanent use of the landholding and appeal site for
         the equine business. It also allowed the mobile home and ancillary unit subject of
         this appeal, but on a temporary basis.

1
    Application Ref 20/00366/FM

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008895


7.     The date by which condition 1 of the previous permission required the mobile
       home and unit to be removed has now passed.
8.     The parties agreed at the Hearing that the site, which is within the open
       countryside outside the settlement boundary for Hockwold cum Wilton, is subject
       to policies seeking to avoid isolated new homes in the countryside other than in
       circumstances set out within those policies. These include there being an essential
       need for residential occupation by a rural worker that cannot be met by existing
       accommodation.
9.     The Council has no objection to the ancillary unit, which it accepts to be necessary
       for the approved land use. I see no reason to take a different view and focus
       hereafter on the mobile home. This is in residential use and occupied by the
       appellant and his family.
10. Given the above, the main issue is whether there is an essential need for a rural
    worker to live in the countryside permanently at or near the appeal site and, if so,
    whether that need justifies the permanent retention of the mobile home.
Reasons
Policy context
11. The reason for refusal refers to Policy LP36 of the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk
    Local Plan (2025) (the Local Plan). This addresses the housing needs of rural
    workers and provides a potential exception to the strategic policies of the Local
    Plan which generally seek to prohibit isolated dwellings in the countryside.
12. Policy LP36 allows new permanent dwellings to support existing rural based
    activities on well-established rural based enterprises, but only upon the satisfaction
    of three criteria. These are (firstly) that there be a clearly established existing
    functional need for occupants to be adjacent to their enterprises day and night;
    (Secondly) that the need could not be met by existing dwellings within the locality;
    and (thirdly) a demonstration of the financial viability of the enterprise.
13. In the Hearing, both parties were content that the new Framework did not
    materially alter the policy context. I see no reason to find otherwise. The appeal
    proposal does not evidently have the support of Framework Policy S5, and Policy
    HO11 seeks to avoid isolated homes in the countryside unless there is an
    essential need for a rural worker to live permanently at or near their place of work
    in the countryside.
14. Taking all of this into account I see no material inconsistency between the Local
    Plan and the Framework for the purposes of the appeal and proceed to assess the
    proposal against the three requirements of Policy LP36.
Functional need
15. The appellant sets out seven activities comprising his overall business enterprise;
    Liveries (DIY and full), hay bailing, and the keeping of ewes, a stallion, 3 brood
    mares, and 2 horses for personal use. In the Hearing he accepted that given their
    low numbers at present, the ewes did not present a functional need for residential
    occupation of the appeal site.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008895


16. The hay bailing takes place away from the appeal site at several locations in the
    wider area. The appellant’s case that this presents a need to live at the site is
    focussed on the fear of machinery theft.
17. Regarding this, and the wider point of crime and security, I have no evidence that
    the site is at any particular risk. I accept the appellant’s point that his having lived
    at the site since commencing the business has helped to guard against crime, but
    that in itself is not evidence that such a risk exists to any notable degree.
18. I have nothing before me to show crime rates in the local area, or in respect of
    comparable sites or land uses across the wider area. I also have no evidence that
    arrangements could not be made to safely store valuable equipment elsewhere.
    Overall, neither the risk of crime nor the hay bailing element of the business
    evidently result in a functional need to occupy the appeal site.
19. Regarding the two horses kept for personal use; Policy LP36 supports dwellings
    outside of settlements for rural workers in relation to rural-based enterprises. That
    is to say, dwellings connected to a commercial undertaking. I do not doubt the
    benefits of being able to regularly check on the wellbeing of these two animals, but
    that does not present a functional need to occupy the appeal site for the purposes
    of the policy, as there is no commercial element to that activity.
20. Whilst I do not doubt that the appellant has a formal duty of care for the animals at
    the site, his written submissions do very little to show that this duty, in itself,
    necessitates residential occupation. I heard from the appellant that a distressed
    animal will emit a distinct sound, particularly noticeable in the quiet of the
    nighttime. This, I was told, will often have the effect of activating the other animals
    and, in either event, the appellant and his partner will usually be woken from their
    sleep by the noise and administer care. I was told that this occurs approximately
    once a week on average.
21. I have little independent evidence that being roused from sleep in this way is an
    established or reliable method of mitigating the risks of overnight equine illness or
    injury. The distance between the appeal site and the northernmost paddocks of the
    landholding does little to assuage my doubts; It is neither evident nor obvious that
    any sound an animal might emit would, over that distance, wake a person from
    their sleep.
22. Having said that, the Council made its decision based on the appellant having only
    2 full liveries and 14 DIY liveries, and on the term ‘DIY’ indicating minimal care for
    the horse on the part of the appellant. Whilst this reasoning is clear, I nevertheless
    find that the livery business is in fact more demanding than that.
23. The number, which is not limited by the terms of the previous permission, has
    grown to some 15 DIY and 8 full liveries. The appellant informed me that it is
    common for him to provide additional services on an ad hoc basis to DIY livery
    customers and that, in any event, even his basic DIY service includes providing a
    night check, drinking water, and a general oversight of the animal.
24. Whilst not identified clearly in his written submissions, these additional services
    are not at odds with the general intention set out in the appellant’s original
    business plan, as provided in support of the previous permission.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008895


25. Whilst I do not accept that the appellant could rely on being woken from his sleep
    by an animal in distress, I have little reason to doubt that having checked on the
    animals throughout the day, he and his partner may anticipate an issue in advance
    and so be more alert to potential issues in the evening and nighttime. I have no
    reason to doubt the reported frequency of such events; Indeed, the number of
    horses at the appeal site, presently at some 27 before any foals or the appellants
    own horses are counted, appears sufficiently high that the need for late-hours
    observation and care may arise reasonably often.
26. I see no reason to question that the successful operation of the appellant’s
    business is based in no small part on the assurance that he will be present
    overnight near the animals and that, as such, a continuous on-site presence is a
    commercial expectation and operational prerequisite. Delayed intervention in the
    event of a sudden veterinary emergency or distress would result in unacceptable
    risk to animal welfare that could only be met by a worker living permanently on the
    site.
27. Notwithstanding the parts of the appellant’s case which I have not accepted,
    overall, I find the nature and scale of the appellant’s business to generate an
    inherent essential need for a rural worker to live in the countryside permanently at
    or near the appeal site. That the appellant is also engaged in foaling, albeit to
    varying extents, only confirms me in this view.
Existing dwellings
28. At the southern end of the landholding is a barn containing a residential dwelling
    (the barn flat), which is occupied by the appellant’s partner’s mother. The dwelling
    was created without planning permission and was the subject of an enforcement
    notice served in November 2022. The notice was quashed at appeal as it lacked
    sufficient accuracy2. The Council did not resume enforcement action and now
    considers the barn flat to be “lawful through the passage of time”.
29. In the Hearing the Council explained that whilst an application for a certificate of
    lawfulness for the barn flat was refused in 20223 it nevertheless contains sufficient
    evidence to show, to the Council’s satisfaction, that immunity to enforcement
    action has accrued since then. As both parties agree the barn flat to be immune,
    and as I have no compelling evidence to the contrary, I proceed on the basis that it
    is.
30. In his statement of case the appellant explained that he could not occupy the barn
    flat as he did not own it. Since then, however, the appellant has bought the wider
    landholding including the barn flat, so the argument set out in his statement has
    fallen away.
31. I was informed in the Hearing that the presence of a sitting tenant prevents the
    appellant from occupying the barn flat. He provided a lease agreement drawn up
    by the previous landowner, and alluded to the legislative protection afforded to
    tenants and the accompanying challenges for landlords seeking to evict.
32. I do not doubt that such matters are subject to stringent regulations. Even so, I
    have no evidence that those regulations prevent evictions altogether, or that the


2
    Appeal Ref APP/V2635/C/22/3312973
3
    Application Ref 22/01689/LDE


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008895


       appellant has undertaken any steps whatsoever to gain occupation of the barn flat,
       let alone that any such attempts have been frustrated by legislation.
33. The lease agreement is stated to have been made on the “1st of June 500” and is
    unsigned. This undermines its credibility. Even if I look past these anomalies, the
    date on the front of the lease is 1 June 2024 and its given term is “12 months with
    the first option to renew thereafter”, leaving me uncertain as to whether it has, in
    fact, expired. The lease allows use of the barn flat “In accordance with planning
    and license permissions” yet, as described above, there is no planning permission
    for the residential use. It is unclear how the lease holds up in the face of this
    apparent contradiction. Taking these matters together, and whatever the legislative
    context, it is not evident that the lease restrains the appellant from taking
    occupancy of the barn flat.
34. The support of Policy LP36 is only available if the need to live at or near the site
    could not be met by existing dwellings within the locality. The reason for refusal
    questions whether the appellant is, in fact, able to live in the barn flat, and the
    Council’s submissions highlight the apparent flaws in the lease. The significance of
    these matters has, therefore, been made clear.
35. In this context, the appellant’s evidence is notably limited. There is little to
    demonstrate that meaningful attempts have been made to secure occupancy of
    the barn flat, or to prove that such accommodation could not ultimately be utilised.
36. The appellant informed me that sound from the animals was less audible in the
    barn flat than in the mobile home. As I have set out in the preceding section, I do
    not accept that he depends upon hearing the animals for their wellbeing, and so
    attach minimal weight to any differences in that respect between the barn flat and
    the mobile home.
37. A core element of the appellant’s case is that the Council has, by virtue of the
    original permission, already found his residential and business use of the site to be
    acceptable, subject to the performance over time of the latter. He contends that as
    the business is demonstrably viable, the pertinent test has been satisfied.
38. Even if I were to accept this formulation, circumstances have changed significantly
    since the previous permission in that the appellant now owns the barn flat. The
    proposal before me differs from that originally before the Council, as does the way
    it fares against Policy LP36. I do not consider that the Council’s decision to grant
    the original permission demonstrates the acceptability of the appeal scheme.
39. Overall, I see no reason to accept that the appellant could not occupy the barn flat
    and, therefore, no reason to accept that the essential need for a rural worker to live
    in the countryside permanently at or near the appeal site could not be met by
    existing dwellings within the locality. In this respect the appeal scheme fails to
    satisfy Policy LP36.
Financial viability
40. The appellant’s case in respect of financial viability includes his original business
    plan, and his business accounts for the year ending 31 March 2025. The latter
    encompasses turnover, expenditure, and profit for 2024 and 2025, and shows a
    net profit of some £22k and £16k per annum (p/a) respectively.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008895


41. The Council directed me to an appeal at a site called White Dyke Farm4 in which
    the Inspector found that a business profit of some £17k p/a was insufficient to
    demonstrate financial viability. That, however, was based on the dwelling at the
    Farm having a value of some £450k, meaning that any independent party who
    might buy the site could not realistically hope to both pay the mortgage and earn
    enough to live on from the business profits.
42. The Council accepted during the Hearing that the appellant’s business was
    different to that at White Dykes Farm in that, based on the figures provided, an
    independent party could take on his landholding and business and make enough
    to live on. This is partly because doing so would involve no equivalent to a
    mortgage for a £450k property.
43. The Council did, however, maintain its objection that the appellant’s figures were
    unproven. The accounts show ‘sales’ of some £52k and £55k for the two years in
    question but provide no breakdown, so it is not clear how much of that income was
    generated by the approved use of the appeal site, much less by the activities
    which present a functional need for residential occupancy.
44. Even if, as the appellant informed me, it is standard accountancy practice to
    present turnover in this way, I see no reason why he could not have supplemented
    the accounts with a breakdown. Policy LP36 is concerned with the financial
    soundness of the rural business associated with the proposed permanent dwelling,
    rather than with any wider business the appellant may be engaged in. It is
    necessary, therefore, to establish that the ‘sales’ figures are evidently derived from
    the equine business undertaken at the landholding.
45. Furthermore; The original business plan anticipated income from three different
    levels of livery and set out the fee for each. However, when one multiplies the
    number of livery customers the appellant had at the time of the application by
    those fees, the resulting sum amounts to a figure considerably lower than the
    given ‘sales’ figures.
46. Whilst the appellant explained that the remainder of the ‘sales’ were made up, at
    least in part, by additional services offered to livery customers and by the sale of
    foals, there is little detailed evidence as to the value of either within the
    submissions. This is material in my determination, not least as the appellant
    accepted in the Hearing that profits from foaling were unpredictable and subject to
    fluctuations.
47. I also heard that the production and sale of haybales contributes to the business
    though, as I have set out above, I do not consider that to be an activity presenting
    a functional need for residential occupation of the appeal site.
48. The concerns listed above undermine confidence in the appellant’s figures. That
    said, I see little reason to doubt that he currently has 15 DIY and 8 full liveries, as
    set out in his appeal statement. The Council does not dispute it, and whilst my site
    visit provided me with little more than a snapshot in time, my observations
    provided no reason to do so.
49. The appellant informed me that his prices have increased slightly since he
    produced the original business plan and, given the time that has passed, this

4
    Appeal Ref APP/V2635/W/24/3351657


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008895


       would be reasonable. Even if he had maintained his original prices of £30 a week
       (p/w) for a DIY livery and £65 p/w for a full grass livery, his current level of custom
       would generate just over £23k p/a from the DIY liveries and just over £27k p/a for
       the full liveries; That is to say, his current level of income appears comparable to
       the purported ‘sales’ figures for 2024 and 2025.
50. Regarding the appellant’s ‘expenditure’ figures; He no longer pays rent for the
    landholding, which was a major outgoing in previous years. I was told that the cost
    of the land purchase was, per annum, less than the rent had been. Again, the point
    is unproven, but I see little reason to suspect that his costs on that front have
    increased. The cost of the mobile home is not demonstrably reflected in the
    accounts. Even so, I heard that its upkeep is covered by the sum attributable to
    maintenance and I have no reason to doubt that it should last for some years
    before the cost of replacing it becomes pertinent.
51. Taking the above into account, and as I was given no basis upon which to
    question the other ‘expenditure’ figures, it follows that a net profit of between £16k
    and £22k, as set out in the accounts, appears realistic based on the appellant’s
    identifiable, if approximate, business income. Whilst the Council’s concerns over
    the clarity of the appellant’s case are reasonable, ultimately, I find there is enough
    evidence before me to demonstrate financial viability.
52. Overall, however, whilst I have found the business viable and there to be an
    essential need for a rural worker to live permanently at or near the appeal site,
    because of the existing dwelling within the appellant’s land holding I have not
    found there is a need to retain the mobile home. As such, the appeal scheme fails
    to comply with Policy LP36 of the Local Plan and so does not benefit from an
    exception to the strategic presumption against new isolated homes in the
    countryside.
Other Considerations
53. The appellant explained the consequences, as he saw them, of the appeal being
    dismissed. However, I am not satisfied that the appellant would be made homeless
    or that their ability to operate the business would be affected, as it has not been
    demonstrated that the adjacent barn flat could not be occupied by the appellant
    and his partner.
54. I recognise that the business provides social and economic benefits. However, as
    it is not clear that he would cease to operate the business if the appeal were
    dismissed, it is also not clear that these benefits would be lost.
55. I do not doubt that the appellant has invested in the business. Of the three criteria
    within Policy LP36, this can only weigh in favour of the third; that the business is
    financially viable. I have accepted this already, and so need not consider the level
    of investment any further.
Conclusion
56. The Framework restricts development outside of settlements and resists isolated
    homes in the countryside, save for defined exceptions. As I have found that the
    appeal scheme does not comprise an exception, I also find that it is in conflict with
    the Framework. I have found no material inconsistency between the Local Plan
    and the Framework for the purposes of the appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008895


57. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
58. The appeal is dismissed.

A Knight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6008895


APPEARANCES

FOR THE APPELLANT:
Mr Bridges                   Agent
Mr Barrett                   Appellant
Miss Oliver                  Appellant’s Partner


FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:
Mrs Barrow                   Planning Department
Miss Su                      Planning Department




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      9
