Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008700
45 Kirkgate, Sherburn in Elmet, North Yorkshire LS25 6BH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs James against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•   The application reference is ZG2025/0968/HPA.
•   The development proposed is 2 storey rear extension and internal reconfiguration.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for 2 storey rear
   extension and internal reconfiguration at 45 Kirkgate, Sherburn in Elmet, North
   Yorkshire LS25 6BH in accordance with the terms of the application, reference
   ZG2025/0968/HPA, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the
   attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr and Mrs James against North Yorkshire
   Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Background and Main Issue
3. During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered,
   any considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally
   changed. I am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard
   to the latest version in reaching my decision.
4. There is no dispute between the parties about the acceptability of the garage
   conversion or the internal alterations to the dwelling. Based on the evidence before
   me I am satisfied that this aspect of the appeal proposal would not cause material
   harm to the character and appearance of the appeal property, and I have not been
   made aware that this element would result in any conflict with any development
   plan policies. Therefore, I have confined my consideration to the proposed rear
   extension.
5. In light of the above, the main issue is the effect of the proposed extension on the
   character and appearance of the property.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008700


Reasons
Character and Appearance
6. The appeal site includes a detached dwelling set within a substantial residential
   plot; the site is screened from the road by an existing front boundary wall and
   mature hedging. The surrounding streetscene comprises an eclectic mix of dwelling
   types, scales and architectural styles, with no single prevailing form of
   development. The original house subject to the appeal was designed in 1965 by
   architect Derek Bottomley as his own residence and occupies the northern part of
   the site, with parking and garage accommodation to the front and extensive garden
   areas to the rear. It is an example of mid-20th century modernist architecture. Its
   form has a strong horizontal emphasis and incorporates extensive glazing to the
   garden elevation. These features are readily apparent in the composition of the
   building and contribute significantly to its architectural identity.
7. The dwelling has an established relationship with the large rear garden through the
   terraces and balcony. Planting along the site boundaries provides a degree of
   screening from neighbouring properties, as such public views into the garden are
   limited.
8. The appeal proposal comprises a two-storey rear extension and a further single-
   storey projection which provides a first-floor balcony above. The extension would
   be located wholly to the rear of the dwelling. The appellant advises that the appeal
   design derives from the original architectural approach of the dwelling, and a review
   of the evidence shows that the extension would continue its strong horizontal
   emphasis and similarly incorporate extensive glazing to the garden elevation. As a
   result, when viewed from the rear garden the proposal would reflect the proportions
   of the current elevation and it would also retain the established relationship
   between the dwelling and its rear garden. Accordingly, the proposal would appear
   as a natural evolution of the original building and would remain consistent with the
   architectural composition, identity and character of the host dwelling.
9. The Council's concerns relate principally to the scale of the proposal and the extent
   to which it would be subordinate to the host dwelling. Whilst the officer report
   identifies the increase in massing and bulk arising from the proposal, I find that the
   evidence before me does not demonstrate that this would result in material harm to
   the character and appearance of the dwelling. I accept that the extension would
   represent a substantial addition. However, whilst subservience can be a relevant
   design consideration, Policy SP19 does not contain a specific requirement for
   extensions to be subservient to the original building. Rather, it seeks high quality
   design that responds positively to character, identity and context. In this respect,
   the proposal has been informed by the architectural character of the host dwelling.
   Its form, materials and extensive glazing would continue the strong horizontal
   emphasis of the existing building. Although, the extension would increase the
   massing of the dwelling when viewed from the rear, the combination of the two-
   storey and single-storey elements would create a layered form that reflects the
   composition of the existing building. As a result, notwithstanding its scale and
   limited degree of subservience, the extension would be successfully integrated into
   the overall design.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008700


10. The proposal would make effective use of the residential curtilage without resulting
    in overdevelopment of the site. From my site visit, I observed that the dwelling
    occupies a generous plot and that the additional built form would not appear
    excessive or overwhelm the original building. The plot is of a sufficient size to
    accommodate the extension comfortably and a substantial rear garden would
    remain. Furthermore, the proposed location of the rear façade would be broadly in
    line with neighbouring properties and the relationship between the dwelling and its
    private outdoor space, which is a key aspect of its design, would also be retained.
    Whilst the overall rearward projection would be relatively deep, the extension would
    be viewed in the context of a generous plot and extensive rear garden.
11. The proposal follows the architectural principles of the existing dwelling and reflects
    the context-led approach advocated by the National Design Guide through the
    continuation of the dwelling’s horizontal emphasis, glazing and relationship with the
    rear garden. These considerations further support my conclusion that the proposal
    can be accommodated within the site without giving rise to wider planning harm.
12. Taking these matters together, I find that the proposal would respect the defining
    architectural characteristics of the dwelling and would appear as a coherent
    continuation of the existing building. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposed
    extension would not harm the character and appearance of the property. As such, it
    accords with Policy SP19 of the Selby District Core Strategy which, amongst other
    things, seeks to promote high quality design that recognises and enhances the
    character and distinctiveness of the locality and is well integrated with its
    surroundings both visually and physically.
Conditions
13. I have considered the conditions having regard to the Framework and Planning
    Practice Guidance. In addition to the standard time limit, plans and materials
    conditions are necessary and reasonable in the interest of certainty.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008700


                                           Schedule of Conditions

1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
       date of this decision.

2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawing nos:

       • 2655NON-SCN-XX-XX- DR- A- 01_003- A3-P1 Proposed Site Plan;
       • 2655NON-SCN-XX-XX- DR- A- 10_003- A3-P1 Proposed Ground Floor Plan;
       • 2655NON-SCN-XX-XX- DR- A- 10_004- A3-P1 Proposed First Floor Plan;
       • 2655NON-SCN-XX-XX- DR- A- 20_003- A3-P1 Proposed North + South
         Elevations;
       • 2655NON- SCN-XX-XX- DR- A- 20_004- A3-P1 Proposed West + East
         Elevations;
       • 2655NON- SCN-XX-XX- DR- A- 01_001- A3-P1 Proposed Location Plan + Site
         Block Plan.

3)     The external surfaces of the extension shall be constructed of the materials
       shown on the approved plans and as specified on the application form.
                                           ** End of Schedule **




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
