Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by Dr Rachael A Bust BSc (Hons) MA MSc LLM PhD MIoL MCMI FGS MIEnvSci MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008290
19 Loughborough Road, Burton On The Wolds LE12 5AF
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Claire Haye against the decision of Charnwood Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is P/25/2103/2.
•    The works proposed were originally described as “the replacement of four existing windows at first-
     floor level, comprising: Front Elevation (First Floor): Two traditional timber sash windows are to be
     replaced on a like-for-like basis. The new units will be constructed from Accoya timber and
     incorporate slimline heritage double-glazed units, maintaining the original appearance and
     proportions. Side Elevation (First Floor): Two non-original outward-opening casement windows are to
     be replaced with new units replicating the existing style and opening configuration. These will also be
     fabricated from Accoya timber. Design and Materials: Joinery: All new windows will replicate the
     existing in terms of joinery detailing, glazing bar profiles, dimensions, and overall proportions.
     Material: Accoya timber, painted finish. Finish: Painted to match the existing external colour scheme.
     Glazing: Slimline double-glazed units with a puttied external finish to closely replicate the
     appearance of traditional.”

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and listed building consent is granted for the replacement of
       2no. side and 2 no. front first floor windows at 19 Loughborough Road, Burton On
       The Wolds, LE12 5AF in accordance with the terms of the application Ref
       P/25/2103/2, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The works authorised by this consent shall begin not later than 3 years from
              the date of this consent.
     2)       The works authorised by this consent shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: proposed windows (front elevation), dated 10
              November 2025; proposed windows (side elevation), dated 10 November
              2025; and drawing dated 10 March 2026 LandVac Glazing cross section.
     3)       No works shall take place until a schedule and methodology detailing the
              removal and installation of the new windows and works of making good have
              been submitted and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              works hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              details.
Preliminary Matters
2.     As the appeal relates to a listed building consent, I have had special regard to
       section 16(2) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       (the Act).
3.     The original detailed description of the works (as set out in the banner heading
       above) contains details of the glazing which were subject to an amendment during

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008290


         the lifetime of the application. As such, I have used the more concise description
         as contained in the Council’s decision notice in the formal decision in paragraph 1.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue in this appeal is whether the proposed works would preserve the
         special architectural and historic interest of the Grade II listed building of No 19
         Loughborough Road.
Reasons
Significance and special interest
5.       No 19 Loughborough Road was listed (at Grade II) in 1984 and according to the
         statutory list entry description1 dates back to the late 16th/early 17th century. It is
         recorded as being a two-storey timber framed structure with a later re-fronted brick
         skin. Formerly two single unit cottages it is now a single cottage with central stack.
6.       The two-storey cottage has a traditional slate roof with a brick chimney. The front
         elevation is finished with a smooth white render and features a timber framed
         porch canopy with pitched slate roof; there are four timber-framed horizontal
         sliding sash windows, two at ground floor and two at first floor, with each panel
         containing six small clear glazed panes and externally painted in light grey. The
         side elevation, adjoining a vehicle access, is similarly finished in a smooth white
         render and contains two timber-framed side-hung, flush casement windows at first
         floor level, also externally painted in light grey. According to the appeal
         submission, these windows on the side elevation were inserted at a later point in
         time.
7.       My observations on site indicate that, following its conversion to a single dwelling,
         the property has undergone some alteration, such as the application of render to
         the building and boundary walls, the insertion or alteration of openings within the
         side elevation and the addition of a rear extension. Nevertheless, historic fabric
         survives, with elements of the timber-frame structure remaining exposed internally
         and externally. Taken together, these factors suggest that the building has
         generally retained its integrity and authenticity as a traditional timber-framed
         dwelling.
8.       Insofar as is relevant to the proposal subject to this appeal, the significance and
         special architectural and historic interest of the listed building is derived, in part,
         from its history and evolution, its timber-frame construction, and the proportions
         and detailing of its traditional timber windows, particularly on the front elevation.
         Collectively, these features define the building's character and special interest as
         an attractive historic dwelling, set back from the road within a varied residential
         streetscape.
Appeal proposal and effects
9.       The existing four, first floor windows are single glazed, and decay is present in
         their timber frames. As such the proposal is to replace four existing windows with
         timber framed windows which incorporates ‘LandVac’ heritage vacuum glazing.



1
    List entry number: 1074596 (formerly listed under Prestwold Road)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6008290


10. Although there are two types of windows (the horizontal sliding sash windows on
    the front elevation and the casement windows on the side elevation) subject to this
    appeal, they share similar design and construction features. Traditional joinery
    has been used in the timber framing, including run-through 20mm-wide glazing
    bars, small clear-glazed panes of 4mm-thick glass, and putty pointing. While the
    windows exhibit a relatively uniform appearance, their traditional design, materials
    and detailing contribute positively to the building’s character, significance and
    special interest.
11. The Council does not dispute the four existing windows proposed for replacement
    are beyond repair. Furthermore, the proposed timber construction together with a
    matching window type and design, would, in principle, be acceptable. The revised
    details showing the use of the ‘LandVac’ glazing system would also satisfactorily
    replicate the traditional appearance of single glazing while improving thermal
    performance. The Council’s remaining concern, therefore, as set out in the Officer
    Report, relates to the details of the proposed glazing bars and glazing beads.
12. The proposed glazing bars would be bonded to both internal and external faces of
    the glazing unit and mechanically jointed into the frames. While this would
    represent a departure from the traditional use of run-through glazing bars, the
    submitted details indicate that a simple chamfered profile and 20mm-wide glazing
    bars would closely replicate the appearance of the existing windows and maintain
    their slimline character.
13. The proposed use of timber glazing beads would also be a departure from the
    traditional linseed putty finish. However, the amended cross section drawing
    dated 10 March 2026 shows a simple flat bead, the angle of which would be
    broadly comparable to traditional putty pointing. Moreover, the four windows are
    relatively small, located at first floor level on a property which is set back from the
    public highway. Due to the construction methods to be used and the proposed
    detailing the changes would only be discernible at close quarters, where they
    could be read as a more modern, but nevertheless sensitive, intervention.
14. It follows that the overall proportions and detailing of the proposed windows would
    be broadly comparable to those of the existing units and as a result they would
    have a neutral effect. Accordingly, in this case, the proposed works would not
    undermine the architectural and historic integrity of the listed building.
15. Given the above, I conclude that the proposed works would preserve the special
    architectural and historic interest of the Grade II listed building of No 19
    Loughborough Road. Therefore, it would satisfy the requirements of the Act.
16. Insofar as relevant, I have had regard to the development plan and Government’s
    National Planning Policy Framework, chapter 16 on conserving and enhancing the
    historic environment in determining the proposal for listed building consent. I find
    no conflict with Policies EV8 (heritage) and DS4 (high quality design) of the
    Charnwood Local Plan 2021-2037 Core Strategy. These policies, seek, amongst
    other things to conserve, protect and enhance heritage assets with designs
    needing to make a positive contribution to respecting and enhancing the character
    of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008290


Conditions
17. I have imposed a condition specifying the time-limit for implementation and as
    broadly suggested by the Council, a condition which sets out the approved plans
    because an amended plan was submitted. These two conditions are necessary
    for certainty. A further condition requiring the submission and approval of the
    details of the proposed works for removing and replacing the windows together
    with details of ‘making-good’ is necessary in the interests of preserving the listed
    building.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

Dr Rachael A Bust
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
