Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by Samuel Watson BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008624
St Vincents Farm Cottages, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1EL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission under section 73A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 for the
    development of land carried out without complying with conditions subject to which a previous
    planning permission was granted.
•   The appeal is made by Vision Residence against the decision of Barnet London Borough Council.
•   The application Ref 25/4961/S73, dated 11 December 2025 , was refused by notice dated 7 April
    2026.
•   The application sought planning permission for demolition of existing 8no. dwellings and ancillary
    buildings and erection of a part single storey, part two storey building to provide 7no dwellings.
    Associated cycle parking, storage, parking and amenity space. Alterations to hard and soft
    landscaping (Amended Description & Site plan) without complying with conditions attached to
    planning permission Ref 16/8115/FUL, dated 1 February 2017.
•   The conditions in dispute are Nos 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13 and 14 which state that:
        1. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the following
             approved plans:
             Proposed Elevations, 1636.04.01 B
             Permitted v Proposed East and West Elevations Overlay
             Permitted v Proposed North and South Elevations Overlay
             Planning Statement Location Plan
        2. Within four months of the date of this decision, photographic evidence shall be submitted to
             and agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority to demonstrate that three rooflights
             have been removed from the western roof slope.
        5. Details approved under planning ref: 17/4788/CON pertaining to condition 6 (refuse) shall be
             implemented in accordance with the details as approved under and retained as such
             thereafter.
        7. Details approved under planning ref: 17/4788/CON pertaining to condition 8 (cycle storage)
             shall be implemented in accordance with the details as approved under and retained as such
             thereafter.
        8. Details approved under planning ref: 18/0470/CON pertaining to condition 10 (subdivision of
             amenity land) shall be implemented in accordance with the details as approved under and
             retained as such thereafter.
        9. Details approved under planning ref: 18/0470/CON pertaining to condition 13 (lighting) shall
             be implemented in accordance with the details as approved under and retained as such
             thereafter.
        11. Details approved under planning ref: 18/0470/CON pertaining to condition 15 (hard and soft
             landscaping) shall be implemented in accordance with the details as approved under and
             retained as such thereafter.
        13. Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with details indicated on plan 1635.03.04
             Rev h. Thereafter, those spaces shall be retained for the parking and turning of vehicles
             only.
        14. Details approved under planning ref: 17/4788/CON pertaining to condition 22 (electric
             vehicle charging) shall be implemented in accordance with the details as approved under
             and retained as such thereafter.
•   The reasons given for the conditions are:
        1. In the interests of certainty, I have attached a condition listing the revised plans. The
             Council's suggested time condition to remove three existing rooflights is necessary and
             reasonable.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008624


           2. It is necessary to reimpose conditions relating to materials, levels, refuse, permitted
              development restrictions, cycle storage, subdivision of amenity land, lighting, biodiversity,
              hard and soft landscaping, boundary treatments, parking and electric vehicle charging to
              ensure these are carried out as per previously approved details. As remedial works are
              required within the appeal site, I have also reimposed a condition relating to tree protection
              to safeguard existing trees.

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.      An application for costs was made by Vision Residence against Barnet London
        Borough Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary and Background Matters
3.      The scheme was originally granted via permission 16/8115/FUL which was
        subsequently amended under permission 24/4904/S73 which was allowed at
        appeal1. Conditions were discharged for the former permission, and these were
        carried over to the latter.
4.      At the time of my visit works had already commenced, but were not completed, on
        the scheme. These works included elements that were not covered by a previous
        permission and so were in breach of conditions. This appeal, which seeks to
        regularise the works, relates to the variation and removal of conditions associated
        with permission 24/4904/S73.
5.      I have been provided with drawings titled Amended Site Plan and Proposed
        Construction Logistics Plan (the PCLP), as well as those numbered 1636.04.01
        rev C and E16-017/EXT301 rev B. The drawing titled Amended Site Plan shows
        changes around the site which I understand are a mixture of as-built and
        proposed. It also shows the internal ground floor layout of each of the seven
        dwellings, I understand that these are as-built. I have not been provided with the
        permitted internal floor plans, but both parties accept the ground floor shown on
        the Amended Site Plan differs from that previously approved. While I cannot be
        certain which units were previously served by stairs, the amended plan shows
        units 1-4, 6 and 7 with staircases leading up. The PCLP shows the appeal site as
        was previously proposed and the roof of the building without any rooflights.
Main Issues
6.      In light of the above, the main issues are:
       • Whether the internal alterations shown on the submitted plans are a matter for
          consideration;
       • If the alterations are for consideration, whether there is sufficient detail for me to
            assess them; and,
       • Whether, in light of the conclusions of the above main issues, Conditions 1, 5, 7, 8,
          9, 11, 13 and 14 should be varied and Condition 2 should be deleted.



1
    Reference: APP/N5090/W/25/3359635


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision 6008624




Reasons
Whether the Internal alterations are a matter for consideration
7.     As noted above the appeal seeks to regularise works in breach of conditions
       attached to permission 24/4904/S73. The appeal is therefore covered by section
       73A; where the original permission stands and only the conditions sought to be
       varied or deleted, as outlined above, are considered. To this end the appellant
       considers that the as-built changes to the internal layout of the units, including the
       provision of staircases, are not part of the scheme before me and so should not be
       considered. Moreover, they submit that the changes do not comprise development
       and so could not be considered.
8.     Section 55(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the Act) identifies that
       the carrying out for the maintenance, improvement or other alteration of any
       building of works which affect only the interior of the building shall not be taken for
       the purposes of this Act to involve development.
9.     The changes to the floor plan of the dwellings only affect the interior of the
       building. However, the exception to ‘development’ in Section 55(2)(a) applies only
       to a completed building on which work was carried out for its maintenance,
       improvement or other alteration. It does not apply to the work involved in
       completing a structure still subject to planning control. Consequently, mindful of
       the context of this appeal, the internal alterations can only be described as
       development.
10. The Amended Site Plan shows these changes, and I have found them to comprise
    development. As such, irrespective of whether the appellant intended for them to
    comprise part of the appeal scheme, they are a matter within the remit of my
    consideration. Consequently, it is necessary for me to consider these.
Whether the Internal alterations can be assessed
11. As noted above, I have not been provided with any first floor plans. The Council’s
    reasons for refusal include concerns as to the quality of living conditions for future
    occupiers stemming from the resultant ceiling heights. However, given the above, I
    cannot ascertain what changes have been carried out. Therefore, and given the
    scant information before me, I cannot assess whether there is a potential for, or
    indeed whether there is any, harm.
Conditions 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13 and 14
12. Above I have found that the Amended Site Plan includes changes that are, for the
    purposes of this appeal, development. I have also found that the details before me
    are insufficient to properly assess the effects of varying Condition 1 to replace
    approved the site plan with the Amended Site Plan. Consequently, varying
    Condition 1 would be unacceptable given the details before me.
13. Nevertheless, even if I were minded to vary the condition, the details before me
    are not sufficient to control the scheme. Also, as with the alterations to the internal
    layout of the ground floor, the formation of a first floor is, in this case, development.
    Therefore, lacking plans of the proposed first floor, any permission arising from this
    scheme would not include the creation of such a floor.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008624


14. The Amended Site Plan and PCLP contain details relevant to vary Conditions 5, 7,
    8, 9, 11, 13 and 14. Given my findings above, it would not be appropriate to vary
    these conditions on the basis of these plan, especially as they conflict with each
    other and the agreed site plan retained under Condition 1. Moreover, I have been
    provided with only very limited details in relation to how these conditions were
    discharged. I therefore cannot be certain as to what the changes would effectively
    bring about or, consequently, be satisfied that these changes would be acceptable.
15. The proposed elevations show 24 rooflights on the western elevation. However,
    these rooflights are not shown on the PCLP, and no plans have been provided
    showing those rooflights previously approved. The plans before me do not,
    therefore, accurately identify which rooflights were conditioned to be removed and,
    moreover, the plans conflict with each other. Therefore, were I to vary condition 1
    and delete Condition 2 to allow for the retention of the rooflights the plans before
    me would not provide sufficient clarity and certainty for the purposes of being
    enforced.
16. Given the above and mindful of my statutory duties, it would also not be possible
    to appropriately assess whether there is a potential, or actual, effect on the
    character and appearance of the surrounding area, including Mill Hill
    Conservation.
Conclusion
17. In conclusion, varying Conditions 1, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, and 14, and deleting
    Condition 2 in line within the amended plans submitted by the appellant would
    result in a scheme that cannot be properly understood or enforced. Moreover,
    doing so would have a potential, which I cannot assess, to result in harms to living
    conditions, character and appearance, and heritage assets.
18. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.

Samuel Watson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
