Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 July 2026
by Simon Rawle BA (Hons) Dip TP Solicitor
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008729
347 Daws Heath Road, Hadleigh, Benfleet, SS7 2UA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Joe Giles against the decision of Castle Point Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0020/FUL.
•    The development is to construct hip-to-gable and front and rear dormer roof extensions.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to construct hip-to-gable
       and front and rear dormer roof extensions at 347 Daws Heath Road, Benfleet, SS7
       2UA in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/0020/FUL subject to
       the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: (22) 11/01 EX01 and (22) 11/01 PL02.
     2)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension shall match those used in the existing building
     3)       The extension hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the first-floor
              window on the left flank elevation as shown on plan number (22) 11/01 PL02
              has been fitted with obscured glazing, and no part of that window that is less
              than 1.7 metres above the floor of the room in which it is installed shall be
              capable of being opened. Details of the type of obscured glazing shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority before
              the window is installed and once installed the obscured glazing shall be
              retained thereafter.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appellant agreed verbally at the application stage to amend the description of
       development from that included on the application form. As the amended
       description represents a more detailed and accurate description of the
       development subject of the appeal, I have largely adopted the amended version
       but have excluded reference to the proposal being part retrospective as that is not
       an act of development. That said I observed at the site visit that the development
       has commenced, and I have determined the appeal on that basis. For the
       avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeal based on the submitted plans.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
       of the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008729


Reasons
4.     The appeal property is located within an established residential area comprising a
       mix of house types including bungalows and two storey dwellings. Many of the
       dwellings have had extensions added and I observed at the site visit that some
       have front, side and rear dormers which are not an uncommon feature. Moreover,
       there is a mix of roof types with both hipped and gable end being evident in the
       street scene.
5.     The appeal site forms part of a row of single storey dwellings that do not have front
       dormers at 335–353 Daws Heath Road (Nos 335-353). However, No 337 has had
       a gable end added and has a different roof form to the attached dwelling at No
       335. No 341 has had a dormer added to the roof slope of its hipped roof.
       Moreover, No 355 has had two flat dormers added to the front roof slope. These
       dwellings and their amended roof profiles form the context of the existing street
       scene.
6.     Although I accept that to a certain extent the appearance of properties on the
       opposite side of the road are different to the properties on the same side as the
       appeal site as many are detached, they nevertheless form part of the same
       streetscene and contribute to the existing character and appearance of the same
       area. Many of these properties have gable ends fronting the road. Also of
       relevance is the two dormers that have been added to the front roof slope of 342
       Daws Heath Road (No 342).
7.     Consequently, there is not a prevailing roof type and dwellings with roof extensions
       are a common feature in the street scene. This mix helps to define the character
       and appearance of the area.
8.     The appeal property itself forms one half of a semi-detached pair of bungalows.
       The development which has commenced involves a change from a hipped to a
       gable end roof. Bearing in mind the existing context set out above this gable end
       element is acceptable and does not unacceptably disrupt the symmetry of the
       existing pair of dwellings. Nor does it harm the character and appearance of the
       area. The same is true of the rear dormer as it would be unobtrusive in the street
       scene.
9.     I observed at the site visit that the two front dormers have not yet been added.
       Although this element would not be set down from the ridge of the roof, it would be
       set in from the new gable end and from the boundary with the attached dwelling
       and set up from the eaves. As a result, these dormers would sit comfortably on the
       roof slope and would appear as a subordinate addition to the host property.
       Moreover, this element would not over dominate either the host property or the
       attached property.
10. Overall, when considered as a total package the development would be
    sympathetic to local character and would not unacceptably harm the character and
    appearance of the area
11. I therefore conclude that the development would not unacceptably harm the
    character and appearance of the area. Consequently, it would accord with Saved
    Policy EC2 of the Castle Point Borough Council Local Plan which among other
    things seek to ensure development will be of a high standard of design will be
    appropriate to its setting and shall not harm the character of its surrounding. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008729


       development would also comply with the relevant parts of the Council’s Residential
       Design Guidance which seeks to ensure that the roof design of any development
       is compatible with the host dwelling and should be informed by the prevailing
       character of the area and surrounding forms of roof development. It also
       emphasises that dormers should be an ancillary feature and not dominate the
       roofscape.
Other Matters
12. The appellant makes the point that due to the concessions available under the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order
    2015, it is possible for extensions to be undertaken at a dwelling, including hipped
    to gable end roof alterations without the need for the specific grant of planning
    permission. It is unclear whether the works already undertaken are authorised or
    not. However, even if they are not, I am unable to conclude, based on the
    available evidence, that any unauthorised development was intentional. As a
    result, the fact that the development has already commenced does not weigh
    against granting planning permission in this case.
Conditions
13. As the development has commenced it is not necessary to impose a standard
    commencement condition. For the avoidance of doubt, it is necessary to ensure
    the development is carried out in accordance with the appeal plans. In the
    interests of the character and appearance of the area it is necessary to ensure the
    development is constructed of appropriate materials. In the interests of protecting
    the living conditions of neighbours it is necessary to impose a condition to ensure
    the upstairs window in the left flank elevation is obscure glazed.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

Simon Rawle
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
