Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 June 2026
by R Standfield BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008646
52 Hugh Road, Coventry CV3 1AD
 • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
   against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 • The appeal is made by Mr Usman Raza of Evita Social Housing against the decision of Coventry
   City Council.
 • The application Ref is PL/2025/0001873/FUL.
 • The development proposed is change of use from a C3 dwelling house to a C4 (HMO) to provide
   supported housing.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was updated 17 August
       2026. Both of the main parties to this appeal have had the opportunity to comment
       in light of the revised document and such comments as were submitted have
       been taken into account accordingly.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
       • the balance of housing provision; and
       • parking provision.
Reasons
Balance of Housing Provision
4.     Hugh Road is an established residential street predominantly comprising
       traditional Victorian terraces with enclosed frontages. The appeal property sits in a
       mid-terraced position and is reflective of, and in keeping with, the character and
       appearance of the area. Submitted plans show that the appeal property is
       configured to comprise a four bedroomed dwelling with lounge, kitchen and
       bathroom. The locality is covered by an Article 4 Direction (2023) which removes
       permitted development rights for the conversion of dwellings (Use Class C3) into
       small Homes in Multiple Occupation (HMO) (Use Class C4).
5.     The Council’s Homes in Multiple Occupation (HMO) Development Plan Document
       (DPD) (2025) supports the assessment of all new HMOs that require planning
       permission. It provides policies recognising that HMOs make an important
       contribution to housing choice but can have significant impacts on existing

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008646


       communities including parking pressures, noise, management of waste and
       recycling and anti-social behaviour.
6.     In order to manage the balance of HMOs within communities, Policy HMO2 of the
       DPD identifies a maximum of 10% concentration of HMOs, measured within a
       100m radius of a proposed site. Methodology for how the percentage should be
       calculated is set out within the DPD. This threshold represents a tipping point,
       beyond which negative impacts to residential amenity and character are likely to
       be experienced alongside reduced housing choice and the erosion of community
       cohesion.
7.     The main parties disagree regarding the concentration of HMOs applicable to the
       appeal site however neither party have provided detailed evidence to support their
       position. The officer’s delegated report notes an existing HMO concentration of
       19% of dwellings within 100m of the site (based upon licensing and Council Tax
       information) whereas the appellant (using licensing and available mapping data)
       indicates that there is not an oversupply and confirms that the proposed
       development would not contribute to a sandwiching of non-HMO dwellings. I am
       not provided with any further information in order to ascertain the correct position.
8.     From the minimal evidence submitted, I am not convinced it has been adequately
       demonstrated that the proposed development would not contribute to a harmful
       concentration of HMO uses. Whilst the activity levels associated with the property
       would likely remain within expected parameters for a four-bedroomed dwelling, it
       would not address the specific nature of HMO characteristics identified above that
       have necessitated the policy constraint.
9.     The description of development identifies the proposal as specifically for
       supported accommodation and the appellant is a social housing provider who
       advises that the support being provided to the residents would mitigate the
       potential for noise nuisance and general disturbance however there is minimal
       compelling evidence before me to support this view.
10. For the reasons given above, the proposed development would not support an
    appropriate balance of housing provision and therefore would conflict with DPD
    Policy HMO2 which seeks to preserve character, amenity and community
    cohesion.
11. The Council have also included Policy H11 of the Coventry City Council Local
    Plan (2017) (the Local Plan) in their reason for refusal, which specifically relates
    to purpose built HMOs or conversions to large HMOs. Given the proposal is for a
    small HMO I do not consider this policy determinative in this case.
Parking Provision
12. Parking in this part of Hugh Road is mainly on street with no restrictions. At the
    time of my site visit, during early afternoon on a weekday, there were few
    available spaces. The ability for the street to accommodate the increased parking
    requirement from 2 to 3 spaces is limited and there is minimal provision for cycle
    storage at the site.
13. I note that supported accommodation may have significantly lower levels of car
    ownership with a greater reliance on public transport, support staff and
    community-based services. I observed that local services and facilities including a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008646


       medium sized supermarket, post office and chemist as well as bus services are
       available on Humber Road, within easy walking distance of the site. These
       opportunities would enable residents to make a proportion of daily trips without
       use of a private car so that a reduced parking provision in relation to residents
       may be feasible. The appellant also notes that there are controlled parking zones
       nearby although minimal information has been provided on the location of these.
14. However, it does not necessarily follow that there should be a reduced parking
    requirement for the property on this basis. Dependent upon the level and nature of
    support being received, there would be a number of visitors to the 4 residents in
    addition to normal patterns of HMO occupation. A lack of suitable parking
    provision could result in vehicles being parked in an inappropriate manner leading
    to obstructions on the highway that could be hazardous for motorists and
    pedestrians. In the absence of detailed information relating to existing parking
    patterns and capacity and the proposed management of the HMO with typical
    care arrangements, I have minimal evidence before me to adequately
    demonstrate that the proposed development would not have a harmful effect on
    highway safety and residential amenity resulting from lack of sufficient parking
    availability.
15. Accordingly, the proposal has not adequately demonstrated the ability to provide
    sufficient parking and would be harmful to highway safety. The proposal would not
    comply with Policy AC3 of the Local Plan which requires parking provision to be in
    accordance with published standards.
Other Matters
16. The appellant outlines that the proposal would meet minimum space standards
    with adequate light and ventilation, and there would be no adverse effect on
    character and appearance or living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. The
    appellant also contends that the appeal property would be a managed supported
    HMO, with residents assigned support workers, receiving supervision, being
    vetted and monitored, and living in a low-impact domestic environment. Minimal
    information has been provided on how this would operate in practice. These
    matters do not alter my findings on the main issues above.
17. The appeal submission references the omission of detailed information within the
    Council’s officer delegated report and the reasons for refusal and claims failure to
    comply with the former paragraph 131 of the NPPF and the “positive planning”
    requirement now established in NPPF Policy DM3. Notwithstanding the noted
    absence of detailed information, this is not a matter for my resolution within the
    context of this appeal.
Planning Balance
18. The proposal would fail to meet requirements for an appropriate balance of
    housing provision to preserve character, amenity and community cohesion and
    has failed to adequately demonstrate suitable parking provision. The proposal
    therefore conflicts with the development plan, taken as a whole. Planning law
    requires applications for planning permission to be determined in accordance with
    the development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
19. Policy S3 of the NPPF sets out a presumption in favour of development and
    Policy S4 clarifies that development proposals within settlements should be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008646


       approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
       any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies
       in the NPPF.
20. Policy H07 of the NPPF states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs
    assessments prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other
    relevant evidence. I have had regard to the appellants statement of case, which
    sets out that the proposal would contribute towards reducing homelessness,
    support vulnerable residents, increase housing mix and make effective use of
    existing housing stock. Reference has also been made to the Council’s Strategic
    Statement for Supported Exempt Accommodation although the document itself
    has not been provided. Whilst acknowledging the role of supported housing
    provision, I am not provided with robust evidence of the express need for the
    proposed development which reduces the weight that I can afford this benefit.
21. The proposed accommodation would conflict with other policies of the NPPF,
    including P3 in respect of living conditions and TR6 4 relating to the impact upon
    highway safety which are broadly consistent with the development plan in this
    respect. For the reasons given above, I consider that these policy conflicts would
    result in very substantial harm.
22. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the NPPF. As such, Policy S4 of the NPPF does not point to
    permission being granted in this instance.
Conclusion
23. In the final balance, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of
    sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to
    all other matters raised, including the NPPF, the appeal should be dismissed.



R Standfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
