Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by Paul Thompson DipTRP MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 08 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008160
Land between 191 and 243 Nottingham Road, Selston, Nottingham NG16 6BT
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Stones Sankey Developments Ltd against the decision of Ashfield District
       Council.
•      The application Ref is V/2025/0464.
•      The development proposed is described as major outline planning application for some matters
       reserved for 42 dwellings.


Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.       An application for costs has been made by Stones Sankey Developments Ltd
         against Ashfield District Council and is subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.       The appellant’s Appeal Statement refers to documents that were not submitted
         with the appeal. These were a new Biodiversity Net Gain Report (Elton Ecology,
         2026) and the Elton Ecology Preliminary Ecological Appraisal Version 3, which
         were respectively replacements for the application documents, dated 2025 and
         noted as Version 1. I subsequently requested these documents to consider them
         against the ‘Holborn Principles’1, which set out substantive and procedural tests for
         whether late evidence should be accepted as part of an appeal. However, the
         appellant’s agent confirmed that the appeal should be determined on the basis of
         the documents submitted to, and considered by, the Council at the application
         stage. I have therefore determined the appeal on that basis.
4.       The National Planning Policy Framework was revised on 17 August 2026 (the
         Framework). The main parties have had the opportunity to comment on the
         relevance of any revised content of the Framework, and I have had regard to any
         responses received in my decision.
Main Issues
5.       The planning application was submitted in outline with all matters reserved except
         for access, layout and scale. I have treated each element of the submitted
         drawings as indicative where they relate to appearance and landscaping when

1
    Established in Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008160


       considering the likely impact of the proposal on the matters set out in the following
       main issues:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
           •    the impact of the proposal on protected species and their habitats, including
                through any effects to the Selston Common Grassland Local Wildlife Site;
           •    whether the proposal would provide safe and suitable access to the site for
                all users;
           •    whether the proposal could be made safe from flooding throughout its
                lifetime without increasing risk elsewhere, having regard to the proposed
                Sustainable Drainage System;
           •    the effect of the proposal on archaeological remains within the site; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on the significance of other Non-Designated
                Heritage Assets, through development within their setting(s).
Reasons
Character and Appearance
6.     The appeal site is a wedge of land situated amongst residential development in
       Selston and has a direct frontage with Nottingham Road. The watercourse that
       runs through the centre, and the landscaping alongside it, effectively divide the site
       in two and the land either side falls to meet it. The higher part of the site, to the
       north of the watercourse, is within the Selston Common Grassland Local Wildlife
       Site. The perimeters of the site are also marked by hedgerow and other planting.
7.     The homes to the south side of Nottingham Road differ markedly in form, scale
       and appearance. However, there is generally more consistency to the pairs of
       homes found to either side of the site and to the north in Holly Hill Road and
       neighbouring streets. The homes in Nottingham Road have a varied relationship
       with the street, and the plot sizes differ significantly, many incorporate front and
       rear gardens, with frontage parking. There are also instances of predominantly
       hard landscaped frontages, including on the same side of the road, either side of
       the site. The pairs of homes to the west of the site in Nottingham Road and north
       in Holly Hill Road, and neighbouring streets, respectively incorporate consistently
       sized plots and gardens with hedgerows. Parking is either on-street or in-plot
       alongside gardens, which are particularly generous in Holly Hill Road.
8.     The proposed homes in the northern half of the site would be closely spaced like
       those to the south, but most plots would be significantly smaller, with shorter rear
       gardens. This aspect of the development would therefore appear cramped in
       comparison to the spacious arrangement of homes in Holly Hill Road. In contrast,
       the presence and linear arrangement of homes along the site’s frontage with
       Nottingham Road would reflect the pattern of housing to the west. It would also be
       separated from the carriageway by landscaping, so this part of the development
       would not appear out of place within its context. Despite this, the layout of the
       northern half of the site would fail to reflect the prevailing characteristics of the plot
       sizes of neighbouring development, so the proposal would stand out as a visually
       harmful addition within its context.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008160


9.       The entrance into the development would be marked by triple perpendicular
         parking spaces on either side at the front of plots 12 and 36. Meanwhile, in the
         northern half of the site, the dominance of parking means that plots 14 to 35 would
         contain very few opportunities for planting. I appreciate that frontage parking is a
         feature of some houses nearby, and parking fronting onto Nottingham Road
         reflects this pattern. Some parking areas could also, to some extent, be screened
         by planting. Nevertheless, parking is not consistently the predominant feature
         within nearby streets, so its magnitude and extent within the development would
         visually degrade the arrival spaces, and the quality of the street environments that
         would be created. Consequently, as greater emphasis is given to accommodating
         vehicle parking rather than placemaking, this results in a consistent and significant
         weakness in the design of the proposed layout, which would result in parking being
         a prominent and visually intrusive aspect of the development.
10. Native hedgerows could be utilised to create a transition from rear boundaries of
    neighbouring properties to the open space in the northwest of the site, but it would
    remain inaccessible as part of the development. The other area of open space
    would be sandwiched between the rear boundaries of plots over the watercourse
    and adjoin the parking area and side boundary of Plot 33. Given their locations,
    and the limited size of the latter space, it is unclear how both areas would function
    as open space. The inclusion of open space in this manner is therefore unlikely to
    contribute in any meaningful way, so would amount to a further aspect of the
    development that would materially reduce the quality of the proposed layout.
11. The layout of homes either side of the main route between the north and south
    sections of the site shows large areas of garden alongside the carriageway,
    including into the buffer zone either side of the watercourse. Conventional wall or
    fence enclosures could result in a bland and imposing route at the heart of the
    development. However, the consistent approach to external boundaries of gardens
    in Holly Hill Road and neighbouring streets demonstrates that this could be
    satisfactorily addressed through landscaping at Reserved Matters and a scheme
    of boundary enclosures. I also have no doubt that it would be possible for the
    appearance of the proposed homes to be reflective of the character of the area.
12. Despite my positive findings in relation to aspects of the proposal, this would not
    address the main concerns that I have identified regarding how the proposal would
    be inconsistent with the prevailing character, and the overall quality of the
    residential environment that would be created. The proposal would therefore have
    a significant adverse effect on the character and appearance of the area. Hence, it
    would conflict with ALPR2 Policy HG5, which indicates residential development will
    be permitted where, amongst other things, its design is acceptable in terms of its
    siting. This would also result in conflict with ALPR Policy ST1, which indicates that
    development will be permitted where, amongst other considerations, it does not
    adversely affect the character or quality of the environment. For similar reasons,
    the proposal would also fail to meet the key principles of the Framework’s design
    policies DP3.1 and DP3.2, as it would not respond to its context, so that it
    integrates with and enhances its surroundings; and it would not create a visually
    attractive, distinctive and characterful development to establish or maintain a
    strong sense of place. It would also conflict with Framework Policy TR4 given that
    the transport considerations of the proposal would not be integral to its design to
    contribute to creating a well-designed place.
2
    Ashfield Local Plan Review, Adopted November 2002.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6008160


13. I have not found conflict in relation to ALPR Policies EV2 and EV4, as these relate
    to development in the countryside and in Mature Landscape Areas, and there is no
    indication that the site is situated within either of those areas.
Protected Species and Habitats
14. The Selston Common Grassland Local Wildlife Site (LWS), to the north of the site,
    comprises lowland acid grassland, with wet flushes. South of the watercourse, the
    land is assessed as being Modified Grassland.
15. The Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (PEA) and Biodiversity Net Gain Report
    (BNGR) were both based on a scheme of 18 homes, with development confined to
    the southern part of the site, with land solely for biodiversity enhancements to the
    north. The current proposal for 42 homes, and its submitted layout, do not reflect
    those assumptions. The areas of enhanced and retained habitats do not therefore
    correspond with the Baseline Habitat Retention Plan or the Proposed Habitat Plan
    in the BNGR.
16. The scheme of mitigation would include areas of open space which could be
    planted as wildflower meadows or a Grassland Management Plan utilised to
    maximise retention of existing grassland habitat. However, given the size of the
    areas identified, the potential use for drainage purposes, and the enclosure of one
    entirely by gardens, it is unclear how effective these would be. They would also not
    lead to the level of enhancement originally envisaged in the PEA and BNGR. In
    addition, landscaping is reserved for future consideration and some trees along the
    watercourse could remain, but the layout shows that many of the other existing
    features of the site’s habitat would be unlikely to remain alongside the
    development, particularly those to the site’s northern half.
17. While just under half of the proposed homes would be situated outside the LWS,
    gardens on either side of the watercourse would extend right up to it. It is unclear
    how parts of the numerous subdivided gardens of these properties could constitute
    a buffer and offer protection from development or enhancement of the biodiversity
    and habitat around the watercourse. It is also unlikely that subsequent controls
    could be maintained, in the long term, to retain wetland planting along the
    watercourse in gardens. This reduces the extent to which the removal of horses
    grazing within the site could reasonably be regarded as a long-term benefit.
18. Although a Construction Environmental Management Plan could minimise the
    effects of construction on the site and neighbouring Holly Hill Selston LWS, the
    PEA has identified that further surveys are required for otter, water vole and
    roosting bats. This is due to the watercourse and numerous trees within the site
    forming suitable habitat. As such, I cannot be certain that the proposal would not
    have a harmful effect on the habitat of protected species.
19. On this basis, the application and appeal have not been supported by sufficient
    information to enable me to conclude other than that the proposal would have a
    substantially adverse impact on protected species and their habitat, notably
    through the loss of the Selston Common Grassland LWS. Hence, it would conflict
    with the nature conservation aims of ALPR Policy EV6 and the protection afforded
    to the natural environment by ALPR Policy ST1.
20. The proposal would also conflict with Framework Policy N2, as this expects
    development to minimise any adverse impact on biodiversity, and the harm I have

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008160


         identified has not been avoided, adequately mitigated or compensated for. Equally,
         Framework Policy N6(1), states development proposals affecting LWS should only
         be supported if the benefits of development in the location proposed clearly
         outweigh the likely impact on the features which make the site valuable for nature
         conservation. In this case, the absence of evidence regarding the identified
         matters means such a conclusion cannot be reached.
Highways
21. The evidence before me indicates that Nottingham Road is a very busy route
    through the district. While I appreciate it was a snapshot in time, during my site
    visit I observed a steady flow of traffic in either direction.
22. Both iterations of the appellant’s Planning Statement3 (PS) refer to a transport
    assessment and travel plan. Neither are included in the documents submitted with
    the application, and they do not form part of the appeal submission. Nevertheless,
    the latest PS indicates that the proposed visibility splays are determined based on
    the Nottinghamshire Highway Design Guide (NHDG, 2021). The NHDG explains
    that, among other things, the Stopping Sight Distance (SSD) for streets inform the
    length of a visibility splay. The proposed splay for the adopted road is set at 43m.
    This corresponds to a road with a speed of 30mph, which Nottingham Road is
    restricted to, in both directions. Despite this, as the road is long and relatively
    straight next to the site, and rises beyond Annesley Lane, it is reasonable to
    assume that vehicles may be travelling above this limit. Accurate data for vehicle
    speeds is therefore justified to inform the SSD.
23. The NHDG states for existing streets, the measured 85th percentile wet weather
    speed should be used to determine the SSD. It is unclear whether the visibility
    splays for the main access were informed by a vehicle speed survey for each
    direction of travel, following the advice in the NHDG. Furthermore, the proposal
    does not include details of the visibility splay for the private drive with a direct
    access to Nottingham Road, proposed to serve several plots.
24. The NHDG also indicates that no more than five properties should be served from
    a private drive, but the layout plan is clear which roads are to be adopted. This of
    itself would therefore not make such a proposition unacceptable. However, turning
    heads are required for all private drives and none are shown to be provided
    throughout the development, with no explanation as to why this is the case.
    Similarly, the proposed layout shows private drives on either side of the adopted
    road, next to the main access, which would create a crossroads. The visibility from
    these drives has not been assessed, particularly as to whether their position would
    be effective or what visibility splays may be required. There is therefore a
    significant risk that these aspects of the proposal would result in conflict between
    road users manoeuvring in and out of the private drives and others in the
    development, notably those entering from or exiting to Nottingham Road.
25. The number of parking spaces appears to reflect the minimum standards outlined
    in the Council’s SPD4. However, given the scale of the layout plan and the
    absence of other worked up drawings relating to the site’s layout, it is unclear
    whether the required spaces could be accommodated at 2.5m by 5.5m for all plots.


3
    February 2022 and September 2025.
4
    Residential Car Parking Standards Supplementary Planning Document (November 2014).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               5
Appeal Decision 6008160


       The lack of clarity in this regard could result in inadequately sized spaces and
       parking displaced elsewhere.
26. Accordingly, taking a precautionary approach, planning conditions would not be an
    appropriate mechanism to resolve concerns regarding the provision of safe access
    arrangements for users of the development and the highway network. Such
    matters could impact on the principle of the proposed development, and the layout
    is fixed by the outline planning permission. Hence, alternate arrangements could
    not be made at Reserved Matters, and it would not be appropriate for this appeal
    to secure alterations to the design through conditions, when the outcome could
    affect the scheme which interested parties have been consulted on.
27. Due to the nature of the issues referred to above, I cannot be certain that the
    proposal would provide safe and suitable access to the site for all users. Hence, it
    would be contrary to ALPR Policy ST1 and the aim of Framework Policy TR6,
    regarding its unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Flood Risk
28. The site is situated within Flood Zone 1, but surface water management is required
    by virtue of its extent. The Council’s concern, informed by consultation with the
    Lead Local Flood Authority, is that there is insufficient detail regarding the
    proposed surface water drainage scheme for the site to inform consideration of the
    risks of flooding. Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) are designed to control
    surface water runoff onsite, often through a combination of built and nature-based
    techniques to closely resemble natural drainage. This also accounts for predicted
    impacts of climate change and urban creep from development.
29. If SuDS are to be effective, the layout and function of drainage systems need to be
    considered at the start of the design process to ensure that the layout of buildings,
    parking, footways and roads are integrated. Given that the application for outline
    planning permission includes consideration of access, layout and scale of the
    development, those are aspects of the development that are fixed and before me.
    It is therefore difficult to understand why the Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) states
    that a detailed site investigation and testing will be undertaken at the design stage
    to determine whether SuDS will be suitable for the disposal of surface water
    drainage on the site.
30. The FRA outlines the existing Greenfield runoff rate, the amount of storage
    required to accommodate runoff from the development, and the types of drainage
    features that could be employed, before outflow to the watercourse. However, it
    does not demonstrate how the drainage hierarchy has been followed, nor does it
    clearly identify a drainage strategy for the site based on that hierarchy. The
    absence of a strategy leaves doubt as to where and how surface water would be
    stored and conveyed to the watercourse in a manner that would be integrated with
    built forms and changes in surfacing. Equally, any SuDS scheme needs to reflect
    the topography and geology of the site, particularly how the topography varies
    either side of the watercourse. In the absence of detailed SuDS scheme, there is
    also insufficient evidence regarding how runoff from the completed development
    would be prevented from leading to flooding elsewhere, and how the SuDS
    scheme would be maintained for the lifetime of the development.
31. In conclusion, it has not been satisfactorily demonstrated that the proposal could
    be made safe from flooding throughout its lifetime without increasing risk

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008160


       elsewhere, having regard to the proposed SuDS. Hence, the proposal would be
       contrary to ALPR Policy ST1, in so far as it relates to avoiding adverse effects of
       development on the safety of the environment. There would also be conflict with
       the aims regarding ensuring development is safe from flooding and SuDS outlined
       in Framework Policies F7 and F8.
Archaeology
32. As explained in Framework Policy HE5(5), where a development proposal
    involves, or has the potential to involve, a heritage asset with archaeological
    interest, there is an expectation that an appropriate desk-based assessment (DBA)
    should be undertaken and, where necessary, a field evaluation. The preparation of
    a DBA and consultation with the Nottinghamshire Historic Environment Record
    (HER), is therefore the minimum expected to inform the understanding of the
    archaeological potential of the site, including whether it could impact on the
    principle of the proposed development.
33. The evidence before me indicates HER provides little to inform consideration of
    the archaeological potential of the site, other than a prehistoric polished stone axe
    found at Selston Common, a short distance away. Nevertheless, the Council
    advises that rivers and streams, such as the one that crosses through the site, are
    focal points for prehistoric activity; and the absence of any development in the
    postmedieval period means that, if archaeological remains are present, they could
    be well preserved. This is not contested by the appellant, and no explanation has
    been provided as to why a Written Scheme of Investigation (WSI) was prepared
    for geophysical survey of the site, but was not carried out. Accordingly, taking a
    precautionary approach, the limited evidence in the HER relating to the site would
    not, on the information available, provide sufficient justification for a DBA or WSI to
    be agreed by planning conditions.
34. Consequently, given the absence of evidence to the contrary, I cannot conclude
    that the proposal would not have a harmful effect on archaeological remains within
    the site, and the proposal would conflict with Framework Policy HE5. As I cannot
    be certain that archaeological remains within the site would not constitute a Non-
    Designated Heritage Asset (NDHA), the proposal could directly or indirectly harm
    the significance of a NDHA. In such circumstances, Framework Policy HE7(2)
    requires any harm to a NDHA to be weighed against the benefits of the proposal,
    and a balanced judgement made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss
    and the significance of the NDHA. I return to this in the Planning Balance, where I
    set out my conclusion in relation to the Framework.
Other Heritage Assets
35. The Council has identified three other NDHAs it considers would be affected by
    the proposal. There is limited information before me regarding the significance of
    these assets, but I have been able to form my own conclusions based on what I
    have seen and read.
36. The first of these assets is on the opposite side of Nottingham Road at Nos 224
    and 226 and comprises a two-storey pair of brick cottages. The front of No 226
    has a two-storey gable to the left side, beside which is the gabled first-floor window
    of No 224. Windows at first floor are sat partly beneath the eaves level, which
    overhangs with modest detailing off its tiled roof. The door of No 226 is to the side
    whereas, it is to the front of No 224 and is embellished with recessed brick

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008160


       detailing and a gabled canopy over. Most windows on the pair are marked by
       stone sills and simple brick arches. As far as it is relevant to this appeal, despite
       being extended to the rear in non-matching brickwork, the building remains of
       moderate significance, given its modest detailing and late 19th Century origins.
37. The cottages also draw significance from their surroundings, including their
    gardens and the views available out over the undeveloped site. However, the
    setting of the cottages has already evolved with nearby houses, including those on
    them. The retained hedgerow and frontages of the proposed homes in the site
    would also provide sufficient separation between the cottages and new homes to
    ensure that the proposal would not have a detrimental effect on the significance of
    the cottages as a NDHA, through development within their setting.
38. The second asset is at 240 Nottingham Road and is referred to as The White Lion
    Public House but is now in use as a restaurant. The building is of two-storeys and
    T-shaped, with its principal gable perpendicular to the road and a wider gable
    parallel with it. The eaves of this extend below that of the principal gable and the
    roadside slope has two very different dormers. One is tall and gabled and the other
    is small and flat-roofed. Although the building retains its roof form, prominent
    chimney stacks to its gable ends and banding between floors, it has been
    extended and altered to a significant extent, particularly with new windows and a
    flat-roofed extension away from the road. Accordingly, as far as it relates to this
    appeal, it too only holds moderate significance, and draws significance from its
    surroundings. This is in its relationship with its own open grounds and those that
    are more expansive opposite, but its parking area detracts from its setting. As it is
    situated around a bend and on a rising section of Nottingham Road, and there are
    numerous buildings between them, there would be very limited intervisibility
    between them. Consequently, the site does not contribute to the significance or
    understanding of the building and its development would not harm this.
39. The final NDHA is the Old Turnpike Toll Road, which is formed of Nottingham
    Road to the south and Annesley Lane to the east of the site. Roads within the
    vicinity of the site have historically, and evidently more recently, been the focus for
    development over time. As such, they have become urbanised, including through
    footpaths to either side and street lighting. Despite the undeveloped nature of the
    site and its enclosure by a hedgerow, this would not set the site apart from this
    context to mean that further development of it would harm the significance of this
    asset as a key historic routeway.
40. For the reasons outlined above, the proposal would not have a harmful effect on
    the significance of other NDHAs, through development within their settings. Thus,
    it would accord, in this respect, with the requirements of Framework Policy HE7.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
41. Framework Policy S4.1 states development proposals within settlements should
    be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    in the Framework. However, before undertaking this overall balance, I need to
    make the balanced judgement required by Framework Policy HE7.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6008160


Stated Benefits of the Proposal
42. The Council is currently able to demonstrate 4.39 years of deliverable housing
    land supply. This shortfall is not considerable and there is no evidence before me
    that the Council is not going to be able to address the shortfall in the short term.
    However, the Framework seeks to substantially increase the supply of homes, with
    an appropriate mix of accommodation. The proposal would deliver 42 homes, with
    a mix of 2-, 3-, and 4-bedroom homes, so these would represent social benefits of
    significant weight.
43. The proposed homes could be constructed of environmentally sustainable
    materials and components; and could meet Building Regulations requirements in
    relation to energy use and insulation. In the absence of any reference to relevant
    policies or guidance with measurable standards, and based on the very limited
    information before me, I can only conclude that the proposal would be capable of
    promoting high standards of sustainability and energy efficiency in the proposed
    homes. However, as the full details of these are not yet known, I afford these
    environmental and social benefits moderate weight.
44. The proposal would be sustainably located in relation to services and facilities,
    including nearby shops and schools; and there are employment uses nearby. The
    availability of public transport would equally provide access to other settlements.
    There would also be short-term economic benefits brought about by direct
    employment, and use of suppliers and providers, during the construction phase;
    and in the longer-term associated with spend from occupiers of the development.
    I afford these benefits moderate weight in favour of the proposal.
45. While the appellant has indicated a willingness to enter into a legal agreement with
    the Council and Nottinghamshire County Council, the draft agreement before me
    has not been finalised, signed and sealed. Hence, I am only able to afford very
    limited weight to the notion of the provision of eight affordable homes and
    contributions towards the provision of bus services, and NHS and secondary
    education infrastructure in the district. Equally, the information before me for the
    agreement excludes provision of pedestrian improvements to Nottingham Road.
46. The harm caused through the loss of the LWS has not been justified or mitigated,
    so the land could not reasonably be described as vacant or underutilised, nor does
    the evidence demonstrate that the proposal would amount to better or more
    effective use of it, as referred to in Framework Policy L2. Equally, Framework
    Policy L3 seeks to achieve appropriately higher densities, where these can be
    achieved alongside securing well-designed and attractive places. My findings
    regarding the site layout demonstrate that this proposal would not achieve this
    aim, so it would not represent an efficient use of land in the terms of that policy.
    Furthermore, the Biodiversity Net Gain calculated for the site has been based on
    layout of the site not incorporating homes to the north of the watercourse. As such,
    these factors do not amount to benefits of the proposal.
47. The proposal would not have a harmful effect on the significance of other NDHAs.
    Furthermore, although the final details of the appearance of the scheme have not
    been worked up, it should be possible to design the development to avoid harm to
    the living conditions of existing and future occupiers of neighbouring homes and
    those within the site. However, as these would all represent absences of harm,
    they would neither weigh for nor against the proposal. Equally, because I have


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6008160


       found conflict with Framework Policies F7 and F8 on flood risk and SuDS, the
       proposal would also fail to meet Framework Policy CC3, which draws these
       matters together in seeking to minimise the vulnerability of development to climate
       change. As such, CC3 cannot be relied on as weighing in favour of the proposal,
       contrary to the appellant’s case.
       Balanced Judgement in Relation to Archaeology as a NDHA
48. There would be a range of benefits associated with the proposal, including some
    of significant and moderate weight. However, the appeal is not supported by the
    evidence necessary to determine the extent or significance of any potential
    archaeological remains within the site, and if there would be any harm or loss
    caused through the proposal. Accordingly, a precautionary approach is the most
    appropriate way forward. In making the balanced judgement required to possible
    archaeological remains as a potential NDHA, I consider that the benefits of the
    proposal would not outweigh the potential harm. Consequently, the proposal would
    conflict with Framework Policy HE7.
       Balance for Framework Policies S3 and S4
49. The adverse effects of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area,
    highway safety, and protected species and habitats (biodiversity), are all of such
    magnitude that, in accordance with Framework Policy S4, failure to comply with
    the relevant national decision-making policies means that the proposal should be
    refused. In addition, the harms in relation to flood risk and potential archaeological
    remains within the site would also be significant, as any potential effects have not
    been satisfactorily demonstrated. The weight I have afforded the stated benefits
    above ranges from significant to moderate, to very limited. Collectively, the
    adverse effects outlined in the main issues, and summarised here, would be
    sufficiently wide-ranging and of such magnitude and importance that they would
    substantially outweigh those benefits.
       Final Balance and Conclusion
50. The appeal scheme would not accord with the development plan, when considered
    as a whole, and there are no other relevant material considerations, including the
    provisions of the Framework, that indicate the proposal should be determined
    otherwise than in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly, for the
    reasons given, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Paul Thompson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
