Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by P Brennan BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008337
4 Whurley Way, Maidenhead SL6 7SS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Riaz Hussain against the decision of Royal Borough of Windsor and
     Maidenhead.
•    The application Ref is 26/00052.
•    The development proposed is a part single, part two storey side/rear extension to create 1no. two-
     bedroom dwelling, 2no. drop kerbs and associated parking and landscaping. (Self-Build).

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The description of development used in the heading above is different to that
      applied for which sought planning permission for ‘conversion of approved
      extension into a separate two-bedroom dwelling’. As the extension has not been
      constructed, planning permission is required for the building and its use. I am
      therefore satisfied that the Council’s decision notice correctly describes the
      proposed development and that description is used above.
3.    An Energy Assessment has been submitted as part of the appeal. The Council has
      provided comments on the document within its evidence. I am satisfied that
      accepting the information would not cause procedural unfairness to interested
      parties and as such, I have taken it into consideration.
4.    The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
      in August 2026. The parties have been provided with the opportunity to comment
      on the implications of the revisions to their cases. I have taken account of the
      revised Framework, and any comments made, in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issues
5.    The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the area;
           •    whether the proposal would result in acceptable living conditions for future
                occupiers, with regards to outdoor garden space and privacy; and




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008337


           •    whether adequate information has been submitted to demonstrate that the
                proposal can deliver the requirements and commitments towards climate
                change and whether this would be delivered by an appropriate mechanism.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.    Number 4 Whurley Way (No.4) is a two-storey, semi-detached dwelling located in
      a prominent corner position on a bend near to the entrance into Whurley Way. The
      appeal property has an existing single storey side extension. Due to the curvature
      of the road, the plot has a larger proportion of garden land to its side than the other
      properties in Whurley Way. Also, due to its prominent position, the rear and side
      elevations of No4 are highly visible from the public realm.
7.    The area is characterised by two-storey, semi-detached houses and maisonettes
      which have seen limited alteration. Front gardens generally comprise grass,
      hardstanding or a combination of the two, forming a largely open plan setting for
      housing. The appeal property, close to the entrance to Whurley Way, with limited
      alterations, makes a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the
      area.
8.    The proposal would involve an extension to the side of the semi-detached property
      extending into the rear garden, forming a separate dwelling. The extension’s north
      (rear) and east (side adjacent to garden of No.4) facing elevations would be blank
      with no windows. The first-floor element of the new dwelling has also been
      recessed. These design features, while designed to mitigate adverse effects on
      neighbour’s living conditions, result in a form of development that would be
      discordant to the existing street scene.
9.    Although the proposed extension would be subservient to the host dwelling, the
      combination of roof lines on the proposed development at ground and first floor,
      combined with the absence of windows, lead to an incongruous and visually
      discordant development. The absence of windows on the rear elevation results in
      a blank façade, at odds with its residential use. Its highly visible and prominent
      corner position would compound the proposal’s incongruity and visual discordance
      with the existing dwelling, pair of semi-detached properties and the wider
      residential area.
10. Consequently, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the appeal site and the wider area. Accordingly, the
    proposal fails to accord with Policy QP3 of the Royal Borough of Windsor and
    Maidenhead Borough Local Plan 2013-2033 (BLP). This policy seeks high-quality
    design that, amongst other matters, respects and enhances the local environment
    with regard to urban grain, layout, rhythm, density, height, scale, bulk, massing
    and proportions. The proposed development would also fail to accord with the
    requirements of the Borough Wide Design Guide Supplementary Planning
    Document 2020 (SPD).
External space
11. The proposed development would split the existing rear, front and side garden
    areas between the existing and the additional dwelling. Approximately 66sq.m of
    the existing north-facing rear garden would remain for use of No.4, in compliance


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008337


      with the SPD. The new dwelling would have a garden area of around 52.48sq.m
      which would fall marginally below the SPD requirement of 55sq.m.
12. Furthermore, the sole private garden area would be provided only to the front and
    side of the proposed dwelling and would be adjacent to the highway. A 1m wall
    and 1.8m Hornbeam hedge would be provided as boundary treatment. A 0.6m
    brick wall would separate the garden area from the front path and neighbouring car
    parking area. However, soft landscaping is not a reliable or permanent means of
    providing screening and ensuring privacy of the garden area for future occupiers
    and, in any event, would take some years to reach maturity.
13. The garden area would be visible to passing pedestrians and motorists and by the
    adjacent neighbours at No.4 and Number 2 Whurley Way. As such, the proposed
    0.6m wall adjacent to the entrance to the new dwelling would not provide adequate
    screening to the private garden area. Whilst planning conditions could address the
    means of enclosure, this would fail to address the proposed size or suitability of
    the private garden area’s location.
14. Consequently, the proposed development would fail to deliver sufficient or
    appropriate private external space to provide acceptable living conditions for future
    occupiers. Accordingly, the proposal fails to accord with Policy QP3 of the BLP.
    This policy seeks high-quality design that, amongst other matters, provides
    sufficient levels of high quality private and public amenity space. The proposed
    development would also fail to accord with the requirements of the SPD.
Climate change
15. Policy SP2 of the BLP requires all proposed development to demonstrate how they
    have been designed to incorporate measures to adapt to, and mitigate, climate
    change. This also includes a list of measures that are required to be incorporated.
    The accompanying Sustainability Supplementary Planning Document (July 2024)
    (SSPD) identifies that applications should be supported by a Sustainability and
    Energy Statement, as required by the Council’s local validation checklist, and
    details the specifics required to be within the Statement. This includes, amongst
    other things, a detailed energy assessment (EA).
16. An EA requires the submission of several energy and carbon dioxide calculations
    to show both on-site reductions and if necessary, the remainder of carbon
    emissions to be achieved via a carbon offset payment to meet net zero carbon
    requirements.
17. The appeal evidence before me includes an EA which identifies that the proposal
    is for a net-zero dwelling. Passive measures, high efficiency ventilation and lighting
    and renewable sources including an air source heat pump and Solar PV are
    proposed within the development but are not detailed on the submitted plans.
    However, the EA fails to address all the requirements of the SSPD as information
    regarding how overheating would be mitigated and how the cooling hierarchy has
    been implemented has not been included.
18. Whilst I note that this information could be secured through a planning condition,
    the proposal is not supported by a legal agreement to secure a performance
    review clause relating to carbon emissions post construction, and a subsequent
    carbon off-set contribution, if necessary.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008337


19. As planning conditions cannot secure financial contributions, and with no legal
    mechanism before me to secure any carbon off set that may be required following
    post construction review, the proposed development fails to accord with Policies
    SP2 and EP1 of the BLP. The proposal would also fail to comply with the
    accompanying SSPD. These policies seek, amongst other matters, for
    development proposals to conserve and enhance environmental quality whilst
    adapting to and mitigating climate change.
Other Matters
      Fallback
20. Planning permission has previously been granted for a two-storey side extension
    and single storey rear extension. Whilst this is a material consideration in the
    assessment of the proposal, for significant weight to be afforded to the fallback
    position there needs not only to be a real possibility of it being carried out, but it
    would also need to be equally or more harmful than the appeal scheme.
21. There appears to be a clear possibility that the extension could be built if no further
    consent is given. The previous scheme was approved on the basis that it did not
    result in any identified harm, including to the character and appearance of the
    area, and complied with the Council’s policies. Whereas the proposed scheme
    includes blank elevations and awkward roof forms which result in harm to the
    character and appearance of the area, alongside increased on-site parking
    requirements and forms of enclosure. As a result, the approved scheme is not
    regarded as equally or more harmful than the proposed development.
    Consequently, the fallback scheme is attributed limited weight in favour of the
    proposal.
      Similar development
22. The appellant has drawn my attention to similar developments at 35 Edinburgh
    Road and 39 Gloucester Road. Whilst the developments both comprised a two-
    storey dwelling on a corner plot, these were designed to logically provide an
    additional dwelling to the terrace. Neither scheme appears to have required
    alterations to a consistent roof line to address access to light and the development
    at 35 Edinburgh Road has a rear private garden that did not require the enclosure
    of the corner or amenity space that was wholly adjacent to the highway. I do
    however acknowledge that the development at 39 Gloucester Road has no private
    garden space, with only the front garden on the corner available, but this
    undoubtedly creates a compromised private garden and therefore does not
    provide strong support for the proposal. Also, both schemes were determined prior
    to the adoption of the BLP and subsequent Design SPD and were therefore
    assessed under a different policy context. Consequently, there is no direct
    comparison to be made between these that weighs strongly in the appeal’s favour.
      Self-build
23. The proposal refers to the development being for self-build. However, no
    information is provided to indicate that the proposed dwelling meets the
    requirements for a self-build plot. These include that the initial owner of the home
    has had primary input into its design and layout, confirmation of the appellant’s
    inclusion on the Council’s self-build register and how the proposal qualifies as a
    self or custom build dwelling. Furthermore, no legal mechanism is before me to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008337


      secure the proposal and its subsequent occupation as a self-build dwelling.
      Consequently, I attach limited weight to this matter.
      Biodiversity Net Gain
24. Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is required under a statutory framework introduced by
    Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as inserted by Schedule
    14 of the Environment Act 2021). Under the statutory framework for BNG, subject
    to some exceptions, every grant of planning permission is deemed to have been
    granted subject to the condition that the biodiversity gain objective is met. One of
    the exemptions from BNG for applications made prior to 6 August 2026 is that the
    development is for self-build housing. In the absence of a planning obligation to
    secure the development as a self-build dwelling, the exemption relating to self-
    build for applications would not apply.
25. A further exemption relates to onsite priority habitat and that less than 25sq.m and
    less than 5 linear metres of habitat would be affected. As the proposal would not
    impact onsite priority habitat and would involve less than 25sq.m and 5 linear
    metres of habitat with a biodiversity value greater than zero; the proposed
    development would be exempt from BNG under the de minimis exemption.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
26. I have concluded above that the proposal would conflict with Policies EP1, SP2
    and QP3 of the BLP and this conflict attracts significant weight. Therefore, despite
    the benefits of the proposal relating to the delivery of a new dwelling, it would
    conflict with the development plan when taken as a whole. Applications for
    planning permission, under planning law, are to be determined in accordance with
    the development plan, unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
27. The Framework at policy H07, requires substantial weight to be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. This is especially pertinent in a district
    where the Council is not meeting its required 5-year supply of housing land, such
    as in this case with a provision of only 4.04 years (as of 10 March 2026) and
    where the Council has not met the Housing Delivery Test.
28. Furthermore, Policy S03 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. Policy S04, for development within a settlement, states
    that such development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
29. The appeal site is within a settlement, and the proposal would provide one
    dwelling. The site is within walking distance of bus routes and a train station that
    would provide access to the centre of Maidenhead. These sustainable locational
    benefits of the site are consistent with the Framework which seeks development to
    support sustainable patterns of movement, enabling good accessibility for different
    users and make the most of existing and proposed transport infrastructure, which
    weigh in favour of the scheme.
30. Nonetheless, the proposal would not be consistent with the overall street scene as
    I have determined that the proposal would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area, in conflict with policy L2(1)(d)(i) of the Framework. The


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008337


      scheme would also create poor living standards for future occupiers, in terms of
      external amenity space and privacy, as sought by the Framework’s policy
      L2(1)(d)(ii).
31. The proposal also fails to address overheating, in conflict with policy CC3(1)(d)
    and DP3(2)(b) of the Framework.
32. In this instance, the benefits of the proposed development, would be substantially
    outweighed by the identified adverse effects of the proposal, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. As
    such the presumption in favour of sustainable development would not apply.
    Accordingly, the identified conflict with the development plan would not be
    outweighed by the material considerations.
33. For the reasons given above the appeal is, therefore, dismissed.



P Brennan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
