Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by AJ Sutton BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008115
The Barn (opposite Lansdowne House), Fordingbridge SP6 3BX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against a refusal
     to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Robert Wilson against the decision of New Forest District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/10858.
•    The development proposed is change of use of agricultural barn in to dwelling house; part demolition of stables;
     demolition of pole barn; associated parking & landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published during this
       appeal process. The main parties have been invited to comment on this matter and
       responses to this have been considered in this decision.
3.     The Council’s reasons for refusing planning permission in this case included that mitigation
       for the adverse impacts, as a result of recreational pressures, on the protected habitats of the
       Dorset Heaths and New Forest had not been secured and therefore likely significant adverse
       effects could not be ruled out. This would also be the case for other protected habitats if
       nutrient neutrality could not be secured. The appellant, through this appeal, has submitted a
       legal agreement to secure financial contributions towards mitigations strategies adopted to
       address the harms from recreation and other pressures. A Grampian style condition is also
       suggested to ensure nutrient neutrality. As the Council appears generally satisfied with this
       approach, I will address this evidence in the ‘Other Matters’ section below.
4.     There is some dispute about the lawfulness of the existing building at the appeal site.
       Regarding this, the evidence shows that permission was granted on appeal in 2014 for a
       barn. While the description on that decision notice is for an open sided barn, submitted plans
       associated with that permission shows a sizeable traditional barn with one double door on
       both the north and south, and otherwise enclosed elevations.
5.     Further plans were submitted in support of a prior approval application in 2020 and the
       Council found that prior approval was not required in that case subject to the changes to the
       permitted barn being in accordance with the submitted details. Those details showed a largely
       enclosed barn, and the proposed changes included adding brick to the elevations and three
       more openings; two at the upper floor level and one single door on the north elevation.
       However, the simple traditional form of the agricultural building permitted in 2014 was shown
       as largely unchanged.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008115


6.     I observed on site that the existing barn is a traditional form and is in keeping with the
       submitted plans in this regard. It also has largely solid brick clad elevations, again generally
       consistent with detail that the Council found did not require prior approval. The header brick
       details do not however match that shown on drawings submitted in support of the prior
       approval application. The existing openings also differ to that shown on the 2014 and 2020
       plans. In my view these discrepancies seem detail matters that do not go to the heart of what
       was permitted in 2014 and approved in 2020; that is, a traditional barn. Moreover,
       noncompliance with approved plans is a matter between the Council and the appellant.
Main Issues
7.     The main issues in this case are:
           •    Whether the appeal site would be a suitable location for residential development,
                having regard to local spatial policy; and
           •    The effect of the proposal on the character of the area.
Reasons
Location
8.     The appeal site is a plot of land along a rural lane. It is near another barn and there are some
       scattered dwellings on the opposite side of the lane. However, although its address
       references Fordingbridge, that settlement is some distance to the north and separated from
       the appeal site by a significant swathe of countryside. The other notable settlement in this
       vicinity is Aldershot, but that too is divided from the appeal site by a good amount of farmland.
       Largely surrounded by paddocks and woodland with development sparse in this setting the
       appeal site does not form part of a settlement and is therefore in open countryside.
9.     The planning history indicates that the existing building at the appeal site is for agricultural
       use and the proposal would convert this to a residential unit. This proposal does would not
       satisfy any of the exceptions for residential development in the countryside as set out in
       Policy DM20 of the New Forest District (outside the National Park) Local Plan Part 2: Sites
       and Development Management (Local Plan Part 2), and this development would conflict with
       this spatial policy in this regard.
10. I therefore find that the appeal site would not be a suitable location for residential
    development, having regard to local spatial policy. In this respect the proposal would conflict
    with Policy DM20 of the Local Plan Part 2.
Character
11. The appeal site hosts a barn, small stable block and pole barn and as already described is in
    a rural setting. The site is part of a wider yard that includes a couple of access tracks leading
    to paddocks. The only other significant structure in this yard is a large open barn. Although
    there are existing dwellings on this section of the lane, these are well spaced and on the
    opposite side of the lane to the appeal site. Other development is largely limited to a
    farmstead some distance south and, unlike the appeal site, set back from the lane.
12. The barn, subject of this appeal, is located close to site accesses and even with some
    vegetation at its boundary it is highly visible particular when travelling northwards along this
    lane. The two gated accesses provide glimpsed views of hard standing around the existing
    buildings at the appeal site and wider yard, and of the adjacent paddocks which are flanked
    by woodland. With these features the appeal site has a distinct rural character reflective of its


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008115


       agricultural and equestrian uses and the traditional shape of the barn is in keeping with this
       countryside aesthetic and other farm buildings in this rural setting.
13. In terms of the character of the wider landscape setting, in additional to sparse built form and
    relatively undeveloped grazing land, other positive features including hedges along the lane
    and some woodland. I saw that these features contribute positively to the natural beauty of
    this part of the countryside.
14. Turning to the proposed scheme, the appellant highlights that there would be no change to
    the mass of the barn and indeed a reduction in built form on the site with the demolition of the
    pole barn. However, comparing the plans for the existing barn and the proposed footprint of
    the dwelling, in my judgement, there would be an increase in the footprint of this built form as
    a result of the development. That said, this would appear a modest increase to the size of the
    permitted building. Also, the proposal would maintain the traditional barn shape.
15. Be this as it may, significant new windows are proposed at the upper floor level under this
    scheme, some of which would be floor to ceiling in height and therefore sizeable and
    domestic in quality. At the ground floor level there would also be new openings on three
    elevations, some of which would be patio door style more commonly seen in suburban
    dwellings. Even with vertical louvres at the upper floor windows, wood cladding and with a
    simple garden layout to be conditioned, the overtly domestic features proposed would be
    clearly apparent and incongruous in a site which is otherwise agricultural in character.
    Although the traditional form would still be apparent, a significant increase in fenestration,
    particularly at the upper floor, and its pattern and styling would be an insensitive addition to
    the approved simplicity of this permitted barn.
16. This discordancy would be amplified by the forming of a residential plot with a significant
    parking and turning space at the front of the property and other hardstanding around the barn
    covered in lawn; cumulatively the finished property would not appear out of keeping in a
    suburban residential estate. With the detail described, the scheme would fail to achieve
    minimal and subtle change through imaginative design as sought in local design guidance for
    rural conversions.
17. The plot size may be modest compared to existing dwellings in the wider area. However,
    proportionate to the existing structure at the site it would be sizeable and the submitted plan
    shows an island of residential development which would be poorly integrated with the
    retained parts of the yard and its wider surrounds. This would be a significant encroachment
    of residential development in this largely undeveloped countryside setting. The harmful
    erosion of the prevailing rural character would be localised, but it would nevertheless be
    significant for the reasons stated.
18. The Inspector in granting the 2014 permission at the appeal site found that the appearance of
    the barn acceptable in terms of character. But as outlined above, under this scheme, that
    existing building would be changed considerably such that it would no longer have the
    appearance of a standard agricultural building that my colleague found visually acceptable in
    this location. This matter has not altered my findings for this reason.
19. Consequently, I find that the proposal would have a significant harmful visual effect on the
    character of the area. In this regard the proposal would conflict with Policies ENV3, ENV4,
    STR1 and STR3 of the New Forest Local Plan Part 1: Planning Strategy for the New Forest
    outside of the National Park (Local Plan Part 1) and Policy DM20 of the Local Plan Part 2.
    These Policies collectively, amongst other matters, require that all development should
    achieve high-quality design that contributes positively to local distinctiveness.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008115


Other Matters and Planning Balance
20. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in accordance
    with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. The new
    Framework states that development plan policies which are materially inconsistent with
    national decision-making policies should be given very limited weight.
21. Addressing the consistency of local policies most relevant in this case, Policy DM20 of the
    Local Plan Part 2 limits residential development in the countryside. However, the exemptions
    for such development are somewhat more restrictive to that set out in national decision-
    making policy S5. Moreover, the Council’s housing land supply is chronically low at just 1.53
    years suggesting that the local spatial strategy of the current development plan (of which
    Policy DM20 forms part of) is not effective in delivering an adequate supply of homes in the
    district. This factor is further evidenced by the district’s score in the latest published Housing
    Delivery Test:2025 Measurement which is a woeful 48%. This points to the local spatial
    strategy of the current development plan failing. In light of this and with the level of
    inconsistency with national policy outlined, local Policy DM20 should attract very limited
    weight in this case.
22. Policy STR1 of the Local Plan Part 1, in keeping with the Framework seeks sustainable
    development. It also, along with Policy ENV3 of the Local Plan Part 1 requires high-quality
    design which appears largely in line with national decision-making policies for well-designed
    places. Policy ENV4 of the Local Plan Part 1 seeks to retain landscape features and
    characteristics through sensitive design, and to successfully integrate new development into
    the local landscape. I find this to be generally in keeping with national decision-making policy
    N2 in terms of considering environmental qualities including landscape character. These local
    policies are not materially inconsistent with policies of the Framework for this reason.
23. Policy STR3 of the Local Plan Part 1 sets out a strategy to locate and direct new development
    in accessible locations and again this largely accords with new national policy. This local
    policy also sets out the primary objectives to conserve and enhance the countryside which
    appears somewhat broadbrush and lacking the more nuanced Framework policies which now
    require consideration of the natural beauty of the countryside and identify opportunities for
    those qualities to be conserved. This factor reduces the weight that should be given to this
    local policy in my view.
24. Regarding other matters material in this case, policy S5 of the Framework states that only
    certain forms of development should be approved outside settlements. This includes at S5(1)
    c the reuse of an existing building provided that it is of permanent and substantial
    construction. As outlined the existing building is a brick clad structure with a solid roof; it
    appeared permanent and substantial in this regard.
25. Turning to other requirements of this category of the national policy, the proposed footprint of
    the residential unit appears larger than the plan indicated as being associated with the 2014
    permission. However, as established, this is only by a modest amount such that the increase
    would not appear disproportionate in size compared to the existing building.
26. For the above reasons, the proposal would in my judgement be a form of development set out
    in S5(1) c. This national decision-making policy sets out other requirements, including at
    S5(3) the approach that should be taken for proposals comprising isolated homes. For the
    purposes of this policy, that is those lying outside settlements or groups of houses.
27. In this case it has been established that the appeal site is not in a settlement. While there are
    dwellings in the wider area, as already described they are on the opposite side of the lane,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008115


       and the only structures near the appeal site is a barn and stables; the development would
       therefore not be in a group of houses. Court judgments that predate this Framework but
       nonetheless clarify the meaning of ‘isolated’ in the phrase isolated homes in the countryside,
       indicate it connotes dwelling physically separated or remote from a settlement. The appeal
       site may not be remote from buildings, but it is from any meaningful settlement and isolated in
       this regard in my judgement. In any event, in the terms outlined in national decision-making
       policies S5(3) this would be an isolated home such that national decision-making policy HO11
       is relevant.
28. National decision-making policy HO11 states that isolated homes in the countryside should
    only be supported in the circumstances set out in this policy; which include, at HO11(1) c the
    reuse of a redundant or disused building. At the time of the site visit the building was being
    used for storage; it was neither redundant nor disused. However, even if I accept that it was
    disused, policy HO11(1) c goes on to require that the development enhances its immediate
    setting.
29. Dealing with this, as outlined above the appeal site currently appears as part of the yard
    hosting buildings for agricultural and equestrian uses; its appearance is very much in keeping
    with the prevailing rural character. This proposal would considerably alter not only the
    appearance of the building, but its immediate setting would be changed to an overtly
    domestic style that would neither be sensitive to the current appearance of the site or the
    rural character that strongly defines this locale. In turn this proposal would fail to enhance its
    immediate setting. The development would therefore not match this circumstance or indeed
    any of the others stated in policy HO11(1) and consequently this proposal would conflict with
    this national decision-making policy.
30. With regards other factors to weigh in the balance, as the insensitive design would not
    respond positively to its context in terms of character and features of the site and its setting
    such that it would fail to integrate with its surroundings, the proposal would be at odds with
    national decision-making policy DP3(1) which seeks well-designed places.
31. Also, in terms of other matters relevant to well-designed places, as a distinctly rural location,
    even though there are settlements nearby, they are small and have limited local services.
    Public transport options also seem very limited and a lane without pavements or streetlights
    along most its length is unappealing to pedestrians. Future occupants of the dwelling would
    therefore be largely dependent on the car to access a reasonable range of services safely.
    This would be contrary with the national decision-making policy DP3(2) d which priorities
    walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport. Moreover, even if I accept that there is a
    constrained land supply in the district, I am not persuaded that there are not more sustainable
    locations than this with regards transport choices. This fact has not altered my finding on this
    matter for this reason.
32. The proposal would not create a well-designed place as required by policy DPS3(1) and (2)
    for these reasons. The Framework states that proposals should be refused if they conflict with
    these aspects of this national policy.
33. Regarding benefits, the proposal would result in one new dwelling and while this would be a
    small contribution, it would nonetheless be a significant benefit in a district with a critically low
    housing land supply. No compelling information is advanced that the type of housing
    proposed in this case would contribute to meeting evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community. Be this as it may, I attach considerable weight to the benefit of a net gain in
    dwellings in light of the dire local housing land supply and the objective of national policy to
    support the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes. However, I am


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008115


       unconvinced that this benefit could not be achieved by an alternative scheme that is more
       visually sensitive to the character of the appeal site and its setting. This factor limits the
       weight that the net gain in units attracts in this decision.
34. As covered above, it is asserted that the building is disused, but I found this not to be the
    case on the site visit. Moreover, the site did not appear degraded or derelict, and nor did the
    land seem underutilised. The substantial weight afforded by national decision-making policy
    L2 does not apply in this case. It is suggested that the removal of the pole barn would be a
    benefit, but although this is a rudimentary open structure, it is agricultural in character and
    largely screened such that I attached little weight to this as a benefit. Landscaping could be
    improved by condition, but the benefit of this would be nullified by the poor design and
    harmful visual change in character. I give this very limited weight accordingly. Low carbon
    features could be secured by condition. This would be a small benefit given the scale of the
    development.
35. Set against these limited benefits, the proposal would not satisfy any of the circumstances set
    out in national decision-making policy HO11 for an isolated home in the countryside, and
    there would be conflict with policy S5(3) in this regard. The proposal would not be well-
    designed for the reasons stated and would be inconsistent with Policy DP3(1) and (2) d in this
    respect; there appears no clear justification for this in evidence and as set out in the
    Framework such proposals should be refused. Consequently, I find that the limited benefits
    identified would be substantially outweighed by the stated adverse effects (including
    character of the countryside and location), and when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework the proposal should be refused. Material considerations do
    not indicate a decision otherwise than in accordance with the development plan in this case.
36. As outlined in the preliminary section of this decision, this appeal site is in the zone of
    influence of protected habitats and with a net gain in dwellings, likely significant adverse
    effects cannot be ruled out in this case. The appellant sought to address the Council’s original
    reason for refusing permission related to this matter during the appeal process; a legal
    agreement was submitted which would have secured suitable mitigation approved by Natural
    England. The appellant also appears willing to accept the suggested condition regarding
    nutrient neutrality. However, as I have found other reasons for dismissing this appeal it is not
    necessary to deal with the matter further.
37. Attention is drawn to Policy DM21 of the Local Plan Part 2. However, this deals with
    agricultural and forest worker dwellings which is not relevant in this appeal.
       Conclusion
38. I find, for the reasons outlined above, having regard to the development plan and other
    material considerations, including the Framework, the appeal should be dismissed.



AJ Sutton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
