Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 June 2026
by L Clark BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008899
80 Wellington Road, Wealdstone, Harrow HA3 5SE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Kush Haria of Wellington London Ltd against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Harrow.
•    The application Ref is PL/2904/25.
•    The development proposed is single and two-storey side extension; rear dormer; one rooflight in front
     roof slope; external alterations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have amended the description of development in the banner heading to that used
       on the decision notice and that by the appellant on their appeal form. This is a more
       accurate description of the proposed development than that given on the application
       form and ensures that it accurately captures the scope of the proposal.
3.     The Council recently adopted the Harrow Local Plan 2021-2041 (the Local Plan) in
       March 2026. This supersedes, amongst other matters, the Harrow Core Strategy
       (2021) and Harrow Development Management Policies Local Plan (2013) which the
       Council relied upon in its assessment. The Council have provided a list of policies
       from the Local Plan it now relies upon. The main parties have had an opportunity to
       comment and, as such, I have proceeded on the basis of the updated plan and
       policies contained within it.
4.     There are discrepancies within the evidence with regard to the risk of surface water.
       The appellant describes the appeal site (No 80) as being within low to medium risk of
       surface water flooding, while the Council describes the site as being in high to
       medium risk. Both parties' comments contend the level of risk is based on the
       available flood mapping; however, the appellant's Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) is
       dated 5 November 2025, while the Council’s consultee comments from its
       Infrastructure/Drainage department are dated 27 January 2026. Without any updated
       mapping from the appellant, I have based my assessment on No 80 being located
       within surface water flood zones high to medium, this being the most up-to-date.
5.     The proposal is for a single and two-storey side extension; rear dormer; one rooflight
       in the front roof slope and external alterations. The Council has indicated that it has
       no objections to the ground floor element of the proposal in isolation and, based on
       the evidence, I have no reason to take a different view. The dispute between the
       parties with regard to refusal reason 1 therefore relates to the proposed two-storey
       side extension and dormer, and these shall be the focus of my assessment. The
       Council has also indicated that it has no objection to the two-storey rear extension

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008899


         (outrigger) with regard to refusal reason 2, and therefore the proposed two-storey
         side extension and dormer shall be the focus of my assessment in this regard.
Main Issues
6.       The main issues in this appeal are:
              •    whether there are suitable measures to manage flood risk;
              •    the effect of the proposed two-storey extension and dormer on the character
                   and appearance of the host property and surrounding area; and,
              •    whether the proposed two-storey side extension and dormer would provide
                   adequate living conditions for existing occupants of 80 and 82 Cecil Road,
                   with particular regard to outlook and sense of enclosure from within the
                   outdoor amenity area.
Reasons
Flood Risk
7.       I have found above that the appeal property (No 80) is located within an area of
         high to medium risk of surface water flooding. There is no dispute that it is also
         located in a Critical Drainage Area.
8.       Policy CN3 criteria B. of the London Borough of Harrow Local Plan 2021-2041
         (2026) (Local Plan) sets out that development requiring a Flood Risk Assessment
         (FRA), in line with National Policy, must demonstrate that the development is
         resistant to, and resilient to, all relevant sources of flooding, including surface water.
         It goes on to state that the design and layout of the proposal should, amongst other
         things, minimise the risk of flooding on site and not increase the risk of flooding
         elsewhere, wherever possible, reduce flood risk overall, and make appropriate
         provision for flood risk reduction and mitigation and not increase the risk or
         consequences of flooding. Furthermore, Policy CN4 of the Local Plan requires
         development to make adequate provision for the control and reduction of surface
         water runoff.
9.       The appellant submitted an FRA1 alongside their planning application which, in
         paragraph 4.2, describes site-specific considerations. In paragraph 5, it describes
         the proposal as not involving any extension and/or redevelopment of the existing
         dwelling and therefore not increasing the total area of impermeable surfaces.
         However, the proposal would extend the dwelling to the flank elevation and the rear
         and would therefore increase the area of impermeable surface. Notwithstanding
         this, the appellant has recommended a number of mitigation measures which
         include, amongst other matters, the incorporation of Sustainable Drainage Systems,
         the installation of water collection devices and permeable materials where feasible.
10. The Council contend that whilst an FRA has been submitted, it is absent of
    information relating to flood data and compensatory flood storage details. The
    Planning Practice Guidance2 (PPG) states that the objectives of a site-specific FRA
    are to establish, amongst other matters, whether a proposed development is likely
    to be affected by current or future flooding from any source; whether it will increase

1
    Paragraph 5
2
    Flood risk and coastal change - Paragraph: 020 Reference ID: 7-020-20220825


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decision 6008899


         flood risk elsewhere; and whether the measures proposed to deal with these effects
         and risks are appropriate.
11. I note that the PPG3 confirms that minor development, such as that proposed, is
    unlikely to raise significant flood risk issues. However, it also states that even minor
    developments can affect flood risk within or beyond the property, particularly in
    areas susceptible to flooding, and that applications for minor development involving
    extensions or additions should still meet the requirements to provide a site-specific
    flood risk assessment as per footnote 63 of the National Planning Policy Framework
    (the Framework).
12. Paragraph 181 of the Framework sets out that development will only be allowed in
    areas at risk of flooding where, in the light of a site-specific FRA, it can be
    demonstrated, amongst other matters, that b) the development is appropriately
    flood-resistant and resilient such that, in the event of a flood, it could be quickly
    brought back into use without significant refurbishment; and c) it incorporates
    sustainable drainage systems, unless there is clear evidence that this would be
    inappropriate.
13. I am mindful that the PPG sets out that a pragmatic approach should be taken to
    the scope and level of detail of the assessment, however, as a minimum, the site-
    specific FRA needs to show that the development will be safe for its users for the
    intended lifetime of the development without increasing flood risk elsewhere, and be
    sufficiently flood resistant and resilient to the level and nature of the flood risk.
14. Whilst the FRA does suggest a number of mitigation measures, it omits any detail
    with regard to specific flood data. Without anything to quantify the extent of current
    surface water flooding in the area, there is little to establish whether the mitigation
    suggested would be sufficient, or whether such mitigation could be accommodated
    on site.
15. I have nevertheless considered the appellant's suggestion of a condition to secure
    such measures; however, even if it’s likely that existing occupants could use the
    remaining property if the proposed extension were subjected to surface water
    flooding, without details of current flooding I cannot be certain that the proposed
    extension would not increase the flood risk elsewhere. I also cannot be certain that
    the proposed mitigation measures could be achieved on site. Therefore, I am not
    satisfied that the use of a condition would be reasonable in this case.
16. From the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated that
    the proposal would be acceptable with regard to flood risk. It follows that the
    proposal conflicts with policies CN3 and CN4 of the Local Plan, which collectively
    seek to make adequate provision for surface water, minimise the risk of flooding on
    site and not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere.
17. There would also be conflict with the Framework which seeks, amongst other
    matters, that development is appropriately flood-resistant and resilient, and flood
    risk is not increased elsewhere.
Character and appearance
18. Policy GR1 of the Local Plan seeks to ensure, amongst other matters, that all
    development must achieve a high standard of design and layout that respects the
3
    Paragraph: 051 Reference ID: 7-051-20220825


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6008899


       character and context of the locality. Policy GR1 also acknowledges that to ensure
       the most efficient and optimal use of land, proposals must take a design-led
       approach by, amongst other matters, responding appropriately to the local context in
       terms of bulk, massing, footprint, building line, scale and existing design
       characteristics.
19. Policy D3 of the London Plan (2021) seeks to ensure that development takes a
    design-led approach which, amongst other matters, enhances local context by
    delivering buildings that positively respond to local distinctiveness through their scale
    and shape, having due regard to forms and proportions.
20. No 80 comprises an end-terrace dwelling with a single-storey rear extension and
    rear dormer, located within a predominantly residential area. Its plot is irregular in its
    shape compared to the remainder of the terrace, with the rear of the site significantly
    wider than the front. This the Council describes as being a wedge-shaped site. I saw
    that Wellington Road has a slight bend within it, approximately at the point where the
    rear boundary of 78 Cecil Road (No 78) and the front boundary of No 80 meet. This
    results in the front elevation of No 80 and its immediate neighbours on Wellington
    Road being set at a slight angle to the road. The position of No 80 within the street
    provides an important visual break between it and properties on Cecil Road. Its
    relationship also broadly reflects that of No 75 opposite and properties on Cecil Road
    and therefore the visual break is the predominant characteristic of this end of the
    street.
21. The Council has drawn my attention to its Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)
    on Residential Design (2010), specifically paragraphs 6.54-6.56. It sets out that on
    wedge-shaped sites first-floor and two-storey side extensions are unacceptable and
    recommends that extensions to corner or end house sites be designed to be parallel
    to the existing house.
22. While the proposed two-storey side extension would be set back from the main front
    elevation, the eaves line to the front would be set approximately 0.7 metres higher
    than those of the main dwelling. It would also be built almost up to the approximate
    line of the shared boundary with Cecil Road and would fill nearly all of the current
    gap between the flank elevation and the rear boundary with properties on Cecil
    Road. The proposed dormer would provide a third floor of accommodation and would
    utilise the roof space of the proposed side extension and that of the two-storey rear
    extension.
23. The appellant does not dispute that the proposed side extension and its position
    alongside the splayed boundary has the potential to create a dominant trait within the
    streetscene but contends that its impact would be mitigated by the proposed
    extension maintaining a similar height to that of the host dwelling.
24. Whilst the setback would aid the side extension to appear subordinate, this would
    only occur, in my mind, when standing directly in front of No 80. Moreover, even if
    the profile of the proposed flank elevation would be similar to that of the current
    dwelling, the flank elevation would project significantly closer to the shared boundary
    than currently, enveloping the gap between it and properties on Cecil Road. The two-
    storey extension and dormer would appear unsympathetic to the scale and
    proportion of other properties within the terrace and would be at odds with the
    predominant characteristic of the street.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008899


25. Furthermore, the clear difference in eaves line would accentuate the proposed
    extension in appearing as a discordant addition not only to No 80, but also the
    remainder of the terrace. The difference in eaves line to the front would be
    discernible within the street and would accentuate the proposed extensions as an
    incongruous feature alongside the host dwelling.
26. The appellant contends, amongst other things, that there is a variety of roof profiles
    and extensions of varying depths, but does not direct my attention to any specific
    examples. I saw that the property opposite (No 75), whilst slightly different in its
    design, it did appear to have a similar relationship with other properties in Cecil
    Road. Whilst No 75 had accommodation to the side of the main dwelling, this was in
    the form of a single storey. I also saw that the properties on the opposite side of
    Wellington Street, at approximately 72 and 74 Cecil Road, had dormers to the rear.
    Whilst visible within the streetscene, the orientation of these properties is different to
    that of No 80, as the dormers appeared above the main dwelling and were not over
    an extension.
27. The Council has not identified any harm in respect of the design and appearance of
    the proposed ground floor element in isolation. Therefore, even if the proposed
    extension would utilise materials similar to the host property, together these factors
    would not outweigh the identified harm arising from the proposed two-storey side
    and rear extension.
28. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would cause harm to the
    character and appearance of the host property and the surrounding area.
    Consequently, it would be contrary to Policies D3(D1) and D(11) of the London Plan
    2021 and Policy GR1 of the Local Plan, which collectively seek to ensure
    development is of a high standard of design that respects the character and context
    of the locality. There would also be conflict with the SPD with regard to wedge-
    shaped sites and with the Framework which seeks, amongst other things, that
    development is well designed.

Living conditions
29. Policy GR1 criteria C of the Local Plan relates to residential amenity and seeks,
    amongst other matters, that proposals should safeguard the amenity for existing
    occupiers in relation to outlook and users within its context.
30. Currently, the flank elevation of No 80 is set off from the shared boundary of several
    properties on Cecil Road. The proposed side extension and dormer would infill the
    current gap and would be built almost up to the boundary, projecting significantly
    closer to neighbouring properties than it does currently.
31. The Council describe the proposed extension as being located approximately 13
    metres from the rear façade of properties on Cecil Road at its closest point and
    contends that three storeys of accommodation4 would be significant. The appellant
    considers that such distances are comparable to the end dwellings and the rear
    elevations of other nearby dwellings. However, the appellant does not provide any
    examples. While I saw No 75 extended up to the shared boundary, this was in
    single-storey form and not three storeys as proposed in the appeal before me. I did
    not see any other obvious extensions nearby where the relationship between the
    host property and the neighbouring properties was similar.
4
    When the proposed dormer is taken into account.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              5
Appeal Decision 6008899


32. I saw that No’s 80 and 82 Cecil Road sit directly adjacent to what the Council
    describes as the “pinch point” in the plot of No 80. Neither party have provided any
    plan showing the relationship between the proposed development and properties on
    Cecil Road.
33. From observations on site and Notaking the proposed set-back of the front elevation,
    together with the angled nature of the building line on Wellington Road, it is likely
    that the proposed side extension, whilst visible from the rear of No 80 Cecil Road,
    would be unlikely to project across its rear boundary. I therefore do not agree that
    the proposed development would harm the living conditions of its existing occupants.
34. I did however see that the flank elevation of the appeal property did dominate the
    outlook from No 82 Cecil Road (No 82) when within the garden. Its current proximity
    and height felt both close and imposing. These feelings were exacerbated the further
    I walked down the garden. Given the proposed projection of the flank elevation
    towards No 82 and the depth it would extend backwards from the front elevation, it is
    likely that the proposed extension would project across the majority of the shared
    boundary. Its proximity and height would result in an imposing and overbearing
    feature at the end of No 82’s garden, which would result in a heightened sense of
    enclosure for the occupants.
35. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposed development would fail to
    provide adequate living conditions for the existing occupants of No 82 with regard to
    outlook and sense of enclosure. Accordingly, the proposal would be contrary to
    Policy D3.D(7) of the London Plan and Policy GR1 of the Local Plan which
    collectively seek, amongst other matters, to ensure development safeguards the
    amenity for existing occupiers.
36. There would also be conflict with the Framework which seeks, amongst other
    matters, to ensure that development creates a high standard of amenity for existing
    users.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
37. I acknowledge that the additional accommodation would help address the needs of
    the appellant's growing family, however, this is a private benefit and a grant of
    planning permission for the proposed development would result in unacceptable harm
    to the living conditions of occupiers of No 82 Cecil Road. It would also result in harm
    to the character and appearance of the host property and the surrounding area.
    Furthermore, it has not been demonstrated that there would not be a risk of flooding
    elsewhere. Therefore, dismissing the appeal is a proportionate response and is in the
    public’s interest in this case.
38. On balance, the proposal conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole, and
    material considerations do not indicate a decision otherwise than in accordance with
    the development plan. I therefore conclude that it is proportionate and necessary to
    dismiss the appeal.

L Clark
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
