Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 June 2026
by N Unwin BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008065
50 Arthur Road, Islington, London N7 6DR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jechiel Goldberg (City Trade Investments Ltd) against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/2793/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as: erection of first floor rear extension and mansard roof
     extension to provide 3no. additional HMO rooms. Change of use from small-scale HMO (Use Class
     C4) to large-scale HMO (Sui Generis).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters

2. The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026. It does not change the planning policy context in
   respect of the main issue, and I have determined the appeal accordingly.
   References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.

3. I have used the description of development within the decision notice and appeal
   form as it more accurately describes the proposal.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the supply of family housing.
Reasons
5. The appeal site forms a terraced property currently in use as a small House in
   Multiple Occupation (HMO) with accommodation over three floors. The size and
   layout of the property means that it would be suitable for larger family housing,
   defined within the Islington Local Plan Strategic and Development Management
   Policies (2023) (the DMP) as self-contained housing units of two-bedrooms or more,
   appropriate for occupation by an adult, or adults, with one or more children.
6. Whilst the appeal property is currently in use as a small HMO (Use Class C4), the
   conversion of the property back to a single house (Use Class C3), for use as family
   housing, would be possible under permitted development rights, should any owner
   wish to do so. As such the appeal property could currently be used as family
   housing without the need to apply for planning permission. The proposed large
   HMO falls within the sui generis use class. Such a use does not allow, through


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008065


    permitted development rights, the ability to revert to Use Class C3 to provide a
    dwellinghouse suitable for family accommodation.
7. Policy H2 of the DMP states that the loss of existing self-contained housing will be
   permitted where the housing is replaced by at least equivalent floorspace and does
   not involve the net loss of more than one unit. Policy H2 concerns new and existing
   conventional housing, which the DMP defines as self-contained homes. There is a
   clear distinction within the DMP between self-contained homes and HMOs, which
   have their own policy in H10 of the DMP. Therefore, whilst the proposal would
   increase the floorspace of the appeal property for the purposes of a large HMO, this
   would not be equivalent to that of self-contained housing which at present the
   appeal property could be used as. As such, the proposal would result in the loss of a
   self-contained family home without the replacement of equivalent floorspace.
8. The appellant contends that it is highly unlikely the property will revert to a single
   dwellinghouse and that, should the appeal succeed, the large HMO could be
   converted to a single dwellinghouse through a future application and grant of
   planning permission.
9. However, whilst the appellant may not wish to utilise the appeal property as a single
   dwellinghouse, future owners may wish to do so. Such a conversion could be
   achieved seamlessly without the need for planning permission. Even if the Council
   were supportive of an application for the conversion of a large HMO to a single
   dwellinghouse, the requirement for planning permission would represent an
   additional barrier. As such, I afford this limited weight.
10.Therefore, for the above reasons, the proposal would harm the supply of family
   housing. It would therefore conflict with the relevant provisions of Policy H2 of the
   DMP.
Other Matters
11.The Council raise no concerns regarding the first-floor rear and mansard roof
   extensions in principle. Nevertheless, they do object to their use to facilitate the
   proposed change of use of the appeal property from a small HMO to a large HMO.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
