Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026 by E Street BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008940
226 Basement Flat, Finchley Road, Camden, London NW3 6DH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Professor Kurinchi Selvan Gurusamy against the decision of the Council of
    the London Borough of Camden.
•   The application Ref is 2025/5066/P.
•   The development proposed is described as “use of the existing area of hardstanding as a single
    off‑street car parking space and the formation of a vehicle crossover on the highway”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure, Preliminary Matters & Main Issue
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal. In addition, and having reviewed the relevant changes, I am
   satisfied that the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
   does not affect the substantive matters of the appeal or the outcome thereof and
   proceeding without further consultation with the main parties would not be
   prejudicial to their respective cases.
3. The description of development on the application form contains a lot of case
   specific information which, whilst I have taken it into account as part of the
   appellant’s arguments, is superfluous for the purposes of identifying the
   development to which the appeal relates. I have therefore used the description
   above which is from the decision notice. This does not change anything
   fundamental of the proposal nor materially affect the cases of the main parties.
4. This one and a recent previous planning decision along with subsequent appeal
   documents have engaged in significant discussion regarding the lawful use of the
   hardstanding and vehicular crossover.
5. There remains some ambiguity regarding the historical planning permissions on the
   site and when and if they were implemented which would lead to the pedestrian
   crossover and hardstanding being lawful. Following this, there has been a
   significant amount of evidence provided by the appellant to suggest that it might be,
   including lease agreements to other flats and planning drawings. The physical
   evidence viewed on the site visit suggests that the kerb in front of Number 226 (No
   226) has not been formally dropped as seen at Number 224 (No 224). It appears
   that it has been slowly degraded through the passage of time. This, along with the
   submission of written evidence, casts some doubt over whether the development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008940


     was implemented in the past. Additionally, there is a time frame which appears that
     there has been no access to the hardstanding due to the previously installed
     bollards.
6. There has been no lawful development certificate submitted by the appellant in the
   to attempt to prove lawfulness. Notwithstanding the lack of certificate, the process
   in considering the issues in this appeal is not one to determine a lawful position.
   The appellant knowingly filled out an application form titled as “application for
   planning permission” and the Council has proceeded on this basis. Within the
   context of an appeal under S78 of the Act it is not within my remit to formally
   determine whether the proposed development requires planning permission as
   claimed by the appellant.
7. I have considered the evidence above as to whether permission is required so far
   as it is material to the merits of the case. If the appellant wishes to ascertain
   whether the development is lawful, they may make an application under section
   192 of the Act. This appeal is to be determined against the development plan. With
   this and the above in mind, I have set out below my findings on the main issue of
   the case, which is the effect of the development on highway safety.
Reasons for the Recommendation
8. The detached appeal building consists of multiple flats with the basement flat being
   the subject of the appeal. The area of hardstanding is to the right of the central
   staircase and in front of the bedroom serving the basement. Outside of the appeal
   site, there is a public footpath, then the carriageway with a bus lane and an
   adjacent bus stop. The wider area consists of mixed uses with six lanes of traffic,
   two bus lanes and four lanes for any other type of vehicle. The highway is a London
   Red Route meaning no stopping or parking during certain times of the day. There
   are some instances of off-road parking facilitated by dropped kerbs. As viewed on
   the site visit, there was a bollard to prevent parking on the hardstanding, and no
   vehicle was in place.
9. The dropped kerb would facilitate the crossing of the pathway into the existing
   hardstanding. There are minimal instances of this situation in the locality. Any
   vehicle parked in the space when exiting would need to immediately enter the
   pedestrian pathway to join the highway. Visibility would be limited by the height of
   the flanking wall. A forward parked vehicle would have no room for manoeuvre
   which would mean it would have to be reversed both into the pedestrian footpath
   and the resultant highway crossing the bus lane. This would not only cause a
   hazard to pedestrians having to cross into the carriageway for avoidance which
   could increase their risk of conflict with a passing vehicle but also an increased risk
   a vehicular collision due to the limited visibility. As the pathway is relatively narrow,
   pedestrians and other users would not be able to avoid a vehicle exiting the space
   causing them to potentially enter the carriageway. There are limited safe crossing
   points along this part of the street.
10. The site being within a close proximity of a bus stop along with the frequency of the
    two bus routes identified with a vehicle pulling out so close, even with the limited
    time it takes to manoeuvre a vehicle could result in a significant highway hazard in
    terms of either nearby pedestrians or a collision between the bus and vehicle
    should the driver not see the bus when reversing out of the parking space. A lack of
    accident data doesn’t necessarily mean that there haven’t been any instances, it


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008940


     just suggests that they haven’t been recorded. In any event, this is based on the
     existing situation, not the proposed. Any assessment has to be based on the
     theoretical basis of what a hazard could pose for highway users.
11. Whilst it has been referenced that permission was granted in 1979 for No 224, I
    have limited information on details of this permission. The appellant contends that
    the access is wider at No 226 compared with No 224, however, without any
    drawings or dimensions to support this, I cannot know for sure. In any case, and
    notwithstanding the above, it is more likely to have been granted under a different
    set of circumstances and prevailing policy and guidance. Moreover, I am not
    convinced given its siting and distance further away from the bus stop that it would
    be sufficiently comparable. Just because one historical permission is in place, it
    doesn’t set a further precedent. Each proposal considered has to have regard to its
    own specific merits and, importantly, context.
12. The scheme would not accord with Policy T2 of the Camden Local Plan 2017 (LP)
    in terms of discouraging the use of private vehicles, especially with the close
    proximity of a public transportation system given it is requiring a space for a car.
    With this and the above in mind, the appeal scheme also conflicts with Policies T1,
    T2 and A1 of the LP which, amongst other things, seek to ensure that all
    development will be satisfactory in terms of highway safety and secure adequate
    provision for the safety of pedestrians, cyclists, buses and other vehicles.
Conclusion and Recommendation
13. With regard to Policy S4 of the Framework, the proposal would support the off-road
    parking of one vehicle, reducing the reliance on parking on street. This would be
    worthy of limited weight given that it would be to the power of one vehicle only. I am
    also unaware of there being any specific evidenced problem with parking locally.
    The harm I have found, and the subsequent development plan conflict, relates to
    the safe use of the highway for users and, in some cases, could be impactive to
    life. I therefore give it significant weight. The Framework also reinforces, in regard
    to section 15, the need to ensure safe use of transportation and highway networks.
    With this and the above in mind, the benefits of granting planning permission for the
    proposals would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when
    assessed against the decision making policies of the Framework.
14. The appeal scheme would not comply with the development plan. The evidence
    provided in regard to the matters above and other material considerations do not
    indicate a compelling enough reason to deviate therefrom. I therefore recommend
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

E Street
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
15. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
