Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by Carla Livingstone MA(SocSci) (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6008483
Land Adjacent To 2 New Ealing Broadway, London, W5 2NU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Ealing.
•   The application Ref is 260011FUL.
•   The development proposed is Installation of 1No. BT Street Hub Unit and associated advertisement
    panels on either side of the unit.
Appeal B Ref: 6008485
Land Adjacent To 2 New Ealing Broadway, London, W5 2NU
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Ealing.
•   The application Ref is 260012ADV.
•   The development proposed is Installation of 1No. BT Street Hub Unit and associated advertisement
    panels on either side of the unit .

Decision
1. Appeal A is dismissed.
2. Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework ('the Framework') on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
   amendments against the December 2024 version before the parties for their
   evidence. Although there have been significant amendments to its layout and
   formatting such that previously cited paragraph references are no longer relevant,
   other changes are not substantive or determinative to the outcome of this appeal. I
   have therefore not gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
4. The two appeals relate to the same proposal on the same site. Appeal A concerns
   the refusal of planning permission to erect a street hub unit (the hub). Appeal B
   concerns the refusal of express consent for advertisement panels on each side of
   the hub. I have considered each appeal on its individual merits, however, as they
   raise similar issues, I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
5. In respect of Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
   (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) require that decisions are made only
   in the interest of amenity and public safety. Therefore, whilst I have taken account


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008483


     of the policies that the Council considers to be relevant, these have not been
     decisive in my determination of this appeal.
6. The appeal site is located within the Ealing Town Centre Conservation Area (CA).
   In determining this appeal I have a statutory duty, under Section 72(1) of the
   Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), to have
   special regard to preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
Main Issues
7. The main issues in respect of Appeal A are:
    • the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area including
       its effect on the CA; and
    • the effect of the proposal on pedestrian safety.
8. The main issues in respect of Appeal B are the effect of the proposed
   advertisement on amenity and public safety.
Reasons
Character, appearance and visual amenity
Character, appearance and significance of heritage assets
Appeal A
9. The BT Street Hub Unit would have the approximate dimensions of 2.99m in
   height, 1.24m in width, and 0.35m in depth. The unit would have a digital display
   screen on either side, with each screen having the approximate dimensions of
   1.67m in height and 0.95m in width.
10. The appeal site is within the edge of the CA towards the outer edge of the
    pavement outside 2 New Ealing Broadway, close to Ealing Broadway station, which
    is a major rail interchange, as well as several bus stops. The footpath is
    approximately 12.6m in width and includes street trees and several items of street
    furniture including bollards, bike racks and lamp posts. The town centre location
    includes several shops that front the footpath in the vicinity of the appeal site.
11. As well as a transport hub, the site is situated within a predominantly commercial
    setting, consisting of a range of food and drink establishments, offices, and public
    buildings, as well as residential apartments.
12. As detailed above, the presence of street furniture is an established characteristic
    of this area, and I found the balance between the proliferation of items on the
    pavement and a clear and welcoming area for pedestrians to be delicately poised.
13. The CA encompasses Ealing Town Centre, and its significance is derived in part
    from its historical importance as the commercial centre of an early London suburb.
    The present use of the CA as a strong retail and commercial hub has continually
    evolved; particularly from the Victorian era which brought a period of expansion and
    growth. This resulted in the varied architectural style and age of the buildings which
    mark the development of the area over time.
14. The appeal site is located close to Ealing Broadway station, which is a
    contemporary building, featuring a large, covered area over a wide section of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008483


     footway, supported by several pillars. The size and architectural style of the
     building marks a contrast with neighbouring buildings including an art-deco inspired
     three storey brick building and Victorian shopping parades. The width and space
     within the footway outside of the station gives the building the necessary space to
     sit comfortably within the street scene. The expanse of the footway and curve of the
     street also allow for unique views which include varied architecture and Haven
     Green, a large public park; positively contributing to the significance of the CA.
Effect of the proposal
15. The proposed hub may be narrower and smaller than other hubs in the wider area.
    Nonetheless, through a combination of its height, width and illumination it would be
    a visually intrusive and bulky addition to the street scene, particularly when
    compared to other existing items of street furniture in the immediate area.
    Furthermore, although the hub would be next to existing cycle racks it would still
    result in a visual intrusion along this section of The Broadway adding visual clutter.
16. Given the commercial character of the area, I acknowledge that there are a variety
    of advertisements in the locality, including fascia signs and projecting signage, on
    shop fronts. However, they are mostly non-illuminated; given this the illuminated
    digital advertisements proposed would jar with the existing street scene.
17. The position of the hub, along with its bulky appearance, would dominate and
    partially obscure the sight lines and views along The Broadway to the detriment of
    the visual amenity of the street scene and the character and appearance of the CA.
    Policy HE4 of the Framework states that proposals should avoid, or minimise, harm
    to the significance of heritage assets and instead conserve their significance.
18. It is acknowledged that the proposed hub would be viewed against the backdrop of
    Ealing Broadway station which is an example of contemporary architecture.
    However, a hub of the size proposed would introduce a dominant and incongruous
    feature within the streetscape. Furthermore, the changing digital advertisement
    images would detract from the clear and spacious characteristics of the area
19. I find that the size and prominent position of the proposed hub, in conjunction with
    its rotating digital images and illumination would be out of keeping with signage in
    the area. It would also result in a dominant element within the streetscape that
    would undermine the attractive qualities of the public realm within this part of the
    CA, causing harm to its significance. However, in acknowledgement of the
    commercial nature of the area the degree of harm would be modest.
20. Consequently, I do not find that the location of the appeal site at the edge of the CA
    or an absence of material concerns from the Council Conservation Officer as a
    clear and convincing justification for the harm that would be caused to the
    significance of the CA.
21. Policy HE6 of the Framework states that when considering the effect of a proposed
    development on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
    should be given to its conservation.
Public benefits
22. In view of the above, policy HE6 requires that where a development proposal would
    cause harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on that
    asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008483


23. Section 9 of the Framework states that advanced, high quality and reliable
    communication infrastructure is essential for economic growth and social wellbeing.
    The Framework also seeks to support the expansion of electronic
    telecommunication networks. The hub would therefore support the Government’s
    aim of improving digital infrastructure.
24. The appeal scheme would also provide a number of benefits including free public
    wi-fi, device charging and phone calls. Free phone calls could also facilitate access
    to charities that support vulnerable people such as ChildLine and the Samaritans.
    Therefore, as well as supporting advertising and economic activity, the hub would
    support digital connectivity for people in the area.
25. When taken together, I find that all of the above-mentioned public benefits attract
    moderate weight in favour of the appeal proposal. However, these public benefits
    do not outweigh the considerable importance I must attach to the preservation of
    the CA as a designated heritage asset.
26. In respect of Appeal B, the Regulations require that decisions are made only in the
    interest of amenity and public safety. As such, most of the proposed benefits put
    forward cannot be taken into consideration in my decision for Appeal B.
    Nonetheless, even in a scenario whereby I accepted that use of the hub to facilitate
    contact with charities supporting vulnerable people was a public safety matter
    relevant to the control of advertisements, the benefits derived from it would not
    overcome the harm I have identified to visual amenity.
27. I therefore conclude on this main issue that the proposal would have an
    unacceptable impact on the character, appearance and visual amenity of the area.
    Therefore, it would conflict with policies D3, D4, D8, and T2 of the London Plan
    2021 (LonP) and policies 1.1 and 1.2 of the Ealing Development Strategy 2026,
    adopted 2012 (EDS) and policies 7. 4 and 7B of the Ealing Development
    Management Development Plan Document 2013 (DPD). When read together,
    these policies are consistent with the Framework in requiring that development
    proposals respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings; and development proposals conserve or enhance the significance of
    heritage assets. In respect of Appeal A, the proposal would also fail to satisfy the
    requirements of Section 71(1) of the Planning (Listed Building and Conservation
    Areas) Act 1990.
28. Policy 2.10 of the EDS relates to the protection of residential neighbourhoods;
    policy 7A of the DPD relates to preserving amenity; policy T4 of the LonP relates to
    assessing and mitigating transport impacts; policy 7D of the DPD relates to open
    space; and policies D1 1 of the LonP and 7.3 of the DPD relate to crime prevention.
    These policies are not determinative in my assessment of the effect of the
    development on the character and appearance of a commercial centre.
Highway and pedestrian safety
29. As mentioned, the proposed hub would be located close to large train station and
    several busy bus stops that serve multiple routes. I observed during my visit, on a
    weekday afternoon, that the footway was very busy with people using it to access
    the station and enter and exit buses and shops. I saw that the flow of pedestrians in
    the area was dense, with limited immediate forward visibility and individuals
    negotiating conflicting paths.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008483


30. The proposed hub would be located close to the edge of the carriageway. To road
    users travelling along The Broadway, the hub would be adjacent to existing cycle
    racks, on the approach to a busy pedestrian crossing.
31. Given the height, width and solid design of the proposed hub, as well as its siting,
    there would be a period whereby pedestrians walking on the eastern side of The
    Broadway, towards the hub, would have a restricted view of vehicles approaching
    on the nearside of the carriageway. Similarly, users of the road would lose sight of
    pedestrians as they walk behind the hub. Furthermore, even though the hub would
    be largely positioned in the path of existing cycle racks it would restrict forward
    visibility of pedestrians on a busy section of the footway; restricting the free flow of
    pedestrian movement.
32. In my judgement the obstruction of views caused by the siting of the hub is a
    potential danger to public safety, including vulnerable users, such as those with
    young children, or those in a wheelchair.
33. For example, a young child may be walking slightly ahead of their carer and lose
    sight and awareness of any oncoming vehicles on the nearside of the carriageway
    because of the hub’s proposed siting so close to the road. Furthermore, they could
    also be easily distracted by its digital display. Similarly, someone pushing a
    wheelchair or a child’s buggy in front of them might only see an oncoming vehicle
    after they have cleared the hub. This is particularly concerning in the area of the
    appeal site where there are a number of conflicting pedestrian movements and
    distractions.
34. Such scenarios not only present a danger to pedestrians, but also to road users if a
    pedestrian suddenly, and unexpectedly, appears from behind the hub, close to the
    edge of the carriageway. If the driver or cyclist was not aware of their presence it
    could cause them to break sharply or swerve once they see a pedestrian emerge
    from behind the proposed unit. This therefore also causes a highway safety issue
    for road users, as well as pedestrians.
35. I acknowledge that the appellant refers to the width of the pavement adjacent to the
    hub, at approx. 12.6m, as a sufficient distance to allow significant pedestrian
    permeability. Still, there is a proliferation of street furniture in the vicinity which
    significantly limits the clear and open width of the pavement . Given the large
    numbers of people traveling through the area, the remaining width of the pavement
    is not sufficient to address my concerns regarding restricted views of both
    pedestrians and road users, at a point where there are conflicting movements of
    individuals.
36. As such, given my above concerns, and in the absence of detailed evidence of the
    visibility and sightlines that would be available to both pedestrians and road users,
    it is reasonable to take a precautionary approach in regard to highway and public
    safety.
37. In view of all the above, based on the information before me, and my observations
    on site, I conclude that the siting of the appeal proposal would unacceptably
    obscure views for both pedestrians and road users at this busy transport hub, to the
    detriment of public safety. The proposal therefore conflicts with policies D3, D8, T2
    and T4 of the LonP and policies 1.1 and 1.2 of the EDS and policy 7B of the DPD.
    When read together they seek to ensure that development has regard to road and
    community safety; and improves pedestrian routes and the pedestrian environment.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008483


     The proposal would also be contrary to the highway safety provisions of the
     Framework.
38. Policies D4 of the LonP and 7.4 of the DPD relate to the delivery of good design;
    policy 7A of the DPD relates to preserving amenity; policy 2.10 of the EDS relates
    to the protection of residential neighbourhoods; policy 7D of the DPD relates to
    open space; and policies D1 1 of the LonP and 7.3 of the DPD relate to crime
    prevention. These policies are not determinative in my assessment of public safety
    within a commercial centre.
Conclusion
39. For the reasons given, I have concluded that the proposal would harm the
    significance of the CA and to the character, appearance and visual amenity of the
    area. It would also restrict visibility of both pedestrians and road users resulting in
    harm to public safety.
40. Appeal A therefore conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole and there
    are no material considerations, including the Framework, to suggest the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with the development plan. Appeal B
    would harm visual amenity and public safety.
41. Therefore, for the reasons given, both Appeal A and Appeal B are dismissed.



Carla Livingstone
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
