Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by L Clark BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008038
9 Selway House, 272 South Lambeth Road, Lambeth, London SW8 1UL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against
     a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Kausik Jethwa against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Lambeth.
•    The application Ref is 25/03420/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use from HMO (Use Class C4) to short-term let (Use Class C1).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The address in the banner heading is taken from the decision notice and that used by
       the appellant on the appeal statement, as this is more accurate than that on the
       application form.
3.     There are discrepancies within the evidence with regard to the current use of the
       appeal property (No 9). The planning application form states it as a House of Multiple
       Occupation (HMO) (Use Class C4); however, the appellant describes1 it as currently
       being used as C32. There is no dispute that No 9 is an HMO and therefore I have
       taken the current use to be that outlined in the description on the application form.
4.     The appellant refers to the 2023 and July 2024 National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) within their evidence; however, the Framework was revised in
       December 2024, with further minor updates in February 2025. More recently, and
       during the course of the appeal, a revised Framework was published on 17 August
       2026. The main parties were provided with an opportunity to comment. I have
       therefore had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework in my decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues in this appeal are:

       •     whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposal having regard to
             local and national policies on tourism development,

       •     the effect of the proposal on the supply of family housing;

       •     the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of existing
             neighbouring occupiers with particular regard to noise and disturbance; and,


1
 Paragraph 5.28 of Statement of Case
2
 Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 2015 (as amended), Schedule 1, Part C Use Classes Order – C3 Dwellinghouse
(UCO)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008038


       •     whether or not adequate arrangements are made for refuse, recycling, and cycle
             parking.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site (No 9) is an ‘L’ shaped ground- and first-floor duplex unit set within
       Selway House, a predominantly residential block at 272 South Lambeth Road. Access
       to No 9 and other similar ground-floor duplex units is directly from the front via a
       recessed doorway. This doorway and the adjoining wall of No 9 share a boundary wall
       with No 8 to one side and the garage of No 46 on the other. To the rear, accessed via
       a rear walkway, is a private garden/amenity space. Ground floor duplex units have
       similar units above, accessed via a stair core and walkway.
Location
7.     Policy ED14 of the Lambeth Local Plan 2020-2035 (September 2021) (the Local Plan)
       relates to hotels and other visitor accommodation. Criterion A sets out that visitor
       accommodation (C1) will be supported in town centres where it does not cause
       unacceptable harm to local amenity and the balance and mix of local land uses.
       Outside town centres, proposals for new visitor accommodation will be assessed
       against the sequential test for main town centre uses in accordance with national
       planning policy. In all locations, visitor accommodation should be of an appropriate
       scale for the proposed location and should not unacceptably harm the balance and
       mix of uses in the area, including services for the local residential community.
8.     Policy E10 of the London Plan 2021 relates to visitor infrastructure and sets out that
       whilst a sufficient supply and range of serviced accommodation should be maintained,
       it also requires, amongst other matters, that in outer London serviced accommodation
       should be promoted in town centres and within Opportunity Areas3 where they are
       well-connected by public transport, particularly to central London.
9.     The approach set out in Local Plan Policy ED14 and London Plan Policy E10 aligns
       with Policy TC3 of the Framework, which collectively set out, amongst other things,
       that a sequential test should be applied to proposals for main town centre uses for
       which planning permission is required. Main town centre uses should be located in
       town centres, then in edge of centre locations, and only if suitable sites are not
       available (or expected to become available within a reasonable period) should out of
       centre sites be considered. When considering edge of centre and out of centre
       locations, preference should be given to accessible sites which are well connected to
       the town centre by sustainable transport modes.
10. Whilst the appellant contends that a sequential test is not required, they do not
    dispute that paragraph 91 advises that sequential tests apply to planning applications
    for main town centre uses.
11. There is no dispute between the parties that No 9 falls outside the town centre. The
    Council have drawn my attention to paragraph 6.103 of its Local Plan which sets out,
    amongst other matters, that proposals for short-stay apartments intended for people
    visiting London will be considered as (Use Class) C1 visitor accommodation.
    Therefore, whilst No 9 is within a sustainable location, described by the Council as
    Public Transport Access Level of 6(a), even if the proposed development would
    provide flexible, short-term accommodation for visitors who would contribute to the
3
 (in accordance with the sequential test as set out in Policy SD7 Town centres: development principles and Development Plan
Documents)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6008038


         local economy, a sequential test is still required in this instance. However, no
         sequential test was submitted alongside the planning application and therefore the
         proposed development fails to accord with Policy ED14 of the Local Plan.
12. Moreover, with regard to Use Class C5, this is, as set out in the UCO only applicable
    in Wales and not England. Therefore, I attach little weight to this in my assessment.
13. Whilst paragraph 85 of the Framework does require planning policies and decisions to
    create conditions in which businesses can invest, expand and adapt, I have little
    evidence before me to demonstrate that the location of the proposed use is suitable.
14. Furthermore, even if Local Plan Policy H3 sets out, amongst other matters, that
    homes should not be used as short-term holiday rental accommodation for a
    cumulative period of more than 90 days a year, the appellant seeks a change of use
    to Class C1, which requires the submission of a sequential test4.
15. For the above reasons, I conclude that the appeal site is not a suitable location for a
    short-term let (Use Class C1) as its location is outside a town centre and the lack of a
    sequential test conflicts with Local Plan Policies ED10 and ED14 which, amongst
    other matters, directs such uses towards the location of town centres.
Housing supply
16. Local Plan Policy H3 relates to safeguarding existing housing. Supporting text
    alongside the policy states, amongst other matters, that this policy seeks to protect
    existing housing (C3) from a change of use to non-permanent accommodation,
    including short-term lets (C1 uses). The Council has drawn my attention to Criterion D
    which sets out that homes should not be used as short-term holiday rental
    accommodation for a cumulative period of more than 90 days a year. Therefore,
    applications for change of use of permanent residential accommodation to short-term
    holiday lets will not be permitted.
17. There is no dispute that No 9 is currently being occupied as an HMO or that it is
    located within an area absent of an Article 4 direction restricting the permitted
    development rights for conversion to HMOs. The dispute relates to the Council’s
    reliance on Local Plan Policy H3 and whether it applies to the appeal property given
    that it is being occupied as an HMO Class C4.
18. The appellant describes No 9 as not a primary residence and that it makes no
    meaningful contribution to the supply of long-term housing. However, as No 9 is not
    located within an area with an Article 4, the General Permitted Development
    (England) Order 1995 (as amended) permits the property to change between an HMO
    Class C4 and C3 and back again without the need for planning permission. Ergo, the
    use as an HMO is flexible and not permanent. In support of this, the Council have
    drawn my attention to an appeal decision at 208 Gipsy Road5. Given that there are
    currently no restrictions in place, there is flexibility for the conversion of No 9 from a
    C4 HMO to a C3 and vice-versa. From my observations, with its living accommodation
    on the ground floor, three bedrooms above and access to a private amenity area to
    the rear, this leads me to believe that the property would likely be suitable for
    occupation by a family. I concur with that Inspector that the planning consequence of
    the proposed change of use is that the appeal property would no longer be available
    for accommodation by a single household without the need for planning permission.
4
    Local Plan Policy ED14
5
    6003181


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008038


19. I have little before me to demonstrate that the appeal property would no longer be
    available accommodation for a single household. The change of use of No 9 from an
    HMO to a short-term let would therefore result in the permanent loss of housing
    suitable for occupation by families, contrary to the aims of the development plan.
20. Given my findings above, I conclude that the proposed development would result in
    the loss of a home which would fail to accord with Local Plan Policy H3.

Living conditions - Existing occupiers
21. Policy Q2 of the Local Plan relates to amenity and sets out that development will be
    supported if, amongst other matters, the adverse impact of noise is reduced to an
    acceptable level through the use of attenuation, distance, screening, or
    layout/orientation in accordance with London Plan policy D146; and adequate outdoor
    amenity space is provided, practical in layout and free from excessive noise or
    disturbance7.
22. South Lambeth Road was busy at the time of my site visit (early afternoon) and whilst
    there was noise audible to the front, there was little noise at the rear. No 9 has a
    relatively large garden which is accessed directly from the ground floor living/dining
    room.
23. The appellant contends that noise levels generated by the proposed use would be
    similar to a Use Class C3 and would not create any additional noise or disturbance.
    Whilst there is likely an expectation of noise and disturbance arising as a
    consequence of the comings and goings of occupants and visitors within the HMO, a
    C1 use would be a materially different use, and would function in a different way to an
    HMO. Rather, a property used as a short-term let would likely be let to a single group
    of people generally connected in some way and known to each other, particularly for
    celebrations and events. As a result, it is more likely to generate a significant level of
    noise and disturbance than either its current use as an HMO or a C3.
24. Short-term let accommodation would consist of a transient number of people coming and
    going on a frequent basis, unlike an HMO whereby it is more likely to be a residential
    home for people to reside on a more permanent basis. People living within an HMO, even
    if on a short-term tenancy basis, contrasts to how a C1 use can operate with frequent
    turnovers. This intensity and transition of guests would have a different character to that
    of an HMO.
25. I acknowledge that No 9 has independent access however, despite this, the property has
    doors almost next to each other where future occupants could loiter, and a rear garden
    which is in close proximity to other nearby residential accommodation which could be
    utilised at unsociable hours. Such use would likely result in noise and disturbance to
    existing occupants of nearby properties.
26. Whilst the appellant refers to a management plan which supports the planning
    application, this is lacking within the appeal document. As such, I cannot be certain that
    there would be any on-site management. Without on this presence, there would likely be
    a significant delay in dealing with any issues that may arise during unsociable hours.
    Even if management staff would be available on site 24 hours a day, managing the


6
    Criterion v.
7
    Criterion vi.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008038


         behaviours of others cannot be reasonably controlled through the planning system as
         planning is land-use based.
27. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would not comply with the aspirations of Policy
    Q2 of the Local Plan in respect of mitigating noise effects and disturbance of the
    development.

Refuse, recycling and cycle parking
28. During my site visit I saw two large refuse facilities located approximately at the base of
    the central stair cores of Selway House fronting South Lambeth Road. These bins were
    overflowing and had rubbish at the base spilling across the pavement. The size and the
    amount of accumulated waste indicated to me that these were a communal facility. The
    overspilling waste resulted in the street appearing untidy, and immediately around the bin
    there was an unpleasant smell. Moreover, I also saw a number of bicycles8 available for
    general hire on the pavement alongside South Lambeth Road.
29. I acknowledge that the Framework sets out, amongst other matters, that development
    proposals should only be refused on highways grounds if there would be an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety, or the residual cumulative impact on the road
    network following mitigation would be severe, taking into account all reasonable future
    scenarios. However, in my mind, the Council’s third refusal reason is not based on
    highway safety, rather the failure of the appellant to demonstrate compliance with Local
    Plan Policies. In this instance, however, the Framework does set out requirements for
    strategic policies to make sufficient provision for, amongst other things, waste
    management.
30. With regard to refuse and recycling, Local Plan Policy Q12 sets out that all refuse and
    recycling storage should meet Criterion A i. to vi. and, if they are communal,
    commercial, or large-scale refuse stores should also meet Criterion B i. to iii.
    Supporting text alongside this Policy states that poorly designed and located refuse
    and recycling storage facilities can result in unacceptable environments and poor
    living conditions for residents.
31. The appellant contends that the use of No 9 for short-term let C1 would utilise existing
    facilities and services in place. Notwithstanding this, the appellant also does not
    dispute that if the Council consider these facilities to be inadequate, planning
    conditions could be attached to address them.
32. The Council considers that the proposed use may require a private contract secured
    for the collection of refuse and recycling. Given that the proposed use would be
    commercial in nature, it would therefore be reasonable that any refuse and recycling
    collection would be private. I have considered whether this matter could be
    conditioned as suggested by the appellant; however, I have little before me to
    demonstrate that the appellant would be willing to enter into a private contract. As
    such, from the evidence before me, and without anything to the contrary, I am not
    persuaded that otherwise unacceptable development could be made acceptable
    through the use of a condition.
33. Without adequate provision and collection of refuse and recycling, the waste
    generated from the proposed use as a short-term C1 let would likely build up and may


8
    Santander Cycles


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008038


       overspill onto the street. I have found above that the existing refuse facilities had
       overspilled and that this was visually unappealing.
34. Local Plan Policy Q13 relates to cycle storage and requires all development including
    conversions to meet, amongst other things, Criterion A i. to vii. Criterion C also sets
    out that all cycle storage should be fully compliant with the minimum standards set out
    in the London Plan.
35. The appellant has drawn my attention to Policy T5 of the London Plan and Local Plan
    Policies T3 and Q13 but has not provided a copy of either Policy T5 or T3 in their
    evidence. Notwithstanding this, the appellant does not dispute that Policy T5 of the
    London Plan seeks to ensure that development proposals make provision for cyclists
    to support an environment where people can choose to cycle, or that Table 10.2 of the
    London Plan contains the minimum parking standard.
36. Whilst submitted plans show no cycle parking associated with the proposed use, I saw
    No 9 did have a relatively large garden to the rear which, in my mind, could
    accommodate a cycle store for 1 bicycle without significantly reducing access to
    outdoor amenity space for its occupants. This matter could be addressed by a suitably
    worded condition if I were minded to allow the appeal. Subject to the imposition of
    such a condition, I am satisfied that the proposed development could accommodate
    sufficient cycle provision to address the identified needs for future occupiers to
    provide acceptable living conditions.
37. For the above reasons, I conclude that even if it would be possible to provide
    sufficient cycle parking within the rear amenity space, it has not been demonstrated
    that adequate provision would be made for the storage and collection of refuse and
    recycling. As such, the proposed development would fail to comply with Local Plan
    Policy Q12 which seeks, amongst other matters, to ensure that refuse and recycling is
    fully integrated into the wider design from the outset.
Other Matters
38. With regard to the appellant's claim that the existing use of No 9 is underutilised and
    unviable, I saw that the property was occupied at the time of my site visit and all
    bedrooms appeared as though they were being used. Moreover, I have not been
    presented with any evidence to show that it is underutilised or unviable. I therefore
    give little weight to this in my assessment.
39. Even if No 9 is currently being utilised as an HMO, it is nevertheless residential in
    nature and is likely to provide predominantly affordable accommodation for tenants
    whose alternative housing choices may be limited. I therefore give little weight to
    whether or not the appeal property is currently used as a primary residence.
40. Whether or not the bedrooms exceed minimum space standards and would comply
    with criteria (k) of Local Plan Policy ED14 are neutral matters in the overall planning
    balance, as these would likely be requirements of any well-designed development.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
41. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 outlines that
    applications for planning permission must be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008038


42. I acknowledge that the proposed development would provide the appellant with a
    business opportunity and it would offer flexible, short-term accommodation for visitors.
    I also note that its occupancy would in turn likely contribute to the local economy and
    create additional visitor accommodation within the Borough. However, the location of
    No 9 is outside a town centre, and the absence of a sequential test would undermine
    the Council’s plan-led approach for visitor accommodation. Furthermore, whilst
    sufficient cycle storage could be provided, the adverse impact of the proposed
    development in terms of long-term harm on the living conditions of existing occupants
    and lack of refuse storage for future occupants collectively attract significant weight,
    and this outweighs the benefits associated with the proposed development.
43. The proposal would therefore conflict with the development plan and there are no
    other considerations, including the Framework, that outweigh this conflict. For the
    reasons given above, and having had regard to all other matters raised, I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

L Clark
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
