Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 June 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008184
138 Marton Road, Cnr Grange Road, Middlesbrough TS1 2ED
 • The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
   Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
   consent.
 • The appeal is made by Wildstone Estates Limited against the decision of Middlesbrough Council.
 • The application reference is 26/0032/ADV.
 • The advertisement proposed is the replacement of existing paper and paste advertising poster with a
   digital advertising display.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for replacement of existing
      paper and paste advertising poster with a digital advertising display at 138 Marton
      Road, Cnr Grange Road, Middlesbrough TS1 2ED in accordance with the terms of
      the application, Ref 26/0032/ADV, dated 12 January 2026. The consent is for five
      years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five standard conditions
      set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations as well as the following additional
      conditions:
     1)       The intensity of the illumination of the advertisement display permitted by this
              consent shall be no greater than 300cd/m2 during the hours of darkness
              (dusk to dawn) and no greater than the maximum luminance values during
              daytime hours (dawn to dusk) for a sign within Environmental Zone 4 as set
              out in tables 10.4 and 10.5 respectively of the Institute of Lighting
              Professionals ‘Professional Lighting Guide 05 (PLG 05) Brightness of
              Illuminated Advertisements’ (or its equivalent in a replacement Guide).
     2)       The interval between successive advertisements shall be no greater than 1
              second and the complete display shall change without effect. The display to
              include a mechanism to default to a blank or black screen in the event of
              malfunction, or if the advertisement is not in use.
     3)       The minimum display time for each advertisement shall be 10 seconds and
              the advertisement shall not include any features which would result in
              interactive messages or advertisements being displayed.
     4)       There shall be no moving images, animation, video or full motion images
              displayed unless otherwise permitted by this consent.
Main Issues:
2. The main issues are the effect of the proposed advertisement on:
     • the amenity of the site and surrounding area; and
     • public safety.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008184


Reasons
Amenity
3.     The appeal site is a paper and paste poster panel situated on the gable of an end
       terrace dwelling. The hoarding faces Grange Road at its crossroads with Marton
       Road, a main route into Middlesbrough town centre. The area is characterised by
       a mix of commercial and residential buildings, with activity levels reflecting its
       fringe town centre location. A digital hoarding, granted consent in 2019, lies
       nearby at 129 Marton Road (No.129).
4.     The proposed advertisement would replace the existing poster panel with a digital
       advertising display measuring approximately 3 metres by 6 metres. The digital
       display matches the size, design and location of the existing panel whilst
       presenting a reduced depth and overall bulk. It would therefore appear consistent
       with the existing poster panel and, being set within the profile of the gable, would
       not detract from the main architectural features of the dwelling to which it would
       be attached. Consequently, its height and scale would not appear intrusive or out
       of character with the streetscene.
5.     Although residential properties are situated further along Grange Road and
       Marton Road, the display would not face towards them. Instead, it would be
       oriented towards a commercial building. Pedestrians and vehicles travelling from
       Middlesbrough town centre would therefore experience the sign within a broader
       commercial context, which includes other commercial uses on the opposite side of
       Marton Road. Whilst these uses may not currently include illuminated signage, the
       presence of the digital display at No.129 establishes that the proposed display
       would not be an incongruous feature.
6.     Though the content of the display would change, this would be at predictable
       intervals and conditions could be attached that require adherence to industry
       standards for brightness and to restrict the use of the display to static adverts.
       These measures would control its prominence, preventing the display from
       appearing unduly dominant despite its illumination. The advertisement would
       therefore integrate with its fringe town centre location and the level of activity
       associated with it.
7.     For these reasons, I find that the proposal would not harm the amenity of the
       area. I have taken into account the provisions of the development plan, so far as
       they are material, but find no conflict with Policies CS5 and DC1 of the
       Middlesbrough Local Development Framework Core Strategy (2008) (MLDFCS),
       which require the visual appearance and layout of development, and its
       relationship with the surrounding area in terms of scale, design and materials to
       be of a high quality so that it is well integrated with the immediate and wider
       context.
8.     There would also be no conflict with the similar aims of draft Policy CR3 of the
       emerging Middlesbrough Local Plan (Publication Version) (2025) (MLP), albeit its
       stage of preparation means I afford only limited weight to this emerging policy.
Public Safety
9.    Marton Road is a classified highway that is straight, flat and wide. It forms a priority
      junction with Grange Road, a tributary street. A signalised pedestrian crossing lies


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008184


      a short distance to the south on Marton Road, with the proposed digital display set
      back to one side behind a small open space. There are two dropped crossings on
      this part of Marton Road that serve the commercial premises opposite the appeal
      site.
10. The Planning Practice Guidance states that all advertisements are intended to
    attract attention but proposed advertisements at points where drivers need to take
    more care are more likely to affect public safety. For example, at junctions,
    pedestrian crossings, or other places where local conditions present traffic
    hazards. There are less likely to be road safety problems if the advertisement is on
    a site within, amongst others, a commercial or industrial locality.
11. Whilst the site lies adjacent to a junction and pedestrian crossing where drivers are
    required to exercise greater care, it also sits at the edge of a commercial area and
    on a road with good forward visibility owing to its width, straight alignment and flat
    topography. In this context, both the junction and the crossing are straightforward
    in layout and present no significant technical challenges for road users. This is
    reinforced by the very low number of recorded incidents at this location over the
    past five years.
12. The proposed display would not be visible to northbound traffic on Marton Road,
    and would be positioned at an oblique angle away from vehicles approaching
    along the eastern arm of Grange Road. For drivers travelling southbound on
    Marton Road, the proposed display would initially be screened by the commercial
    building opposite. As a result, drivers would first register the dropped crossings in
    the foreground, followed by the crossroads junction and pedestrian signals further
    ahead. By the time the display would be visible, drivers would have identified
    potential road-safety considerations and would be expected to prioritise these
    accordingly.
13. For road users on the western arm of Grange Road, the sign would remain in view
    for a longer period due to its position directly ahead. However, that part of Grange
    Road is straight and subject to a 20mph speed limit. At these lower speeds, drivers
    would have ample time to process both the digital display and the road
    environment in front of them, including any vehicle movements into, or out of, the
    junction or adjacent off-street parking spaces. When considering the longstanding
    presence of the existing poster panel, the modernisation to a digital hoarding
    would not be unexpected or overly distracting for road users in this location.
14. Owing to its setback from the road frontage, the digital display would recede from
    view as drivers move closer to the pedestrian crossing. This ensures that the
    attention of drivers would not be disrupted at a critical point where high-risk
    pedestrian crossings could be attempted. The setback, combined with the
    measures proposed by the appellant to control brightness and ensure fixed
    images, would prevent the illuminated display from appearing any more prominent
    or distracting than the digital display accepted by the Council at 129 Marton Road.
    Furthermore, as there is no intervisibility between that site and the appeal site, it is
    not expected that granting consent would give rise to a cumulative impact.
15. For the reasons set out above, I determine that the proposed advertisement would
    not have a harmful effect on public safety. In taking into account the provisions of
    the development plan, so far as they are material, I find no conflict with Policy DC1



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008184


      of the MLDCFS which requires, amongst other things, that there is no impact on
      highway safety.
16. Furthermore, there would also be no conflict with the corresponding aims of draft
    Policy CR8 of the emerging MLP, albeit its stage of preparation means I afford
    only limited weight to this emerging policy.
Conditions
17. The Council have not suggested any conditions beyond the five standard
    conditions set out in the 2007 Regulations. The appellant has suggested
    conditions and I have considered these in respect of whether they are required in
    the interests of amenity and public safety. Where appropriate, I have amended the
    wording of the conditions to ensure their precision.
18. As the advertisement would be adjacent to a main thoroughfare, conditions
    restricting levels of illumination, the timing and nature of changes to the displayed
    advertisement and the use of moving images or interactive displays are all
    necessary to ensure its operation does not cause distraction to drivers and
    compromise highway safety. However, I have not imposed the suggested
    condition restricting advertisements resembling traffic signs as this would
    effectively duplicate one of the standard conditions.
Other Matters
19. I note the considerations made by the Inspectors for appeals
    APP/X4725/Z/18/3205903 and APP/B4215/Z/22/3303626. However, these
    decisions relate to proposals in different council areas and with different site
    circumstances. Therefore, these decisions are not directly comparable and have
    not been decisive to my reasoning, which is based on the specific planning merits
    of the proposal.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
