Appeal Decision
Inquiry held 8-11 September 2026, 15 September 2026 and 18 September 2026
Site visits made on 1 July 2026, 7 September 2026 and 14 September 2026
by D Hartley BA (Hons) MTP MBA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Reference: 6008238
Land North of A507, West of A10, Buntingford, SG9 9ER
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Hallam Land Management Limited against the decision of East Hertfordshire
    District Council.
•   The application reference is 3/24/0966/OUT.
•   The development proposed is an outline planning application for development of up to 600 dwellings
    (C3), up to 60 units of elderly accommodation (C3), a mixed-use local centre (including flexible use E
    and F), first school, informal and formal open space, associated works and infrastructure including a
    new access from the A507 and bridges over the A10, with all matters reserved except access.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted for development
   of up to 600 dwellings (C3), up to 60 units of elderly accommodation (C3), a mixed-
   use local centre (including flexible use E and F), first school, informal and formal
   open space, associated works and infrastructure including a new access from the
   A507 and bridges over the A10, with all matters reserved except access, at Land
   North of A507, West of A10, Buntingford, SG9 9ER, in accordance with application
   reference 3/24/0966/OUT, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. A case management conference was held with the main parties on 17 June 2026.
   This was to discuss only procedural matters.
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026
   (the Framework). It is a material consideration of ‘critical importance’ in decision
   making terms. The main parties were afforded the opportunity to provide written
   comments about the implications of the Framework in respect of their appeal
   positions prior to the opening of the inquiry. In reaching my decision, I have
   considered all written comments received as well as the aural comments made at
   the inquiry.
4. It has been drawn to my attention that a separate planning application for
   employment development (planning application 3/24/1255/OUT) has been
   submitted on land to the south of the appeal site. This is the subject of a separate
   appeal to be considered by another Inspector in due course. I have determined this
   appeal on the basis that such nearby land does not have a planning permission in
   place for its development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008238


5. The description of the proposed development in the banner heading above was
   agreed by the main parties at the inquiry. This differs from the agreed position of
   the main parties prior to the inquiry commencing in so far that it correctly refers to
   ‘bridges’ over the A10, as distinct from just ‘pedestrian bridges’ over the A10. This
   is because the proposal includes a bridge over the A10 which would be used by
   cyclists. It also omits reference to ‘sui generis’ uses in respect of the mixed-use
   local centre because that is not precise and, if approved, could in principle approve
   harmful or inappropriate development.
6. The proposed development has been screened on behalf of the Secretary of State
   under section 14(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Environmental Impact
   Assessment) Regulations 2017. It has been concluded that the development is not
   Environmental Impact Assessment development.
7. A completed planning obligation made under section 106 of the Town and Country
   Planning Act 1990 (as amended) accompanies this appeal. It was executed on
   23 September 2026. If outline planning permission is approved, it will take effect.
Main Issues
8. The main issues for consideration are:
      (i)      whether the proposed toucan crossing to be provided at grade level over
               the A10 would be safe, the acceptability of proposed speed limit reductions
               on the A10, the extent to which the site would be capable of delivering safe
               access and route connections for all users in accordance with an
               acceptable Road Safety Audit, and whether the proposed access from the
               A507 would be suitable and safe;
      (ii)     whether the development would be in a sustainable location with convenient
               access by all to a choice of sustainable modes of transport including
               socially safe and quality pedestrian and cycling routes to reach day to day
               amenities, facilities and services, including employment and
               food/comparison shopping facilities further afield, and the extent to which
               the proposed cycle and pedestrian route connections and bus
               improvements would make a suitable modal shift towards reducing car
               usage;
      (iii)    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area
               including landscape character;
      (iv)     whether the proposal would provide the necessary infrastructure to make
               the development acceptable including affordable housing, custom/self-build
               housing, active travel provisions, education, and public transport provisions,
               and;
      (v)      given policy S5 of the Framework, (a) if the development proposal falls
               within one of the categories in such a policy whether the benefits of the
               proposal would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when
               assessed against the national decision-making policies, and b) if the
               development proposal does not fall within one of the categories in such a
               policy, whether exceptionally the benefits of the proposal would
               substantially outweigh any adverse effects, including any possible adverse



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6008238


               effects on the character of the countryside and in relation to promoting
               sustainable patterns of movement.
Reasons
Proposal
9.    The proposal is submitted in outline with all detailed matters reserved for
      subsequent consideration apart from access. The application site is just over 50
      hectares. An indicative masterplan accompanies the application, and I have
      considered this from the point of view of considering the planning merits of the
      proposal in land use principle terms.
10. Up to 600 dwellinghouses are proposed of which 240 (40%) would be affordable
    and 1% would be made available for custom and self-build purposes. Based on
    the appellant’s building heights parameters plan in its Design Principles Document
    dated May 2025, identified lower slopes would have buildings up to 12.5 metres in
    height and identified upper slopes would have buildings up to 10.0 metres. The
    proposal would also include an element of elderly accommodation (60 units) as
    well as a mixed-use local centre and community hub (0.53 hectares). A 2-form
    entry first school is proposed as well as green infrastructure totalling some 24.67
    hectares including also the provision of a country park.
11. Access into the site would be off the A507 Baldock Road to the south and off
    Throcking Lane to the north. Active travel improvements are proposed on the
    A507, including provision of a shared use footway/cycleway from the site towards
    the town centre of Buntingford. A new active travel bridge would be constructed
    adjacent to the existing pedestrian bridge over the A10 linking public rights of way
    36 and 40 where improved lighting would be in place. A new pedestrian bridge
    would be provided over the A10 which would connect public rights of way 41 and
    35 and hence links into the town.
12. It is proposed that two ‘mobility hubs’ would be provided on the site with one
    located in the local centre and with a bus stop (including shelter). The mobility
    hubs would include pedestrian and cycle facilities, charging facilities, and real time
    bus information boards. The appellant’s bus strategy is for bus services 18, 331
    and 386 (now 37) to connect directly into the site. Such provision would be
    enabled by means of a financial contribution which would allow bus service 331 to
    be delivered at a 30-minute frequency with further complimentary service provided
    by bus services 18 and 386 (now 37). A further contribution of £500 per dwelling is
    proposed for the Buntingford Community Transport Scheme.
13. Existing trees and hedgerows would be retained, unless necessary to be removed
    to enable development, and new planting and wildlife areas would be provided.
    The appellant’s evidence indicates a biodiversity net gain of 11.22%.
Land use principle - Development Plan and the Framework
14. There is no dispute between the parties that the appeal site falls outside the
    settlement of Buntingford. I have applied the definition of a settlement in Annex B of
    the Framework and taken the settlement of Buntingford to be that which is shown
    by way of a settlement boundary in the East Hertfordshire District Plan 2018 (LP).
    In this regard, the settlement boundary for Buntingford is for the most part up to
    and/or close to the eastern edge of the A10.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
Appeal Decision 6008238


15. The main parties agreed at the inquiry that the proposal would not lead to the
    provision of isolated homes in the countryside and hence that national decision-
    making policy HO11 of the Framework was not applicable in this case. On the
    evidence that is before me, I do not disagree with these common ground positions.
16. As the appeal site falls outside of the settlement of Buntingford, it is necessary that
    I determine the acceptability of the principle of the development against national
    decision-making policy S5 of the Framework. It states that only certain forms of
    development should be approved outside settlements, as set out in a list, and that
    proposed development ‘should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework’.
17. In this case, the main parties agree that the proposal should be considered
    specifically against policy S5(1)(j) of the Framework. In principle, this permits
    development outside a settlement where it would ‘address an evidenced unmet
    need (including, but not limited to , development proposals involving the provision
    of housing where the local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five year supply
    of deliverable housing sites or scores below 75% in the most recent Housing
    Delivery Test) and where the development would (i) be physically well related an
    existing settlement (unless the nature of the development would make this
    inappropriate) and be of a scale which can be accommodated taking into account
    the existing or proposed availability of infrastructure’.
18. There is no dispute between the main parties that the Council cannot demonstrate
    a deliverable five-year supply of housing sites. The appellant says that the supply is
    2.21 years, and the Council says that it is 2.88 years. I have determined this appeal
    based on a housing land undersupply range of between 2.21 years and 2.88 years,
    and for the purpose of my final balance and conclusion below, have opted for the
    Council’s best-case scenario of 2.88 years. The housing aspect of the proposed
    development is sufficient to satisfy national decision-making policy S5(j) from the
    point of view of ‘addressing an evidenced unmet need’ for housing. I deal with the
    other aspects of the proposed development later in my decision and from the point
    of view of the consideration of general benefits in the overall planning balance.
19. I concur with the common ground position of the main parties that the development
    would be of a scale that could be accommodated considering the existing and
    proposed availability of infrastructure (see my findings relating to the completed
    planning obligation later in this decision). In this regard, the proposal also satisfies
    national decision-making policy S5(j) of the Framework.
20. In respect of the above policy, the principal issue in dispute between the main
    parties relates to whether the proposed development would be ‘physically well
    related’ to the settlement of Buntingford. In terms of this matter, I have considered
    all the comments made at both the inquiry and in terms of the written
    correspondence received.
21. In my judgement, the proposed development would be seen as being physically
    well related to the settlement of Buntingford owing to existing and proposed bridges
    and other transport connections (including active travel links and proposed toucan
    crossing on the A10 which I later conclude are acceptable in all respects); the
    intervisibility between the site and existing residential/other development close to
    and off Neale Drive (including also some consented development that has not been


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
Appeal Decision 6008238


     built out); the fact that there is no intervening countryside between the settlement
     edge and the proposed development; the proximity of Buntingford Business Park
     (where the roofs of such development can be seen from parts of the appeal site);
     the site’s existing association with the adjacent proposed employment allocation
     (accepting that this is yet to be developed); the promotion of sustainable patterns of
     movement between the site and the settlement utilising roads, paths and services;
     the avoidance of isolated development; and the overall close proximity of the
     development to the edge of the existing settlement of Buntingford as defined by its
     boundary in the LP.
22. I acknowledge that the A10 does physically separate the appeal site from land
    immediately to the east of it and which falls within the defined settlement boundary.
    Even accounting for the view expressed by the Council’s landscape witness that
    the A10 is of itself a ‘landscape break’, there is common ground that the site is
    adjacent to the settlement of Buntingford. It is noteworthy that large parts of the
    A10 which are close to the appeal site are confined to land within a cutting. Hence,
    it is my judgement that in this location it constitutes a soft connection bridging the
    settlement of Buntingford with the proposed development rather than being
    perceived as being a hard boundary, or a prominent landscape break.
23. I acknowledge that in respect of historic planning decisions, a view has generally
    been taken that, overall, the A10 represents a physical barrier to the settlement of
    Buntingford. That may be the case, but the point is that policy S5(j) does, in
    principle, permit development proposals outside of settlements and, in this case,
    subject to such development being physically well related to the settlement of
    Buntingford.
24. The A10 is not very wide as it passes the appeal site: it is not four lanes and a
    verge as can be seen along other parts of the A10 further afield. Part of it is
    experienced as being visually within a cutting. When travelling along part of the A10
    and near to the appeal site (e.g., just after or before Neale Drive), the motorist is
    obliquely aware of existing residential development. Such development is also
    experienced from parts of public rights of way (PROW) Nos. 40 and 41. I also
    consider that owing to the proximity of the appeal site to the defined settlement
    boundary, the overall pattern of development within the locality, land topography,
    and the presence of existing and proposed urban influences, the proposed
    development would be physically well related to the settlement of Buntingford for
    the purposes of applying national decision-making policy S5(j) of the Framework.
25. I turn now to consider the principle of the proposal against development plan
    policies. The appeal site is within an area designated as a ‘Rural Area Beyond the
    Green Belt’ in the adopted LP. There is no dispute between the main parties that
    the proposal does not accord with policies DPS2 and GBR2 of the DP. The former
    seeks to direct development in accordance with a hierarchy and the latter permits
    specified development types. The proposal does not meet any of the requirements
    of the hierarchy and does not meet any of the specified development types for the
    ‘Rural Area Beyond the Green Belt’. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would
    conflict with the requirements of policies DPS2 and GBR2 of the LP.
26. Moreover, the proposal does not accord with the requirements of policy HD1 of the
    2017 Buntingford Community Area Neighbourhood Plan 2014-2031 (NP) which
    states that where development schemes are consistent with policies HD2 to HD7
    of the NP, they ‘will be permitted in the form of small scale infill development within

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
Appeal Decision 6008238


      or immediately adjoining significant clusters of development; affordable housing on
      rural exception sites to meet an identified local need which cannot be met in any
      other way; development for which there is a demonstrable need for a location in
      the countryside. The need for this policy to be updated will be assessed when the
      emerging District Plan has been adopted and the strategic context in terms of the
      scale of new housing development has been determined’.
27. The proposal is not a small-scale infill development. While the site is adjacent to
    Buntingford Business Park and an employment allocation (identified under policy
    BUNT3 of the LP), it is not in my judgement adjoining a ‘significant’ cluster of
    existing development. It does not comprise affordable housing on a rural exception
    site. I therefore conclude that the proposal would conflict with policy HD1 of the
    NP. I emphasise, however, that the NP was adopted in 2017 and therefore it is
    more than five years old. Therefore, national decision-making policy S6 of the
    Framework is not applicable in this case.
28. The above development plan policies are placing a constraint on the delivery of
    houses in the context that the Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites. The spatial housing strategy as contained with the
    adopted development plan for the area relates to a housing requirement which is
    materially different to the one that is in place now. Moreover, such policies are
    materially inconsistent with national decision-making policy S5 which relates to the
    principle of development outside settlements, including housing development.
29. It is noteworthy that Annex A, paragraph 2 of the Framework states that
    ‘development plan policies (or parts of those policies) which are materially
    inconsistent with national-decision making policies in this Framework should be
    given very limited weight’. I afford the above development plan policies limited
    adverse weight in decision making terms because they materially conflict with
    national decision-making policy S5. The development plan for the area does not
    accord with the requirements of Plan-making policy HO3 of the Framework
    because it does not seek to ensure that a sufficient supply and mix of housing
    sites is identified to meet the most up to date housing requirement for the area.
30. Given that there is at least an agreed housing land supply range amongst the main
    parties, it has not been necessary in this case for me to reach a detailed finding
    about the actual housing land supply position. Either way, I agree with the position
    of the main parties that substantial positive weight should be afforded to the
    proposed delivery of dwellinghouses on the land. In the context of national
    decision-making policy HO7, and the very significant undersupply position, I afford
    the delivery of a significant number of dwellinghouses on the site substantial
    positive weight.
31. For the above reasons, I conclude that the housing led proposal does amount to a
    form of development that can in principle be approved in this location as it accords
    with the criteria in national-decision making policy S5(j) of the Framework. I afford
    national-decision making policy S5(j), as recent national planning policy, more
    weight as a material planning consideration than the above development plan
    policies to which I afford only limited weight in decision making terms.
32. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would be acceptable in principle
    subject to satisfying the additional requirement of national decision-making policy
    S5 which is that it ‘should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008238


      substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
      national decision-making policies in the Framework’. I deal with this as part of my
      overall planning balance.
Highway safety
33. There is no dispute between the parties that the proposed accesses into and out of
    the site from Baldock Road and from Throcking Lane would be safe and that the
    surrounding road network has capacity to accommodate the additional vehicles
    associated with the development. Moreover, the main parties consider that the
    appeal site could be developed in such a way that suitable road and car parking
    infrastructure could be provided on-site and in conjunction with the provision of bus
    service infrastructure and walking and cycling routes. I have no reason to disagree
    with these common ground positions, and, in this regard, the proposed access
    details are acceptable.
34. The primary issues of concern between the Highway Authority/Local Planning
    Authority and the appellant relate to whether the evidence indicates that the
    proposed toucan crossing with a new 40 mph zone would be safe for cyclists,
    wheelers and pedestrians alike taking into account vehicular speeds; likely driver
    behaviour relating to the character of the environment and particularly from a speed
    point of view; whether a toucan crossing on the A10 could be provided without
    vehicles queuing back to the roundabout when travelling in a northbound direction;
    whether motorists using the A10 would likely mistake a green light at the toucan
    crossing as meaning that it related to a signalised roundabout and hence that it was
    safe to enter the Baldock roundabout without giving way; and the extent to which
    the proposed toucan crossing would be acceptable and safe in respect of its
    staggered arrangement and its central island as a space to be shared between
    pedestrians, wheelers and cyclists alike.
35. In considering the above matters, I have considered the appellant’s two options
    relating to the location/design of the toucan crossing (‘option 1’ drawing No. 23161
    0046 P2 or ‘option 2’ drawing No. 23161 043 P2). I have also considered the
    various local and national guidance relating to the provision of toucan crossings as
    outlined by the main parties. In some respects, they are conflicting, although it is
    fair to say that when the technical guidance is considered as a whole, it does not
    normally support shared and staggered toucan crossings.
36. Notwithstanding the above, I do not consider that there is an automatic prohibition
    in terms of the provision of a shared staggered toucan crossing in this location and
    where a 40mph limit is being proposed. Indeed, LTN 1/20 authorises the use of a
    signalised crossing such as those which I am asked to consider for speed limits up
    to and including 50mph. It is noteworthy that there was no specific objection in
    principle to the provision of a shared staggered toucan crossing over the A10 (i.e.,
    close to the Baldock roundabout) from the point of view of the completed
    independent Road Safety Audits (RSA).
37. I find that a shared toucan crossing within a 40mph zone is acceptable in principle
    on this part of the A10. While the highway safety witness representing the Highway
    Authority raised some criticism of the appellant’s speed survey (a 57m set back
    from the roundabout) in terms of it not being conducted on two separate months, I
    am nonetheless satisfied that in this case the data can reasonably be relied upon
    as an indicator of average 85th percentile speeds, i.e. about 30 mph in the given


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008238


     speed measurement locations. I find that the 85th percentile speed rating is
     acceptable from the point of view of the consideration of the suitability of the
     proposed 40mph zone. In considering this matter it is noteworthy that there is
     significant visibility of the proposed signals from the southbound A10 and there is
     comfort in the measurements between the circa 30mph 85th percentile speed and
     the 50mph speed limit at which LTN 1/20 would support a signalised crossing.
38. I do accept that the speed survey findings should not only be relied on when
    considering the acceptability of the proposed toucan crossing. Other evaluation
    criteria should be considered which I consider later. While the highway safety
    witness representing the Highway Authority indicated a preference to see traffic
    speed data taken from further along the A10 (perhaps up to Neale Drive), I am
    nonetheless persuaded that in this case the speed survey undertaken by the
    appellant is sufficiently robust. Indeed, I concur with the appellant’s highway safety
    witness that traffic speeds nearer to the Baldock Road roundabout were always
    likely to be relatively low because motorists would need to be slowing down for it or
    because they were just leaving it. This is indeed something that I witnessed on my
    site visits, albeit that they were snap shots in time. In other words, it is my
    judgement that the roundabout itself seeks to slow vehicles down.
39. At the inquiry there was much discussion about whether drivers would abide by the
    new 40mph limit. The view of the Council and Highway Authority was that drivers
    would not always slow down because there would not be a change in the character
    of the road environment on the A10. Indeed, it was stated by the Council’s highway
    safety witness that drivers would not have had to give way for several miles when
    travelling on the A10 from Royston.
40. I do not agree with the claim made that the character of the A10 would not be
    different between Neale Drive and the Baldock roundabout. The A10 at this point is
    straight and there is very good forward visibility. The Baldock Road roundabout
    already represents a change and a visual break for drivers. Moreover, new
    signalling infrastructure would be visible to drivers. In addition, road markings,
    signage, a change in road surface etc could be provided along the A10 and would
    be capable of being addressed as part of a planning condition.
41. In conjunction with the above, it is my judgement that the Neale Drive and
    Throcking Lane junctions do already alert drivers to some extent that there is some
    change in the character of the environment. Moreover, motorists travelling in a
    southbound direction are already aware, albeit at an oblique angle, to the existing
    of dwellinghouses off Neale Drive and it is noteworthy that additional consented
    residential development in this area is yet to be built out.
42. This is an outline application, but it is the case that the master plan proposals for
    the site do show areas of landscaping (including sustainable urban drainage) on
    land immediately fronting the A10. However, I find that even accounting for the
    indicative planting reaching maturity, it is likely that there would at least be some
    glimpses of buildings, structures and lighting on rising land and which would be
    apparent to passing motorists.
43. Even if one were to disagree with me on the above point, it is not in any event
    determinative. This is because the other matters addressed above, coupled with
    the provision of new bridges over the A10, are sufficient in my judgement for me to
    conclude that motorists would perceive that there was a material change in the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    8
Appeal Decision 6008238


     character of the A10 from Neale Drive to the Baldock roundabout. Consequently, I
     find that southbound motorists would adjust their speed to be in accordance with
     the proposed 40mph speed limit.
44. In respect of northbound traffic, the evidence is that the 85 percentile traffic speeds
    are already below 40mph. However, to ensure that queuing is avoided, which could
    impact on the flow of the roundabout, I consider that the option 2 toucan crossing
    proposal offers, on balance, the best highway safety and active travel solution. This
    proposal has a greater set back distance from the roundabout and, in my
    judgement would suitably ensure broad accordance with technical guidance.
45. At the inquiry, the Council’s witness raised some concern about the toucan
    crossing being set back further away from Baldock Road from the point of view of
    cyclists, wheelers or pedestrians potentially circumventing it to the detriment of
    highway safety. I am not persuaded that this would be a common occurrence and,
    in any event, some form of hard landscaping feature (e.g., railings) could be put in
    place to prevent such unsafe crossings from happening. There is no objective
    evidence before me to suggest that people would seek to climb over railings. There
    is scope for this to be addressed as part of the agreed conditions.
46. While it is the case that local and national technical guidance does generally
    suggest that shared and staggered toucan islands should normally be avoided, I
    find that based on forecasted cycling and pedestrian trips (AM and PM peak times)
    arising from the development, the proposed central refuge/island would be large
    enough (i.e., that shown in the option 2 drawing) to accommodate shared use and
    without unacceptable conflict between cyclists, wheelers and pedestrians within it.
    A staggered toucan crossing would be appropriate in this location in so far as it
    would suitably balance the needs of cyclists, wheelers and pedestrians while
    minimising the potential for traffic back-ups or tailbacks within the highway network,
    including the Baldock roundabout.
47. I note the concern raised by the Council about the width of the toucan crossing
    island (option 2) from the point of view of part of it being 3.0 metres wide. I deal
    with this matter as part of the sustainable transport main issue below (an
    interrelated matter) and conclude that it would be safe and would be acceptable
    from an active travel point of view.
48. In this case, and notwithstanding the views expressed by the Council’s highway
    safety witness, I consider that it would be appropriate to have guard rails in place in
    respect of the proposed toucan crossing. This would address some of the concerns
    raised by the Council’s highway safety witness (representing also the Highway
    Authority) who raised the point about pedestrians potentially stepping out into the
    road. It is my judgement that in this environment (i.e., a relatively busy ‘A’ road
    which distributes traffic from the north to the south of the district and vice versa),
    most users would find that the provision of guard rails made them feel safer.
    Indeed, the guard rails would give all users the feeling of some protection from
    traffic flows as they waited to cross to the other side of the toucan crossing.
49. In this case, and notwithstanding the views expressed by the Council’s highway
    safety witness, I am of the view that the provision of guard rails would therefore be
    likely to encourage more use of the proposed toucan crossing. It is also noteworthy
    that under cross examination, the Council’s highway safety witness commented



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
Appeal Decision 6008238


     that they can ‘occasionally be useful, but it is rare’. This at least indicates to me that
     such a witness was not saying that they could never be acceptable.
50. Moreover, with traffic markers, signage and potentially a change of road surface
    (including a polish stone value assessment) as part of the detailed planning stage, I
    am satisfied that motorists would be alive to the fact that the speed limit had
    changed within the A10 (i.e. to 40mph). These are final detailed matters that could
    be secured as part of a planning condition. In my judgement, it would be
    appropriate to introduce the 40mph limit on the A10 from just north of Neale Drive.
51. On the evidence that is before me, I consider that motorists would slow down to
    safe speeds prior to reaching the toucan crossing and, as is common on many
    highways now (including motorways), motorists would be alive to the fact that there
    would be variable speed limits on this part of the A10. If it was subsequently found
    that motorists were not obeying the proposed 40mph speed limits, there are of
    course separate law enforcement measures to deal with this. However, I do not find
    that there is any objective evidence to support the contention that such law
    enforcement measures would likely be necessary.
52. I do not find that with the provision of the above measures it would be the case that
    motorists, whether familiar or not with the area, would interpret a potentially
    ‘constant green light’ associated with the proposed toucan crossing as either
    meaning that it related to the roundabout junction and that they could proceed
    without giving way, or that they would opt to ignore red lights. With a reasonable
    separation distance between the toucan crossing and the roundabout (i.e. the
    position as broadly shown on the option 2 toucan crossing drawing), coupled with
    suitable signage before the roundabout (give way etc), the proposal would be
    capable of mitigating any possible risks and conflicts in terms of the safe use of
    roundabout. In respect of the phasing and timing of the traffic lights (even if not in
    use), this is a matter that could be considered more fully as part of future road
    safety audit stages and as part of the s.278 agreement process.
53. In reaching the above finding, I have considered 85th percentile speed data
    provided by the appellant. I find that this presents an acceptable/robust basis for
    concluding that existing traffic speeds are acceptable within the vicinity of the
    proposed toucan crossing. At this point, the evidence indicates that even without a
    toucan crossing motorists are slowing down for the roundabout. I noticed this on my
    site visits although I do acknowledge that they were only snap shots in time.
54. At the inquiry, concern was raised by a local resident in Throcking about the
    potential for the A507 (Baldock Road) to be closed when the proposed new
    roundabout was being constructed. I acknowledge the concern raised given the
    nature and width of the roads running though Throcking and the consequent effect
    that diverted traffic and/or heavy goods vehicles could have on this village. It need
    not, however, be the case that the A507 (Baldock Road) would have to be fully
    closed when the new roundabout giving access into the appeal site was being built.
    It is often the case that a new roundabout can be built out in phases, thereby
    keeping sections of an existing road still open and without the need to divert traffic.
55. The above is not therefore a matter that justifies refusal of planning permission. It is
    a matter that can be suitably controlled by way of the submission of a construction
    management plan and by condition. Upon approval of such a construction
    management plan, it could be enforced in the event of a breach. Ultimately, the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     10
Appeal Decision 6008238


     Highway Authority would have input into a construction management plan by way
     of being consulted upon it once received by the Council and as part of a discharge
     of condition planning application. Put another way, the evidence does not lead me
     to conclude that in respect of this proposal the use of roads in Throcking from the
     point of view of either construction vehicles accessing the site and/or traffic being
     diverted from the A507, would necessarily have to take place, or that the proposal
     would result in any material harm being caused to Thistly Vale Brook.
56. Overall, and for the above, reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would
    not cause unacceptable harm to highway safety. This relates to the proposed
    vehicular accesses, the operation of the Baldock roundabout, the provision of a
    proposed toucan crossing (i.e. option 2 – see highway safety and active travel
    assessment below), and the proposed 40mph zones on the A10 and Baldock
    Road. This is of course subject to the imposition of conditions and the completed
    planning obligation which would control matters of detail.
57. In reaching the above conclusion, I have also considered the conclusions reached
    by J Bartlett Consulting Ltd in respect of the independent Road Safety Audits.
    Moreover, and, for the avoidance of doubt and as per the common ground position
    of the main parties with reference to the highways statement of common ground, I
    find that the evidence indicates that the proposed development would not
    cumulatively have a severely adverse impact on the transport network in terms of
    capacity and congestion, or indeed lead to ‘pressure on the local highway network’.
58. Subject to the imposition of conditions, I therefore find that the proposal would
    accord with the highway safety, traffic management and sustainability requirements
    of national decision-making policy TR6 of the Framework, and policies TRA1 and
    TRA2 of the LP, all of which are consistent with one another.
Whether a sustainable/accessible location
59. There is no dispute between the main parties that the proposal would ensure that it
    was possible to walk or cycle to day-to-day amenities and services in the centre of
    Buntingford (all within 2 km of the centre of the appeal site) and based on the
    indicative active travel improvements within and outside the site and the proposed
    bridges over the A10. The 2 km distances would be possible if cyclists or
    pedestrians were to use any of the proposed active travel routes.
60. There is also no dispute between the parties that excluding driving, the appeal site
    has a connectivity score of 45, meaning that it is 45% as well connected as the
    best-connected place in the country, which is a grid square within Tower Hamlets.
    When scored relative to areas within the same District, the appeal site falls within
    band B (excluding driving), on a scale from A to J, where A is the best-connected
    category. That indicates to me that the appeal site is already well connected from
    an active travel point of view. In other words, this is a very good baseline to start
    with when considering the proposed active travel proposals.
61. The appellant’s sustainable transport witness acknowledged at the inquiry that
    some may decide at certain times of the day (e.g., hours of darkness), or if there
    was inclement weather, that they may want to use alternative active travel routes
    from the site and to the town centre/amenities (and vice versa). This is a
    reasonable position to take. It is noteworthy that this proposal does provide
    alternatives in terms of active travel options for those that would visit and occupy
    the proposed development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    11
Appeal Decision 6008238


62. Several measures are proposed to facilitate access and connectivity to and from
    the appeal site including a new vehicle main access junction to the site from the
    A507 Baldock Road with a footway/cycleway. Vehicular access is also proposed
    from Throcking Lane.
63. There would be a toucan crossing over the A10 leading to a shared
    pedestrian/cycling route within Baldock Road which would stretch to the east and
    towards the town centre. There would be additional financial contributions in the
    completed planning obligation which would be used to make sustainable transport
    improvements to Bowling Green Lane and Monks Close.
64. At this point, it is worth me emphasising that some of the active travel
    improvements would also be of benefit to existing members of the local community
    (and visitors alike), as well as to those who travel on foot or bicycle to Buntingford
    Business Park.
65. It is also noteworthy that some additional employment units have recently been
    approved within the Buntingford Business Park complex (i.e., an extension to
    existing provision) and there is in principle support through the allocation for the
    building out of more employment development adjacent to the appeal site. In other
    words, it is reasonable that I conclude that the proposals would have at least some
    in principle potential for reducing car journeys relating to visits to and from
    Buntingford Business Park and the adjacent employment allocation.
66. In addition to the above, improvements are proposed to Public Right of Way 36 in
    the form of a widened, better surfaced and lit footpath. At the inquiry, the
    appellant’s sustainable travel witness indicated that the provision of an ‘up to’ 3.0
    metre width footpath would also have the potential to be used at a future date as a
    shared pedestrian/cycle route, and in accordance with the existing aspirations of
    the Hertfordshire Rights of Way Improvement Plan (2017/18-2027/2028).
    However, it was made clear, and not disputed by the Council, that the Highway
    Authority felt that it could not permit a change in the legal status of PROW 36 at
    this moment in time. I deal with this matter later.
67. Finally, it is also proposed to improve footpath connectivity in respect of the
    widening and lighting of PROW 35 to the east of the site and via a new footbridge
    over the A10 (with steps) leading to the north eastern part of the appeal site
    (PROW 41). This bridge would replace the existing at grade crossing over the A10
    between the appeal site and PROW 35. The new bridge would represent an
    enhancement to PROW 35 and its safe connectivity to the appeal site.
68. The point of dispute between the main parties relates to whether the proposed
    residents of the site would seek to use the walking and cycling links from the site
    and to the centre of Buntingford. The Council’s view is that given the routes that
    residents would have to use, they would not be attractive or feel safe. It is stated
    that this would particularly be the case at night and where there is a claimed lack
    of surveillance from existing development. Consequently, the Council’s view is that
    the private motor vehicle would be used for most journeys as distinct from walking
    and cycling.
69. The appellant disputes the above claims and is of the view that the proposed
    active travel improvements would be safe and feel safe and would have the effect
    of materially reducing the number of car journeys in association with the proposed
    development. Moreover, the appellant points out that it is proposed that the site

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6008238


      would include some on-site facilities such as a mixed-use local centre,
      sports/recreation facilities and a country park. The latter would encourage more
      sustainable patterns of movement and would seek to reduce reliance on the
      private motor vehicle.
70. In respect of proposed footpath links, I am satisfied that the appellant has suitably
    explored all reasonable options and has sought to prioritise pedestrians in terms of
    the design strategy for the scheme. Good on-site links could be secured at
    reserved matters stage in conjunction with the consideration of layout matters.
    Moreover, I find that the provision of bus services and infrastructure within the site
    would enable convenient access to and from the site to the town centre, as well as
    to nearby towns where there is additional choice in terms of employment, shopping
    or other leisure opportunities. This would constitute a realistic and sustainable
    choice for residents in terms of not using the car for such journeys.
71. At the inquiry, there was much discussion about whether the proposal would be
    acceptable in terms of making provision for cyclists from an active travel point of
    view. Concern was raised by the Council’s sustainable transport witness about the
    fact that cyclists using the new active travel bridge over the A10 would have to turn
    right into Skipps Meadows where there is a hard surfaced ‘alleyway’ of about 1.8
    metres in width and where it would be necessary for cyclists to dismount. The view
    expressed was that cyclists would be unlikely to dismount at this point and that
    sharing this route with pedestrians would lead to conflicts. Moreover, it was
    claimed that this was an area which felt vulnerable.
72. I do agree that it would be ideal if cyclists could continue down PROW 36 as a
    shared pedestrian and cycle route. Based on the appellant’s evidence, it does
    appear that there may be enough land to achieve this aim should the Highway
    Authority decide that it is prepared to permit a change in its legal status, and that
    there is final and sufficient legal certainty that all the land is within public control as
    distinct from in the ownership of a private party. However, in the absence of the
    Highway Authority confirming that it is in a position to allow a change in the legal
    status of PROW 36 to permit also its use by cyclists, I am satisfied that the
    appellant has done as much as it could to explore and prioritise cycling provision
    along this route.
73. In the context of the above, and while the route via Skipps Meadow would not
    reach the level of being perfect because cyclists would have to dismount, I
    emphasise that this would only be for a very short distance. On balance, I consider
    that cyclists would look to dismount and that the link would be acceptable,
    convenient and safe for cyclists and pedestrians alike. I accept that this may be
    minor annoyance for some but nonetheless do not find that it would be a
    disincentive from a regular use point of view. My findings are also reached in the
    context of the matter pertaining to PROW 36, by the fact that the ‘alleyway’ is lit in
    the form of a street lamp, and because Skipps Meadow is traffic calmed. I also
    emphasise that that those using a cycle adapted to their needs and with a
    disability, would be able to lawfully use PROW 36 (and other footpaths) in
    accordance with section 20 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act
    1970.
74. I experienced on my site visits that traffic was light in Skipps Meadow. This route
    would link into a new shared pedestrian and cycling route in Baldock Road and
    with convenient access to many amenities, services and facilities in Buntingford

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     13
Appeal Decision 6008238


      and within 2km of the site. While the Framework refers to 800 metres or a 10
      minutes’ walk time to railway stations as being a ‘reasonable walking distance’,
      this is in the context of considering proposals against specific proposals around
      well-connected railways stations. This appeal does not relate to such a proposal.
75. While Manual for Streets states that ‘walkable neighbourhoods are typically
    characterised by having a range of facilities within 10 minutes’ (up to about 800 m)
    walking distance of residential areas which residents may access comfortably on
    foot’ it goes on to say that ‘this is not an upper limit and PPS13 states that walking
    offers the greatest potential to replace short car trips, particularly those under 2
    km’. In this case, I am satisfied that the walking routes to the many amenities and
    services in Buntingford (i.e., less than 2km) would, from a pure distance point of
    view, be acceptable to encourage many to travel by foot.
76. While PROW 36 is not being proposed by the appellant as a shared cycle and
    pedestrian route (i.e., it is proposed only as an improved footpath), it is
    nonetheless noteworthy that there would be a proposed active travel bridge over
    the A10 and to the appeal site. This includes cycling provision which is to be
    commended. In time, and on the evidence that is available to me including the
    appellant’s counsel opinion, I consider that there may be a prospect of PROW 36
    also becoming a cycle route. This would be in accordance with the aspirations in
    the Hertfordshire Public Rights of Way Improvement Plan (HPROWIP) relating to
    PROW 36. This would be ideal from a convenience point of view for those cyclists
    who wanted to reach Freeman college or other facilities towards its eastern end.
77. Notwithstanding the above, I do not find that in this case a shared cycle/pedestrian
    facility along the route of PROW 36 is strictly necessary to make the development
    proposal acceptable from an overall active travel point of view. The improvement
    of this route for pedestrians (including lighting) is in itself a very positive matter.
    While it is the case that some parts of the route have less surveillance than others,
    I find that many would use it on a day-to-day basis. It is also the case that
    improvements to this footpath (e.g., lighting and surfacing) would have benefits for
    those that currently use it. I do not find that it would be unsafe or feel vulnerable for
    most users. However, for those pedestrians that did not want to use this route at
    certain times of the day, it is noteworthy that there would be other options available
    to them in terms of conveniently (i.e., travels distances) reaching facilities,
    amenities and services in Buntingford.
78. At the inquiry, the Council’s sustainable transport witness raised concerns about
    the toucan crossing from the point of view of its staggered design (requiring cyclists
    to turn four times), as well as to the amount of shared space that would be
    available within parts of the island for both cyclists, wheelers and pedestrians alike.
    In addition, the same witness raised some concerns about the proposed shared
    pedestrian/cycle route along the Baldock Road corridor both in terms of the claimed
    lack of surveillance to the west of the Baldock Road roundabout, and in terms of
    some technical matters to the east of the Baldock Road roundabout. I deal with
    each of these points below in turn.
79. In this case, I do not find that a staggered toucan crossing (option 2) would in
    principle be an unsafe option to facilitate walking or cycling across the A10. I
    acknowledge that a minimum of 4.0 metres is recommended for islands in
    paragraph 14.12 of Part 3 of Hertfordshire County Council’s Place & Movement
    Planning and Design Guidance for Hertfordshire (P&MP&DG). However, it is my

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    14
Appeal Decision 6008238


     judgement that as the proposed island widens beyond the 3.0 metres annotation on
     the option 2 drawing, users of the island as a whole would be sufficiently alert to the
     space that they had around them from the point of view of reacting, waiting and/or
     sharing such space as a whole.
80. In reaching this view, I have noted that 3.0 metres would be more than enough
    space to accommodate a typical ‘maximum’ length cycle of 2.8 metres and a
    ‘maximum’ typical width of 1.2 metres as identified in table 5-1 of the 2020
    Department for Transport Local Transport Note 1/20 (LTN 1/20). Furthermore, I
    consider that very long cycles would likely take a diagonal approach to ease turning
    movements. I do not therefore envisage the sort of conflict as alleged by the
    Council’s sustainable transport witness.
81. I therefore find that the option 2 toucan crossing would not cause unacceptable
    harm to highway safety and that it would be regularly used by all users as an active
    travel route. Consequently, I find that there is justification in this case for departing
    from the minimum island width distance as advocated in paragraph 14.12 of Part 3
    of P&MP&DG.
82. It is noteworthy that the main parties have agreed a condition which requires
    ‘general accordance’ with either the option 1 or 2 toucan crossing proposals. This
    means that there is a degree of flexibility or ‘wiggle room’ in terms of the final
    approval of the design of the toucan crossing. On balance, I find that toucan
    crossing option 2 is the preferred solution because it is set well back from the
    roundabout and hence would seek to avoid queuing or claimed concerns about
    drivers suddenly having to break. Moreover, it is my judgement that general
    accordance would be capable of meaning a 4.0 wide island/refuge, should the
    appellant or indeed the controlling authority want that option to be explored, or
    indeed a degree of movement in terms of the final position of toucan crossing. This
    is in the context that it is not disputed that there is some spare highway land to
    accommodate any possible ‘general accordance’ changes.
83. For the avoidance of doubt, and for the reasons outlined, I am satisfied that the
    option 2 toucan crossing would not lead to unacceptable harm being caused to
    highway safety. Moreover, and despite some conflict with the technical guidance, it
    would comprise a quality and suitably convenient active travel facility over the A10
    and leading conveniently into other proposed active travel routes.
84. While parts of the shared cycle/pedestrian route to the east and west of the
    Baldock roundabout would not, in the words of the appellant’s sustainable transport
    witness, be ‘perfect’ in all respects from a cycling point of view, and fully in
    accordance with the guidance in LTN 1/20, it is noteworthy that the proposals along
    this route are not fully detailed at this stage. Furthermore, at the inquiry it was
    accepted by the Council’s sustainable transport witness that several of the more
    minor concerns would be capable of being addressed at detailed design stage and
    subject to the imposition of a planning condition. It was stated that these matters
    were not ‘showstoppers.’ I agree with that position. Moreover, LTN 1/20 permits a
    degree of flexibility and does not require perfection.
85. As regards the shared cycle/pedestrian route to the west of the Baldock
    roundabout, I do not find that the route would be unsafe or that users would have
    the perception of it being unsafe. The route could include lighting and other security
    features/permeable landscaping and hence would be likely to be well used. To this


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    15
Appeal Decision 6008238


     extent, I do not find that users would likely experience it as a vulnerable, quiet or
     intimidating environment. It is also proposed to be a wide shared route at this point
     (including in part a ‘buffer’ from Baldock Road): the feeling of space along this part
     of the proposed route would assist in minimising any possible anxiety about using
     it. In my judgement, the absence of surveillance from surrounding buildings would
     not therefore prohibit regular use. Put another way, there is no reason why this
     active travel route could not be finally designed so that it felt safe and was safe for
     all users.
86. I find that the proposal to include cycle parking to the far east of the Baldock Road
    shared pedestrian/cycle route (i.e., close to the town centre and as shown on the
    submitted plans) should be secured at detailed design stage. This is so that less
    experienced cyclists would have the option of ‘parking up’ and walking into the town
    centre at this point, rather than transitioning into the main road with cars/other
    vehicles.
87. I am mindful that the completed planning obligation includes a financial contribution
    to make changes to Bowling Green Lane and Monks Walk. I have no reason to
    doubt the appellant’s sustainable transport witness who commented that
    discussions were underway with the Highway Authority to make Bowling Green
    Road 20mph. This is likely to be a well-used route by residents of the proposed
    development. The introduction of such a speed limit would provide some positive
    and acceptable assistance, in safety and route attractiveness terms, for those
    cyclists using Bowling Green Lane which leads to education and other facilities.
88. I note the comments made by the Council about the fact that the proposed northern
    footbridge over the A10 would be stepped and that it would not therefore allow for
    access by all. This is acknowledged, but the proposal is not reliant on this bridge as
    the only means of connectivity to the settlement of Buntingford. There would be
    several other active travel links available to those occupying or visiting the site,
    including those that were not able bodied. Put another way, the proposed bridge to
    the north would seek to offer an acceptable alternative link for many residents and
    visitors to the appeal site, but there would be other options available to those who
    may have difficulties using steps.
89. I see the provision of a new northern pedestrian bridge over the A10 as a positive
    aspect of the proposal overall. It would represent a very significant improvement
    from the point of view of the at grade connectivity of the public rights of way and
    over the A10 which I do not consider to be safe. I am satisfied that along with the
    other package of on and off-site active travel proposals, it would have the effect of
    encouraging many to travel to Buntingford on foot. The provision of a lit
    environment on PROW 35 would offer a suitably safe environment for most users
    and, again, there would be other routes available for any pedestrian that chose not
    to use it.
90. I afford very positive weight to the fact that the proposal would include bus
    infrastructure and services within the appeal site itself. Such bus infrastructure and
    services would enable residents of the site conveniently to reach Buntingford by
    such a sustainable mode of transport, and/or to travel further afield to other towns
    where there is additional choice of employment, shopping and other facilities.
91. Given the above, the development would therefore offer a choice to residents and
    visitors of the development alike in respect of travel by sustainable modes of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    16
Appeal Decision 6008238


     transport. In my judgement, this is a further proposal that would reduce reliance on
     the private car. In reaching this finding, I also note there is agreement between the
     main parties regarding the imposition of a travel plan condition should outline
     planning permission be approved. This would also ensure that sustainable
     transport is actively encouraged, including acceptable modal shifts, in association
     with the proposed development.
92. In conclusion, subject to the imposition of conditions the proposed on and off-site
    active travel measures would be acceptable in this case. I find that the appellant
    has reasonably explored all opportunities to give priority to walking, wheeling and
    cycle movements and with access to good public transport. With the proposals in
    place, the location of the development would limit the need to travel by private car,
    and it would offer a genuine choice of sustainable, quality and safe transport modes
    for residents and users. Overall and subject to the imposition of conditions and the
    completed planning obligation, I find that the development would therefore be
    sustainably located and with a good choice of sustainable modes of transport.
93. Moreover, I consider that when the active travel proposals are considered as a
    whole, they would offer alternative routes for cyclists, wheelers and pedestrians
    alike. It is also noteworthy that the active travel proposals would bring forward
    some of the cycling route improvement aspirations as contained within both the
    HPROWIP and the East Herts Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan. This
    is therefore a positive consideration to weigh in the overall planning balance.
94. I acknowledge that in terms of the active travel proposals, they do not always reach
    a level of ‘perfection’ from the point of view of compliance with every aspect of local
    and national technical guidance (including LTN 1/20). This is particularly the case in
    terms of some aspects of the proposed cycling infrastructure. However, an
    absolutists approach to the application of LTN 1/20 is not warranted when the
    guidance is considered as a whole. I have reached an on balance finding in terms
    of this main issue and conclude that in this case the proposal would suitably accord
    with the active travel, climate change, sustainable transport, and public rights of
    way requirements of national decision-making policies CC2, TR3, TR4 and TR8 of
    the Framework, and policy TRA1 of the LP all of which are sufficiently consistent
    with one another.
95. In reaching the above conclusion, I have had due regard to the public sector quality
    duty contained in section 149 of the Equality Act 2010, which sets out the need to
    eliminate unlawful discrimination, harassment and victimisation, and to advance
    equality of opportunity and foster good relations between people who share a
    protected characteristic and people who do not share it. I note the concern raised
    by the Council’s active travel witness in respect of the use of shared
    cycle/pedestrian routes by those who are visually impaired. In my judgement, there
    would be some areas where it would be practical to address such concerns as part
    of the approval of the final detailed design for routes (e.g., the use of tactile paving
    and route clarity).
96. Having regard to the various proposed cycle, wheeler and pedestrian route options
    available to users of the appeal site and given the imposition of conditions and the
    completed planning obligation, I find that the development would reasonably and
    proportionately provide an inclusive active travel package of measures.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    17
Appeal Decision 6008238


Character and appearance (including landscape character)
97. While the appeal proposal is submitted in outline, I have nonetheless been able to
    consider the design principles and parameters as outlined in the submitted design
    and access statement, the indicative masterplan, the parameter plans, as well as
    the overall quantum and type of development proposed.
98. The appeal site is to the west of the settlement of Buntingford which is currently the
    smallest town within East Hertfordshire District. It is a historic market town which
    lies in the shallow Rib river valley at the centre of a large rural area in the
    agricultural north-east corner of Hertfordshire.
99. The appeal land falls within the South Suffolk and North Essex Clayland National
    Character Area (National Character Area 86). It is an area described as being a
    dispersed settlement pattern of scattered farmsteads and the agricultural landscape
    is predominantly arable with a wooded appearance. The site is on an undulating
    topography, at 130m AOD in the west and centre, descending gradually eastward
    toward Buntingford, to 110m AOD on the north-eastern boundary. To the west, the
    landform descends and then rises gently towards Cottered with the wider rural
    context in the west sitting largely above the site. Public right of way Cottered 40
    crosses the site and is accessible to the east from a footbridge across the A10 at
    Buntingford and connecting to the wider network of public rights of way via public
    right of way Cottered 39 and Cottered 46 to the west.
100. At the more local level, the site falls within the ‘Cherry Green Arable Plateau’
   landscape character area (LCA 141) in the Council’s Landscape Character
   Assessment’ Supplementary Planning Document 2007 (SPD). It is adjacent to the
   High Rib Valley landscape character area (LCA 142) which retains a distinctive
   valley form and associated land uses. The SPD states that for the High Rib Valley
   character area ‘the A10 corridor is a strong feature of the area and the traffic is
   locally intrusive as are some of the built features within Buntingford’ and ‘The most
   extensive visual impact comes from the adjacent residential developments, which
   in some cases lie adjacent and unscreened e.g., northern edge of Buntingford
   overlooking Corney Bury. The A10 is also locally intrusive but contains sections in
   cutting’.
101. LCA 141 is located on an elevated plateau between the valley of the River Rib to
   the east and the more settled plateau to the west and stretches from Throcking in
   the north to Nasty in the south. The key characteristics of this character area are
   identified as an open arable plateau with some very large field units; minimal
   settlement, restricted to individual farmhouses; a remote isolated feel; minimal
   woodland cover; degraded landscape pattern with few hedgerows and associated
   trees; organic winding lanes with few direct connections across the plateau (except
   for A507), water towers, electricity cables and aerial masts locally prominent
   features due to open countryside and open views across plateau and to the valley
   of the Rib. LCA 141 is described as ‘not rare or highly distinctive within the country’.
102. The landscape character area Ardeley/Cottered Settled Plateau (LCA 140) is
     situated immediately to the north of the site. Its keys characteristics include a
     dispersed settlement pattern; strong sense of historic continuity in structure; a
     range of field sizes including many smaller fields around settlements; a strong
     hedgerow pattern including mature trees; mixed land use with arable and range of
     pasture for horses, sheep and cattle; organic winding lanes with few direct


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   18
Appeal Decision 6008238


      connections across the plateau (except for the A507); village greens and
      commons, wide range of vernacular domestic buildings; moderate woodland
      cover, particularly to the west; widespread rights of way network; a tranquil area;
      and minimal visual detractors.
103. The appeal site forms part of a transitional landscape and there is no dispute
     between the main parties that it is of medium value. The plateau landscape is
     visible from both the neighbouring plateau and the upper slopes of the Rib Valley.
     The landscape has, in the main, exposed views and apart from those parts of the
     landscape close to the A507 and A10 (such as the appeal site), are remote and
     quiet. The SPD states that ‘the major visual impact on the area comes from the
     perimeter of Buntingford with significant impact arising from both industrial and
     residential developments on the upper slopes of the Rib Valley. The widest
     reaching single impact is caused by the Sainsbury’s warehouses, which are major
     structures on the skyline to the east’. The overall strategy for the Cherry Green
     Arable Plateau includes that of promoting a ‘strategy for reducing the visual impact
     of development on the upper slopes of Buntingford including the Sainsbury’s
     warehouses’ (my emphasis).
104. The site comprises just less than 50 hectares of arable land delineated centrally
     into two irregular parcels by a line of partially denuded hedgerow and hedgerow
     trees. A series of power lines run in a north-south direction through the site. The
     boundaries of the site are formed by overgrown hedgerows, scrub vegetation,
     hedgerow trees and vegetated road verges. The appeal site is bounded to the east
     and south by the presence of the A10 and A507 (Baldock Road), which serve the
     neighbouring town of Buntingford, whilst the minor road Throcking Lane borders
     part of the site’s northern edge. To the south-east, a combination of mature
     hedgerow, scrub and trees provide a buffer to the Buntingford Business Park and
     associated built form, which ranges in scale and massing. To the west, the
     degraded hedgerow pattern allows unfiltered views across the undulating rural
     landscape toward Cottered, comprising arable fields, pasture and scattered
     woodland.
105. The appellant has submitted a Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA).
     This includes a May 2025 addendum. The assessment of impacts reflects the
     design strategy outlined in the appellant’s submitted design and access statement
     as well as the implementation of the appellant’s illustrative masterplan after 15
     years. I have considered the LVIA and have considered the effects of the
     development on sensitive receptors including an assessment of the proposed
     development relative to the viewpoints outlined in the LVIA and as part of my site
     visit.
106. Policy ES1 of the NP states that ‘development on the fringes of Buntingford which
   extends on to the higher ground surrounding the Rib Valley could have harmful
   effect on the landscape of this area and part of the Cherry Green Arable and
   Wyddial Plateaux’ (my emphasis). Given the wording of the above policy, it is not
   the case that all development in this area would automatically cause harm to the
   character and appearance of the area.
107. Policy HD2 of the NP states that ‘all new housing development should be sensitive
   to the landscape and be of a height that does not impact adversely on views from
   the surrounding countryside. All development proposals should demonstrate how
   they conserve, enhance or strengthen the character and distinctive features of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    19
Appeal Decision 6008238


     BCA landscape’ and appendix 1 of the NP states that ‘there does seem to be a
     degree of support for ensuring that the future development of Buntingford is carried
     out in such a way that the landscape views across the Town are not adversely
     affected. This requires that building on higher ground is limited in height and that
     any further housing is developed within the valley setting’.
108. On my site visit, I experienced that open views of the site are available from the
   public rights of way that cross the appeal site. There is a mixture of glimpsed and
   more open views into the site from users of part of the A10 and from Throcking
   Lane.
109. In terms of the quantum of development proposed, there is no doubt that the
   development would result in a very sizeable urban extension into the otherwise
   mainly open and undeveloped countryside. While there would be change, it is worth
   emphasising that this does not automatically equate to significant harm.
110. I acknowledge that a relatively small business park (Buntingford Business Park) is
   close to the appeal site. This is located on the west side of the A10. In addition,
   there is an employment allocation adjacent to Buntingford Business Park. This has
   not yet been ‘built out’ and there is no live planning application submitted for
   determination by the Council. There is an earth bund around this employment
   allocation although it is not clear whether it is lawful. Currently, there is a relatively
   limited amount of development on this side of the A10 and, overall, the area is
   predominantly experienced as being of a more rural and undeveloped landscape
   character. Moreover, Buntingford Business Park is not very conspicuous when
   viewed from either the A10, the public footpaths (apart from the roofs of the
   buildings), or further afield, owing to land topography and the provision of planting
   to its boundaries.
111. I note that the appellant has sought to minimise the effects of the proposed built
   form on the character and appearance of this mainly undeveloped landscape from
   the point of view of the position and height of the proposed buildings (as detailed on
   the submitted parameter plans). Nonetheless, the proposal would be seen and
   experienced as departing from the otherwise more open and agricultural character
   of the countryside and when judged particularly against its immediate surroundings
   to the west. Indeed, there is some visual difference between the existing settlement
   to the east of the A10 (where further development has been approved but not yet
   built out) and land to the west of the A10.
112. Such a change would be very apparent when experienced from those travelling
   along parts of Throcking Lane and when using PROW 40 and 41. These users
   currently appreciate a more open and undulating rural landscape. In respect of
   PROW 40, my site visit revealed that large parts of it (mainly to the west) are
   experienced by walkers as being quiet and where the presence of the A10 is not
   visually or audibly as apparent when compared to those using PROW 41. This is
   because the A10 is positioned within a cutting at its point closest to PROW 40. I
   noticed on my site visit that there was a very distinctive open, rural, and quiet
   audible character to large parts of the appeal site when appreciated from the most
   westerly extent of PROW 40.
113. While the proposed planting would, in time, help to soften/mitigate the effects of
   the proposed development from certain viewpoints, I do not find that it would be
   capable of fully mitigating the essentially localised adverse harm which would be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    20
Appeal Decision 6008238


     caused to the character and appearance of this part of the countryside, or indeed to
     the way that users of the on-site existing public rights of way would experience the
     site in relative terms. Given the quantum and scale of the development proposed, I
     do not find that the proposed planting would have the effect of ensuring that the
     urbanising effects of the development were fully screened from public view. Even
     by year 15, it is my judgement that limited localised adverse harm would be caused
     by the proposal to the overall character and appearance of the countryside.
114. In reaching the above conclusion, I note that the appellant has sought to control
   the position and proposed height of buildings on the land, as detailed on the
   proposed parameter plans. In this respect, controlling development in accordance
   with the parameter plans would ensure that built development was kept away from
   the plateaux or ridge top of this undulating landscape. In this regard and noting that
   the development overall would be a large extension to the existing settlement of
   Buntingford and into the countryside, I reach an overall position that some limited
   localised harm would be caused to the rural character of the area when seen from
   parts of the A10, Throcking Lane, properties, and from PROW 40 and 41.
115. In reaching a finding of limited localised adverse harm, I nonetheless acknowledge
   that the proposal would avoid higher ground surrounding the Rib Valley and that
   built development would be confined to that within the ‘Rib valley landscape cell’ as
   named by the appellant. In other words, built development would be confined to the
   valley slopes below the western and northern spurs of landform and, in this regard,
   would preserve and value the Rib Valley setting of the Buntingford Community
   Area. In this regard, I do not find that the proposal would conflict with the NP which
   seeks to maintain the town’s valley setting and which seeks the objective of ‘limiting
   development on higher ground’.
116. The proposed development to the south/south west of the appeal site would be
   well screened from the A10 owing to existing vegetation and the location of
   Buntingford Business Park. It would also be well screened by boundary planting
   along Baldock Road. Even accounting for the proposed new access into the site
   from Baldock Road (reserved matters landscaping details would need to be
   sensitively considered in this area), which would partly open up the site to some
   public views, I find that development on this part of the site would nonetheless be
   experienced as being well contained from surrounding public views. I also noticed
   on my site visit that some of the roofs of the employment buildings at Buntingford
   Business Park were visible from this part of the appeal site and from the western
   edge of PROW 40. Hence, the development proposed on this part of the appeal
   site would have some visual affinity with the existing built form adjacent to this part
   of the appeal site.
117. The proposed development further to the north/north east of the appeal site would
   be partly viewed in the context of the A10 and other urban influences such as the
   proposed pedestrian bridge, as well as existing and consented development near
   to Neale Drive. Even, accounting for such intervisibility, I find that limited harm
   would nonetheless be caused to the character and appearance of the countryside
   by year 15 particularly when experienced by users of the on-site public rights of
   way and from parts of Throcking Lane.
118. As the built development would avoid ridge top or plateau land, it would not in this
   regard be highly prominent or visually overbearing. Built form would not occupy a
   skyline location. Therefore, it would not generally assert itself as a significantly

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   21
Appeal Decision 6008238


     discordant or intrusive feature that would cause very significant and lasting harm to
     the character and appearance of the landscape. That said, I do find that there
     would be a material change to the way that the users of parts of the public rights of
     way through the site currently enjoy the open and tranquil nature of this part of the
     countryside (particularly to the western section of PROW 40). In my view, this is a
     matter to which I afford greatest harm in respect of the effect of the development on
     important receptors.
119. I find that limited harm would be caused to LCA 141 and limited harm caused to
   the surrounding LCA areas. I acknowledge that LCA 141 is ‘not rare or highly
   distinctive within the country’ and that the appeal site does not lie within a National
   Landscape designation. However, this does not mean that it does not have
   landscape character value.
120. Overall, and notwithstanding the proposed landscaping, I do not find that the
   development would fully conserve the character and distinctive features of the
   landscape and, even with landscaping, users of parts of the public rights of way
   through the site would experience a much more urban and less tranquil
   environment. I recognise that efforts have been made to keep the proposed
   development confined to the valley slopes and, in this regard, there would be
   suitable compliance with policy ES1 of the NP. Nonetheless, and, even with the
   proposed indicative landscaping maturing by year 15, I find that limited localised
   harm would be caused to the character and appearance of the countryside,
   including to landscape character, particularly when the resultant development is
   experienced by users of the public rights of way running through the site.
121. I therefore conclude that when the proposal is considered as a whole, it would not
   fully accord with the landscape character, countryside natural beauty, and public
   right of way requirements of policies GBR2 and DES2 of the LP, policy HD2 of the
   NP, and national decision-making policy TR8 of the Framework.
122. It is a point of dispute between the main parties in terms of whether, in view of my
   conclusion above, the proposal would conflict with national-decision making policy
   N2 of the Framework which states that proposals should ‘consider the
   environmental qualities of land proposed for development including…landscape
   character and the natural beauty of the countryside, and identify opportunities for
   those qualities to be conserved and enhanced’. While the appellant has identified
   opportunities from a conservation and enhancement point of view, these are not
   sufficient to fully conserve in the context of the limited localised harm that I have
   identified.
123. There is a difference of opinion between the main parties in terms of whether
   decision making policy DP3(1) of the Framework is of relevance in terms of
   considering the above main issue. I find that it is not relevant from a landscape
   character point of view because this is specifically addressed in national decision-
   making policy N2 as listed above.
124. In my judgement, national decision-making policy DP3(1) relates to matters such
   as on-site scale, layout, landscaping and appearance rather than to the effect of a
   proposal on the landscape character and visual attributes of the countryside. In
   other words, I find that it relates to matters which would be considered at reserved
   matters stage from the point of view of the consideration of on-site detailed
   proposals. It would be at this stage that a reserved matters proposal(s) would need


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   22
Appeal Decision 6008238


     to ensure that the development suitably integrated with and enhanced its
     surroundings. Notwithstanding my conclusion in respect of the above main issue,
     the parameter plan proposals demonstrate to me that in principle the proposal
     would be capable of meeting the objectives of national decision-making policy
     DP3(1). In my judgement, this is not a relevant policy from the point of view of the
     above main issue.
125. If one was to disagree with me on the above point, I have decided to opt for an
   ‘even if’ approach in my overall planning balance and conclusion. In other words, I
   have also reached a finding based on national decision-making policy DP3(3) being
   of relevance to my conclusion on the landscape character and visual effects main
   issue. This is in so far that the policy says that ‘development proposals should be
   refused if, without clear justification they conflict with paragraph 1 of this policy’.
   This has implications in terms of the application of national decision-making policy
   S5 which I deal with later.
126. Overall, I afford the harm to the character and appearance of the area, including to
   landscape character, limited adverse weight in the overall planning balance.
Infrastructure
127. Both the completed planning obligation and imposed conditions below ensure that
     the proposal would provide necessary infrastructure to make the development
     acceptable from a planning point of view.
128. I deal with matters relating to PROW 36 and the provision of land and contributions
     for a first school later in this decision. However, there is common ground between
     the main parties that the Council’s fourth reason for refusal of planning permission
     relating to infrastructure matters has now been resolved owing to the completed
     planning obligation and the agreed conditions. I do not disagree with this common
     ground position.
129. I therefore conclude the proposal would accord with the infrastructure and planning
     obligation requirements of policies TRA1, DPS4, DEL1, DEL2, HOU3, CFLR1,
     CFLR7 and CFLR9 of the LP.
Other considerations – other harms
130. The proposal would result in the loss of best and most versatile agricultural land
   (BMVAL). This weighs against allowing the appeal, although this must be
   considered in the context of the amount of BMVAL that would be lost as a
   proportion of the significant amount of other BMVAL that exists in the wider area.
131. Moreover, the Council falls significantly short of being able to demonstrate a
   deliverable five-year supply of housing sites. There is a pressing need to release
   more land for housing: it is conceivable that this will likely have to result in the loss
   of some BMVAL. I do not find that the proposal would have a materially adverse
   impact on the UK to be food self-sufficient. Notwithstanding these views, the
   proposal would not fully accord with national decision-making policy N2(1)(b) of the
   Framework, or policy ED2 of the LP. This is a common ground position. I attribute
   this matter limited adverse weight in the overall planning balance.
132. Holy Trinity Church is located about 1km to the west of the site. It is a grade II*
   listed building and hence has more than special interest. The Framework states
   that great weight should be given to a heritage asset’s conservation and that any

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    23
Appeal Decision 6008238


     harm to heritage assets requires clear and convincing justification. Where harm
     would occur (i.e., not at the level of substantial harm), this should be weighed
     against the public benefits of a scheme. In this case, that exercise takes place in
     the context of section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas)
     Act 1990. It states that, when considering whether to grant permission for a scheme
     which affects a listed building’s setting, the decision maker shall have special
     regard to the desirability of preserving that setting. It sets a strong presumption
     against permission for a development that would harm that setting.
133. The significance of Holy Trinity Church derives from is historic and architectural
   special interest. In respect of its built fabric, its special interest relates to its
   construction methods and materials, together with its decorative elements and
   retention of original internal features. It is a small late medieval parish church with a
   tower. It is mainly flint rubble plastered with stone dressings to the nave and
   chancel. The base courses of the tower are in coursed unknapped flint and pebbles
   and there is knapped flint facing around the windows and with stone quoins and
   dressings. The upper part of the tower is finished in red brick. Internally, there are
   17th century benches in the nave (with 19th century copies) and heraldic floor
   slabs.
134. I find that the significance of Holy Trinity Church is also derived from the
   contribution that is provided from its mainly undeveloped, rural and tranquil setting
   which extends to and includes the appeal site. I was able to experience the relative
   intervisibility as part of my site visit, albeit acknowledging that the appeal site is
   quite some distance from the listed church. As per the position of the main parties, I
   find that harm would be caused to the overall significance of Holy Trinity Church
   arising from the proposed urban form of development falling within its setting.
135. The above harm would not be substantial. It would be a level of harm which is at
   the lower end of the spectrum of less than substantial harm. I find that the public
   benefits of the proposal, as outlined elsewhere in this decision (including below),
   would collectively present a clear and convincing justification to outweigh the harm
   that would arise to the significance of Holy Trinity Church through the harm caused
   to its setting. In this regard, the proposal would not conflict with national decision-
   making policy HE6(4) of the Framework.
136. I find that there is justification for some main town centre development on the
   appeal site (i.e., the mixed-use local centre). In fact, that is perhaps to be expected
   from a proposal of some 660 residential units. I am satisfied that there is
   justification for the inclusion of the quantum of ‘main town centre’ type development
   on the appeal site and as part of the housing led proposal. The sequential test as
   outlined in national decision-making policy TC3 of the Framework is passed. I do
   not find that the proposal would cause any material harm to the vitality and viability
   of any town centre.
Other Considerations – Benefits
137. There is no dispute between the parties that the local planning authority cannot
   demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites relating to the 31 March
   2025 base date. There is a very significant shortfall in housing land supply in the
   area and hence there is a critical need to release more land for housing. The
   adoption of a new development plan for the area, which would consider the
   new/increased housing requirement for the area (i.e., a requirement to deliver 1237


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    24
Appeal Decision 6008238


     homes per annum rather than 839 per annum in the LP), is not proposed until April
     2029. Therefore, a plan led strategy for delivering economic growth, including
     housing, would not be in place until at least two and half years’ time.
138. The Council’s planning witness also agreed at the inquiry that the new
   development plan for the area would be likely to have to include sites outside
   existing settlement boundaries. There is common ground between the main parties
   that whether I consider the lower or upper end of the undersupply position,
   substantial positive weight should be afforded to the delivery of the proposed
   dwellinghouses on the land.
139. The proposal also includes a significant number of affordable homes, homes for
     the elderly, and 1% custom self-build housing on the appeal site. The substantial
     positive weight that I afford to each (my emphasis) of these benefits is necessary
     given the wording in national decision-making policy HO7 of the Framework which
     links to national decision-making policy HO1. Put another way, I find that the
     appellant has correctly disaggregated these benefits rather than considering them
     as one single benefit. I emphasise, however, that this is not a matter which makes
     a difference to my overall conclusion to grant outline planning permission.
140. The proposal would deliver a biodiversity net gain of 11.25% and hedgerow
     benefits of 49.78%. I afford this matter moderate positive weight in the overall
     planning balance. For the avoidance of doubt, it is not the case, as claimed by
     other interested parties, that the proposal would cause harm to biodiversity.
141. The development would deliver sports facilities: a cricket pitch, two football
     pitches, a multi-use games area, and an associated pavilion to meet the wider
     needs of Buntingford. These are matters to which I also afford moderate positive
     weight.
142. The proposed country park and the very significant amount of proposed open
     space (about 25 hectares) would be provided in the context of a deficit of facilities
     in Buntingford. Hence, they should be attributed moderate positive weight in
     decision making terms.
143. The financial contribution in the completed planning obligation to be used towards
     bus services and sustainable transport initiatives in the town would be a very
     welcome benefit from a wider community perspective. Hence, I attribute each of
     these matters moderate positive weight.
144. The proposal would include footpath, cycle and wheeler improvements more
     generally within Buntingford which would have wider community benefits. This is
     also a matter to which I afford moderate positive weight in decision making terms.
145. I acknowledge that PROW 36 is not proposed to be used by cyclists. However, the
     appellant’s proposals seek to widen the footpath by some 3.0 metres. To the
     extent that the appellant’s proposed improvements would at least make the option
     of using this route for cycling more likely than not in the future (noting that there is
     currently a dispute about changing its legal status), and in accordance with
     strategic aspirations to create a cycle route in this area more generally, I afford this
     matter some limited positive weight in decision making terms.
146. There would be economic benefits associated with the proposed development
   including construction employment, employment associated with the on-site mixed-


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    25
Appeal Decision 6008238


     use local centre, and increased expenditure within the local economy arising from a
     significant number of people living on the appeal site. In respect of the proposed
     mixed-use local centre, I find that there is at least some prospect of this coming
     forward as part of the development proposal. Specific controls are suggested to
     deal with this matter. However, at this stage it cannot be absolutely guaranteed that
     it would be delivered on the land. That is, however, the case for most speculative
     proposals. Overall, I attribute the various economic benefits moderate positive
     weight in decision making terms.
147. Decision making policy HC4(1) of the Framework states that substantial positive
     weight should be given to proposals for new or improved public service
     infrastructure or community facilities. The mixed-use local centre, sports facilities
     and country park would seek to minimise car journeys and to encourage more
     sustainable travel movements (e.g., waking and cycling) for those that live on the
     appeal site and/or visit. In this regard, they can be considered a benefit as part the
     overall mixed-use proposal. I attribute limited positive weight to such benefits.
148. I note the point made by the Council about the lack of need for a GP surgery, but
     other health facilities (e.g., physiotherapist etc) may be capable of being provided
     on the site. Again, this is a speculative proposal at this stage and so I afford this
     matter only limited positive weight in the overall planning balance.
149. I deal with the provision of land for a first school as part of my assessment of the
     completed planning obligation below. For the reasons given, up to date forecasting
     and a falling roll/decline in birth rates demonstrate that there is not currently a
     need for a first school. Moreover, the evidence is that there is a low likelihood of
     there being a need in the future. The provision of a first school on the land is not
     therefore a matter to which I afford any material weight as a benefit. However, this
     does not alter or outweigh the very substantial weight that I collectively afford to
     the other benefits outlined above, and in the overall planning balance.
Other Matters
150. I have considered the very significant number of representations made by other
     interested parties made at both planning application and appeal stages. This
     includes the representation made by Chris Hinchliff MP. Some of the comments
     made by other interested parties have already been addressed in my reasoning
     above and owing to the completed planning obligation.
151. Some third parties have raised a concern about the capacity of the sewage
     treatment works, the ability to provide suitable sewerage drainage facilities for
     future residents, and whether a suitable water supply for residents and the wider
     community would be available. It is noteworthy that Thames Water do not object to
     the proposal.
152. It is also important that I emphasise that water companies have a legal obligation
     under the Water Industry Act 1991 to properly maintain, cleanse, and upgrade
     their sewers and to ensure that there is sufficient water supply for new
     development. Developers and householders can legally connect to the existing
     sewer network. Ofwat has significant statutory powers (including enforcement
     powers) under the Water Industry Act 1991 and the Water (Special Measures) Act
     2025 to ensure that water companies fulfil their duty to maintain and upgrade
     sewer systems.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   26
Appeal Decision 6008238


153. Given the statutory requirements imposed on water companies in respect of the
   provision of a suitable off-site sewage network and treatment facilities, coupled with
   the provision of adequate water supplies, it has not been necessary for me to
   impose conditions requiring the specific approval of off-site foul and water supply
   details. National decision-making policy DM7(2) of the Framework states that
   ‘Planning decisions should not seek to duplicate or extend controls imposed by
   separate regulatory regimes.’
154. While I note the concerns raised by members of the public about existing foul
   drainage capacity, as well as water supply issues, there is no objective evidence
   before me to indicate that Thames Water would not be able to address matters
   appropriately and in accordance with its statutory responsibilities. The main parties
   have, however, agreed to the imposition of a condition to ensure that dwellings are
   not occupied until all necessary upgrades to the foul water network to
   accommodate additional flows from the development have been completed.
155. I note the requests of Westmill Parish Council in terms of financial contributions for
     claimed highway safety concerns at the northern and southern exists of Westmill,
     to clear alleged blockages in the River Rib, to improve a recreation ground
     operated by the Greg Trust, and for foul network upgrades. Save for my comments
     made above about foul water treatment and capacity, these requests are not
     necessary to make the proposed development acceptable. It is the statutory
     responsibility of each water company to ensure that the sewage
     network/infrastructure can accommodate proposed and consented development
     proposals. This is not the responsibility of a developer.
156. I am satisfied that the SUDS and swale proposals would be capable of adequately
     managing flood risk and would be capable of according with policy WAT1 of the
     LP. A condition could be imposed to deal with surface water drainage.
157. I acknowledge that several housing proposals have been granted planning
     permission in Buntingford, including on appeal. However, I have determined this
     appeal on its individual planning merits, based on existing site conditions and the
     specific proposals, and considering the most up to date local and national planning
     policies. The circumstances and site conditions relating to other proposals and
     decisions elsewhere in Buntingford are not directly analogous to this appeal
     proposal and, in any event, I have exercised my own professional planning
     judgement.
158. Comments have been made that the proposal does not include sufficient
     employment opportunities on the site. Some employment is proposed on-site in
     the form of a mixed-use local centre. Moreover, the site is adjacent to Buntingford
     Business Park as well as to a proposed employment allocation.
159. I acknowledge the concern raised by some interested parties that the site should
     only be released for development if a development plan review process indicates
     that it would be acceptable to do so. The development plan for the area is now of
     some age, and the evidence is that a new development plan will not be adopted
     for a few years. It has been necessary for me to determine this appeal on its
     individual planning merits and against current local and national planning policies.
     It is of note that the outline planning application was not refused on grounds of
     prematurity.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   27
Appeal Decision 6008238


160. There is no objective evidence before me to indicate that below-ground
     archaeology would be a constraint to the development of the appeal site. A
     planning condition could be imposed to deal with this matter.
161. At the inquiry, Councillor Nicholls raised concerns in relation to ecology and a
     nearby chalk stream. Priority habitats including chalk rivers have been plotted by
     the appellant. I have no reason to doubt the appellant’s assessment which
     concludes that through standard pollution control measures there would be no
     significant residual effects.
162. None of the representations made by other interested parties alter or outweigh my
     overall planning balance and conclusion below.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
163. Collectively, I attribute very substantial positive weight to the benefits outlined
   earlier on in this decision. Moreover, I have found that the proposal constitutes an
   acceptable development type listed in national decision-making policy S5 (in
   particular because of the evidenced unmet need for housing in the context of a five-
   year undersupply position) and hence can be approved in principle. The
   Framework is a material consideration of ‘critical importance’ for making decisions
   on development proposals. I afford the Framework very significant weight as a
   material planning consideration.
164. Weighed against the above benefits are some identified harms. I conclude that by
   year 15 the proposal development would cause limited localised harm to the
   character and appearance of the countryside, including to landscape character. As
   a connected point, there would be some limited localised harm caused to the way
   that the existing PROW crossing the site would be subsequently experienced by
   users. There would also be less than substantial harm caused to the significance of
   the grade II* Holy Trinity Church from a setting point of view. Such harm would be
   at the lower end of the spectrum of less than substantial harm and so it is afforded
   limited adverse weight in the overall planning balance.
165. There would be conflict with identified development plan policies in terms of the
   principle of the proposed development in this countryside location. However, these
   policies are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policy S5 of the
   Framework. Therefore, I afford the conflict with such development plan policies
   limited adverse weight in decision making terms.
166. Subject to the imposition of conditions and the completed planning obligation, the
   proposal would not cause harm to matters of highway safety; would provide the
   necessary infrastructure to make the development acceptable; would suitably
   promote and prioritise active travel; would provide a choice of sustainable modes of
   transport including socially safe and quality walking, wheeler and cycling routes;
   and would make a suitable modal shift towards reducing car usage. Given the
   package of proposals, the development would not result in reliance on the private
   car for day-to-day journeys. Some of these matters are necessary to make the
   development acceptable, although to the extent that they lead to wider community
   benefits I have attributed positive weight to them in the overall planning balance.
167. In this case, I conclude that the benefits associated with the proposed
     development would not be substantially outweighed by the identified adverse


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   28
Appeal Decision 6008238


      effects of the proposal (including the conflict with the identified development plan
      policies) when assessed against the policies in the Framework.
168. As outlined earlier on in this decision, I have also considered a scenario whereby if
     I was wrong in terms of the applicability of national decision-making policy DP3(1)
     to the consideration of the landscape character and visual effects main issue. If it
     were the case that the proposal would not accord with national-decision making
     policy DP3(1) of the Framework (i.e., a refusal type policy) in terms of this main
     issue, it is noteworthy that national decision making policy S5(2) states that ‘the
     circumstances in which the benefits of approving development are likely (my
     emphasis) to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not
     limited to, situations where the development proposal would fail to comply with one
     of the national-decision making policies which state that the development
     proposals should be refused in specific circumstances’.
169. To the extent that one was correct in asserting that national decision making policy
     DP3(1) of the Framework was applicable to the landscape character and visual
     effects main issue (which I say it is not), I would, in any event, have concluded that
     the very substantial benefits of approving the development would not have been
     substantially outweighed by the identified adverse effects, including the claimed
     conflict with national decision-making policy DP3(1) of the Framework.
170. Consequently, and, either way, I find that the proposal would accord with the
     requirements of national decision-making policy S5 and so is acceptable in
     principle. Moreover, access details are acceptable subject to the imposition of
     conditions. It therefore follows that the proposal would accord with national
     decision-making policy S3 and therefore it would deliver a sustainable form of
     development.
171. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
     planning decisions must be made in accordance with the development plan unless
     material considerations indicate otherwise. In this case, there are material
     considerations which outweigh the proposal’s identified conflict with the
     development plan. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be allowed.
Planning Obligation
172. An agreed and completed section 106 agreement has been submitted as part of
   this appeal. In summary, the planning obligation includes covenants and obligations
   relating to affordable housing; elderly accommodation; custom/self-build housing;
   education/childcare/youth services; public infrastructure; public transport; health
   facilities; sports facilities; and a sports pavilion.
173. I have considered all the contributions and obligations in the completed section
   106 agreement against Regulation 122(2) of the Community Infrastructure Levy
   Regulations 2010 (CIL Regulations) which states that they should be ‘necessary to
   make the development acceptable in planning terms; directly related to the
   development; and fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the
   development’. Apart from matters relating to the provision of a first school and the
   financial contribution towards changing the legal status of PROW 36 which I deal
   with below, I am satisfied that all other covenants and obligations in the completed
   section 106 agreement meet the tests for planning obligations as contained within
   Regulation 122(2) of the CIL Regulations.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    29
Appeal Decision 6008238


174. The evidence is that most recent forecasting evidence submitted from
   Hertfordshire County Council Education Authority to the Government demonstrates
   that there is a surplus of first school places and hence a first school would not
   currently be needed on the site. In respect of forecasting, each Education Authority
   should not consider outline planning permissions for housing. In addition, the
   evidence is that there are falling rolls in schools in the administrative area and
   indeed this is a national trend.
175. While the appellant considers that there may in time be a need for a first school on
   the site when outline planning permissions are considered against the most up to
   date Hertfordshire County Council’s Education Authority submitted forecasts (at the
   inquiry the view expressed by the appellant’s witness was that a one form entry as
   distinct to a two form entry school would still be needed), I am nonetheless
   persuaded by the evidence of Hertfordshire County Council’s Education Authority
   that there is no need for first school on the site now, and, based on forecasting,
   there would be a low prospect of one being needed on the site in the future. In my
   judgement, the evidence does not support the contention that there would likely be
   a requirement for a first school on the site upon the construction of the 270th
   dwelling on the land.
176. Given the above, the provision of a first school on the site is not needed to make
   the development acceptable. Hence, the obligations within the planning obligation
   relating to a first school are not needed in respect of the appeal proposal. In other
   words, any related obligation in the completed planning obligation is not CIL
   Regulation 122(2) compliant: a first school is not necessary to make the
   development acceptable in planning terms. Hence, section 4 (conditionality) of the
   planning obligation is applicable in terms of this matter.
177. The evaluation of a planning obligation is of course different to the consideration of
   the land use planning merits of a development proposal. It is noteworthy that the
   Council does not raise an objection, in land use principle, to the fact that a first
   school is shown on the submitted master plan, or indeed that it is included in the
   description of development. I do not disagree that such a proposal would be
   suitable in principle as part of a mixed-use and residential led scheme. However, as
   it is not needed to make the development acceptable, or to address a forecasted
   shortfall in school places, it is not a matter to which I have been able to afford any
   material positive weight in the overall planning balance.
178. In respect of the proposed development, I do not find that it is necessary to pay the
   ‘PROW financial contribution’ of £1500 towards the cost of an application to change
   the legal designation of Public Right of Way 36 to include a cycleway. A cycle route
   is not being proposed by the appellant and so this is not directly related to the
   development proposal. Moreover, it is not necessary to make the development
   acceptable. Put another way, this obligation is not CIL Regulation 122(2) compliant
   and hence section 4 (conditionality) of the planning obligation is applicable in terms
   of this matter.
Conditions
179. The conditions set out in the accompanying schedule are based on those
   suggested by the Council and agreed by both main parties at the inquiry. The
   appellant has expressly agreed in writing to the imposition of the pre-
   commencement conditions. I am satisfied that there is clear justification for the pre-


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   30
Appeal Decision 6008238


     commencement conditions. All the conditions meet the tests as outlined in national
     decision-making policy DM6(1) of the Framework.
180. For the avoidance of doubt, I have provided reasons why each condition is
   necessary after each condition in the schedule of conditions attached to this
   decision. I have also referred to relevant planning policies.
Overall Conclusion
181. For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

D Hartley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   31
Appeal Decision 6008238


                                 Schedule of Planning Conditions
1. In accordance with approved plans
The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with the
approved plans listed below:
•    Location Plan - HLM082/021 RevB
•    Building Heights Parameter Plan – HLM082/036 RevC
•    Land Use Components Plan – HLM082/018 RevR
•    Residential Density Plan – HLM082/037 RevD
•    Tree Retention and Removal Plan (within Barton Hyett AIA) - BHA_5798A_02
REASON: To ensure the development is carried out in accordance with the approved
plans, drawings and specifications.
2. In general accordance with approved plans and documents
The development hereby approved shall be carried out in general accordance with the
approved plans and documents listed below:
•    Baldock Road Roundabout – Northern Access – 23161 SK 029 P5
•    Northern Parcel Throcking Lane Access – 23161_SK_T_025 P4
•    Northern Bridge Crossing – 23161_SK_T_032 P1 / 23161_SK_T_033 P1
•    Southern Bridge Crossing – 23161_SK_T_021 P1 / 23161_SK_T_022 P2
REASON: To ensure the development is carried out in general accordance with the
approved plans, drawings and specifications.
3. Approval of reserved matters prior to development
No phases of the development (other than Preliminary Works) (as set out in the
approved Phasing Plan) shall be begun until Reserved Matters approval for that Phase,
Subphase or Development plot has been obtained from the local planning authority in
writing. The development shall be carried out fully in accordance with the details as
approved.
REASON: The application as submitted does not give particulars for some phases
sufficient for consideration of the Reserved Matters.
4. Submission of reserved matters within 3 years
Applications for approval of Reserved Matters, in general accordance with the Design
Principles (May 2025) namely details of layout, scale, appearance, and landscaping
(hereinafter called "the Reserved Matters") for all phases shall be made to the Local
Planning Authority no later than 3 years from the date of this permission.
REASON: To comply with the requirements of Section 92(2) of the Town & Country
Planning Act 1990 as amended by Section 51 of the Planning and Compulsory
Purchase Act 2004.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      32
Appeal Decision 6008238


5. Commencement within 2 years of last reserved matters approval
All phases of the development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of
2 years from the date of approval of the last Reserved Matters.
REASON: To comply with the requirements of Section 92(2) of the Town & Country
Planning Act 1990 as amended by Section 51 of the Planning and Compulsory
Purchase Act 2004.
6. Planning permission limited
The outline element of the development hereby permitted is for no more than 600
Residential Units (Use Class C3), no more than 60 elderly accommodation units (Use
Class C3) and no more than 2,000m² Mixed Use Local Centre (Flexible Use E and F).
The mixed-use local centre hereby permitted does not grant outline planning
permission for hot food takeaway.
REASON: To comply with the provisions of the outline planning permission including
the parameters assessed considered and established by this permission.
7. Caps on housing occupation until infrastructure provided
No more than the following number of dwellings shall be occupied until the following
onsite infrastructure is completed and available for use by future occupiers of the
development:
    •   Prior to first occupation/use - 23161 SK 029 P5, Baldock Road Roundabout,
        Northern Access (works on Baldock Road)
    •   Prior to occupation of no more than 50 dwellings served solely by the southern
        access onto Baldock Road - 23161_SK_T_021 P1 / 23161_SK_T_022 P2,
        Southern Bridge Crossing
    •   Prior to occupation of no more than 50 dwellings served solely by the southern
        access onto Baldock Road - Mobility Hub (to include proposed bus stop with
        shelters with real time bus information, cycle parking, electric charging facilities,
        car club spaces)
    •   Prior to any occupations of dwellings served solely by the northern access onto
        Throcking Lane or the occupation of no more than 400 dwellings whichever is
        the sooner - 23161_SK_T_032 P1 / 23161_SK_T_033 P1, Northern Bridge
        Crossing
    •   Prior to occupation of no more than 50 dwellings served solely by the northern
        access onto Throcking Lane - Mobility Hub (to include proposed bus stop with
        shelters with real time bus information, cycle parking, electric charging facilities,
        car club spaces)
    •   Prior to occupation of no more than 500 dwellings - 23161_SK_T_025 (P4)
        Northern Parcel Throcking Lane Access
REASON: In order to ensure that future occupiers have the potential to access local
services and active travel infrastructure and reduce reliance on private car. Thereby
ensuring that the development can function in a sustainable manner in accordance with
policies DPS1 and TRA1 of the East Herts District Plan.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     33
Appeal Decision 6008238


8. Phasing Plan
Site-wide phasing proposals (hereinafter called the "Phasing Plan") for the
development shall be submitted for approval by the local planning authority prior to
commencement of any part of the development. The Phasing Plan shall include the
following: a) A plan of the site showing the extent of each proposed Phase and Sub-
Phase of the development; b) A timetable for the delivery of the development and
associated infrastructure, including active travel connections (footpaths, bridges, A10
crossing, other highway improvements); and, c) Mechanisms for monitoring the
implementation of and delivery of the development and its associated infrastructure. No
development (except Preliminary Works) shall be begun until the Phasing Plan has
been approved in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall accord
with each approved Phasing Plan.
REASON: To ensure that the development is delivered and developed in a manner
which is coherent and compliant with Development Plan policies.
9. Design Code
No further reserved matters shall be approved until a Design Code has been submitted
and approved by the Local Planning Authority. The Design Code shall be produced in
general accordance with the approved documents, Design Principles Document, DAS,
and associated planning conditions. The Design Code will provide a set of simple,
concise, illustrated design requirements to provide specific, detailed parameters for the
physical development of the site. As a minimum the code shall include principles for the
following:
•    Design
•    Block structure
•    Public Realm
•    Green and blue infrastructure including multifunctional SuDS
•    Routes and movement network, integrating with the wider movement network
•    All modes parking typologies
•    Street hierarchy and character types
•    Land uses
•    Density ranges
•    Building heights
•    Edges, nodes, and gateways
•    Frontage, access, and servicing
•    Built form
•    Identity
•    Areas that will be publicly lit, including streets, recreation areas and other public
     spaces in accordance with the lighting design principles in the Development
     Specification

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     34
Appeal Decision 6008238


•    Indicative materials palette
•    Indicative Planting strategy
•    Reporting of the Design Code Testing process including how the outcomes have
     informed the final Design Code
•    Design Code Compliance Checklist
All subsequent Reserved Matters shall accord with the approved Design Code and
shall be accompanied by a completed Compliance Checklist which demonstrates
compliance with the Code.
REASON: In order to achieve a coordinated approach to development and high-quality
design outcomes in accordance with policies, DES1 and DES4 of the East Herts
District Plan.
10. Construction Traffic Management Plan
Prior to the commencement of all phases of the development hereby approved, a
'Construction Traffic Management Plan' shall be submitted to and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority. The 'Construction Traffic Management Plan' shall set
out: the phasing of construction and proposed construction programme; the methods
for accessing the site, including wider construction vehicle routing; the numbers of daily
construction vehicles including details of their sizes, at each phase of the development;
the hours of operation and construction vehicle movements; details of any highway
works necessary to enable construction to take place; details of construction vehicle
parking, turning and loading/unloading arrangements clear of the public highway;
details of any hoardings; details of how the safety of existing public highway users and
existing public right of way users will be maintained; management of traffic to reduce
congestion; control of dirt and dust on the public highway, including details of the
location and methods to wash construction vehicle wheels; the provision for addressing
any abnormal wear and tear to the highway; the details of consultation with local
businesses or neighbours; the details of any other construction sites in the local area;
and waste management proposals. Thereafter, the construction phase of the
development shall only be carried out in accordance with the approved Construction
Traffic Management Plan.
REASON: In the interests of highways safety, in accordance with Policy TRA2 of the
East Herts District Plan 2018.
11. Ground contamination investigation works
No development within each phase or sub phase of development shall commence until
the following are submitted to and approved by the local planning authority:
1) Phase II intrusive investigation report detailing all investigative works and sampling
on site, together with the results of the analysis, undertaken in accordance with BS
10175:2011 Investigation of Potentially Contaminated Sites - Code of Practice. The
report shall include a detailed quantitative human health and environmental risk
assessment.
2) A remediation scheme detailing how the remediation will be undertaken, what
methods will be used and what is to be achieved. A clear end point of the remediation
shall be stated, and how this will be validated. Any ongoing monitoring shall also be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   35
Appeal Decision 6008238


determined. The relevant phase/sub phase of development shall thereafter be
undertaken in accordance with these approved details.
REASON: To minimise and prevent pollution of the land and the water environment and
in accordance with national planning policy guidance set out in section 11 of the
National Planning Policy Framework, and to protect human health and the environment
in accordance with policy EQ1 of the adopted East Herts District Plan 2018.
12. Archaeological Investigation works
No development shall take place within each phase or sub phase of the proposed
development site, until the applicant, or their agents, or their successors in title, has
secured the implementation of a programme of archaeological work in accordance with
a written scheme of investigation, which has been submitted to and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority for each phase. This condition will only be discharged
when the Local Planning Authority has received and approved an archaeological report
of all the required archaeological works, and if appropriate, a commitment to publication
has been made.
REASON: To secure the protection of, and proper provision for, any archaeological
remains, in accordance with Policies HA1 and HA3 of the East Herts District Plan 2018.
13. Drainage details
Prior to or in conjunction with the submission of each reserved matters application, in
accordance with the submitted FRA and Drainage Strategy (23161-FRADS(N)-01 v5,
May 2024) and Applicant Response to Hertfordshire County Council LLFA Consultation
Response (24 January 2025), detailed designs of a surface water drainage scheme
incorporating the following measures shall be submitted to and agreed with the Local
Planning Authority. The approved scheme shall be implemented prior to the first
occupation of the development within that phase or sub phase and thereafter retained
as approved. The scheme shall address the following matters:
i) Detailed infiltration testing in accordance with BRE Digest 365 (or equivalent) along
the length and proposed depth of the proposed infiltration feature/s, or If infiltration is
proven to be unfavourable, then surface water runoff rates will be attenuated to QBAR
as stated within section 6.2 of the FRA and Drainage Strategy. The discharge location
for surface water runoff will be confirmed to connect with the wider watercourse
network.
ii) Provision of surface water attenuation storage, sized and designed to
accommodate the volume of water generated in all rainfall events up to and including
the critical storm duration for the 3.33% AEP (1 in 30 year) and 1% AEP (1 in 100)
rainfall events (both including allowances for climate change).
iii) Detailed designs, modelling calculations and plans of the drainage conveyance
network in the: 3.33% AEP (1 in 30 year) critical rainfall event plus climate change to
show no flooding outside the drainage features on any part of the site; 1% AEP (1 in
100 year) critical rainfall plus climate change event to show, if any, the depth, volume
and storage location of any flooding outside the drainage features, ensuring that
flooding does not occur in any part of a building or any utility plant susceptible to water
(e.g. pumping station or electricity substation) within the development. It will also show
that no runoff during this event will leave the site uncontrolled.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    36
Appeal Decision 6008238


iv) The design of any infiltration or attenuation basin will incorporate an emergency
spillway and any drainage structures include appropriate freeboard allowances. Plans
to be submitted showing the routes for the management of exceedance surface water
flow routes that minimise the risk to people and property during rainfall events in excess
of 1% AEP (1 in 100) rainfall event plus climate change allowance. This will include
surface water exceedance which may enter the site from elsewhere in excess of the 1
in 100 (1% AEP) rainfall event.
v) Finished ground floor levels of properties are a minimum of 300mm above
expected flood levels of all sources of flooding (including the ordinary watercourses,
SuDS features and within any proposed drainage scheme) or 150mm above ground
level, whichever is the more precautionary.
vi) Details of how all surface water management features will be designed in
accordance with The SuDS Manual (CIRIA C753, 2015), including appropriate
treatment stages for water quality prior to discharge.
vii) A maintenance and management plan detailing the activities required and details of
who will adopt and maintain all the surface water drainage features for the lifetime of
the development. This will also include the ordinary watercourse and any structures,
such as culverts, within the development boundary.
REASON: To prevent flooding in accordance with National Planning Policy Framework
Policy F8 by ensuring the satisfactory management of local sources of flooding surface
water flow paths, storage and disposal of surface water from the site in a range of
rainfall events and ensuring the SuDS proposed operates as designed for the lifetime of
the development.
14. Hydraulic Modelling
Prior to, or in conjunction with any Reserved Matters application, detailed hydraulic
modelling of the surface water flow path which runs through the site shall be carried out
and submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
modelling shall demonstrate that the development will not result in an increase in flood
risk elsewhere, incorporating all watercourses, upstream exceedance flow routes and
flows through the site. The modelling should include proposed ground levels and site
layout and demonstrate that the development will not increase flood risk for all events
up to and including the 1% AEP (1 in 100 year) plus climate change event. It should
also demonstrate that any culverts have capacity for both the development discharge
and overland flow paths as not to cause an increase in flooding elsewhere.
REASON: To ensure that the development achieves a high standard of sustainability
and ensure the flood risk is adequately addressed for each new dwelling and not
increased in accordance with NPPF Policy F8.
15. Interim temporary drainage measures
Each phase or sub phase of the development shall not commence until details and a
method statement for interim and temporary drainage measures during the demolition
and construction phases have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
Planning Authority. This information shall provide full details of who will be responsible
for maintaining such temporary systems and demonstrate how the site will be drained
to ensure there is no increase in the off-site flows, nor any pollution, debris and
sediment to any receiving watercourse or sewer system. The site works and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   37
Appeal Decision 6008238


construction phase shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with approved method
statement.
REASON: To prevent flooding and pollution off-site in accordance with the NPPF Policy
F8.
16. Site Waste Management Plan
Prior to the commencement of each phase or sub phase hereby approved, a Site
Waste Management Plan (SWMP) for the site shall be submitted to and approved in
writing by the Local Planning Authority. The SWMP should aim to reduce the amount of
waste being produced on site and should contain information including estimated and
actual types and amounts of waste removed from the site and where that waste is
being taken to, for that phase. The development shall be carried out in full accordance
with the approved SWMP.
REASON: To ensure that measures are in place to minimise waste generation and
maximise the on-site and off-site reuse and recycling of waste materials, in accordance
with Policy 12 of the Hertfordshire Waste Core Strategy and Development Management
Policies Development Plan Document 2012.
17. Off-site highway improvements
No development shall commence until a detailed scheme for the off-site highway
improvement works has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
Planning Authority. The scheme shall be designed in accordance with Manual for
Streets and shall generally accord with the details indicated on drawings below and
shall thereafter be undertaken in accordance with the approved details and in
accordance with the trigger points specified below:
    •   Drawing showing Proposed offsite works on Baldock Road (Southern Route) –
        Drawing 23161 0044 P3, and Drawing 23161 043 P2
    •   Drawing showing Proposed Active Travel Improvements to Monks Walk Road -
        Drawing 23161 042 P2
    •   Drawing showing offsite improvement works PRoW 36 and Skipps Meadow
        (Central Active travel route) - Drawing 23161 0045 P3 Drawing showing offsite
        improvement works to Northern PRoW routes (Northern Active Travel Route) –
        Drawing 23161 0047 P2
No more than the following number of dwellings shall be occupied until the scheme is
completed and available for use by future occupiers of the development:
    •   Proposed offsite works on Baldock Road (Southern Route) and Proposed Active
        Travel Improvements to Monks Walk Road – prior to first occupation
    •   Offsite improvement works PRoW 36 and Skipps Meadow (Central Active travel
        route) – prior to 50th occupation
    •   Offsite improvement works to Northern PRoW routes (Northern Active Travel
        Route) – prior to any occupations of dwellings served solely by the northern
        access onto Throcking Lane or the occupation of no more than 400 dwellings
        whichever is the sooner
REASON: To ensure construction of a satisfactory development and that the highway
improvement works are designed to an appropriate standard in the interest of highway
safety and amenity and in accordance with Policy 5, 13 and 21 of Hertfordshire’s Local
Transport Plan (adopted 2018).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   38
Appeal Decision 6008238


18. Design details of estate roads
Prior to the commencement of each phase or sub phase of the development, full details
in relation to the design of estate roads (in the form of scaled plans and/or written
specifications for each phase/sub phase) shall be submitted to and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority to detail the following:
a. Roads;
b. Footways;
c.   Cycleways (compliant with LTN 1/20);
d. External public lighting;
e. Minor artefacts, structures and functional services;
f.   Foul and surface water drainage;
g. Visibility splays (in accordance with Manual for Streets);
h. Access arrangements including temporary construction access;
i.   Hard surfacing materials;
j.   Parking areas for vehicles and cycles (in accordance with LTN1/20);
k.   Loading areas; and
l.   Turning and circulation areas.
The approved details shall be implemented in full prior to first occupation of each
phase/sub phase.
REASON: To ensure suitable, safe and satisfactory planning and development of the
site in accordance with Policy 5 of Hertfordshire’s Local Transport Plan 2018.
19. Public rights of way improvement works
Notwithstanding the details indicated on the submitted drawings, no works shall
commence on site within the relevant phase/sub phase unless until a Rights of Way
improvement plan for the off-site and on-site Rights of Way improvement works for that
phase/sub phase has/have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
Planning Authority. The approved works shall be implemented in full prior to first
occupation of that phase/sub phase and shall be retained and maintained thereafter.
REASON: To ensure that the highway improvement works are designed to an
appropriate standard in the interests of highway safety and to protect the environment
of the local highway corridor and in accordance with Policies 5 and 21 of Hertfordshire’s
Local Transport Plan (2018).
20. External materials
Prior to the commencement of any above ground construction works for each
phase/sub phase of the development, details and specifications of all the external
materials of construction and finishes for that phase/sub phase of the development
hereby approved shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   39
Appeal Decision 6008238


Authority. Thereafter, the development shall be implemented, in accordance with the
approved details.
REASON: In the interests of amenity and good design, in accordance with Policy DES4
of the East Herts District Plan 2018.
21. Sustainability measures
Prior to the commencement of any above ground construction works for each phase or
sub phase, details of energy and water sustainability measures to be incorporated
within each phase of the development shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
the Local Planning Authority. These sustainability measures shall be based on the
recommendations of the Energy Strategy Statement (Sustainable Construction Energy
and Water Statement by Turley revD) and shall include details of:
o Energy efficient construction techniques;
o Energy efficient lighting and fittings;
o Services and controls;
o Efficient energy supply (including details of air source heat pumps);
o Water efficiency measures, which demonstrate compliance with the water
consumption target of 110 litres, or less, per head, per day; and Compliance with the
Future Homes Standard (unless otherwise agreed)
o BREEAM rating for non-residential buildings (no less than 'excellent' unless otherwise
agreed)
Thereafter, the development shall be implemented and maintained, in accordance with
the approved details.
REASON: In the interests of minimising carbon emissions and promoting the principles
of sustainable construction, in accordance with Policies CC1 and WAT4 of the East
Herts District Plan 2018.
22. Drainage maintenance and management
Each phase or sub phase of the development hereby approved shall not be occupied
until details of the maintenance and management of the sustainable drainage scheme
have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
drainage scheme approved under Condition 13 shall be implemented prior to the first
occupation of each phase or sub phase of the development hereby approved and
thereafter managed and maintained in accordance with the approved details in
perpetuity. The Local Planning Authority shall be granted access to inspect the
sustainable drainage scheme for the lifetime of the development. The details of the
scheme to be submitted for approval shall include:
I.   a timetable for its implementation.
II. details of SuDS feature and connecting drainage structures and maintenance
requirement for each aspect including a drawing showing where they are located.
III. a management and maintenance plan for the lifetime of the development which shall
include the arrangements for adoption by any public body or statutory undertaker, or
any other arrangements to secure the operation of the sustainable drainage scheme

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    40
Appeal Decision 6008238


throughout its lifetime. This will include the name and contact details of any appointed
management company.
REASON: To ensure that the development achieves a high standard of sustainability
and ensure the flood risk is adequately addressed for each new dwelling and not
increased in accordance with NPPF and Policies of East Herts District Council.
23. Drainage Verification
Prior to completion of each phase or sub phase of the development a detailed
verification report (appended with substantiating evidence demonstrating the approved
construction details and specifications have been implemented in accordance with the
surface water drainage scheme) should be submitted to and approved in writing by the
Local Planning Authority. The verification report shall include a full set of “as built”
drawings plus photographs of excavations (including soil profiles/horizons), any
installation of any surface water drainage structures and control mechanisms.
REASON: To ensure that the development achieves a high standard of sustainability
and ensure the flood risk is adequately addressed for each new dwelling and not
increased in accordance with NPPF and Policies of East Herts District Council.
24. Estate roads maintenance and management
No phase or sub phase of development shall be occupied until full details have been
submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority in relation to the
proposed arrangements for future management and maintenance of the proposed
streets within the development. The streets shall thereafter be maintained in
accordance with the approved management and maintenance details until such time as
an agreement has been entered into under Section 38 of the Highways Act 1980 or a
Private Management and Maintenance Company has been established.
REASON: To ensure satisfactory development and to ensure estate roads are
managed and maintained thereafter to a suitable and safe standard in accordance with
Policies 5 and 22 of Hertfordshire’s Local Transport Plan (adopted 2018).
25. Travel Plan
No phase of the development hereby permitted shall be occupied prior to the
implementation of the approved Framework Travel Plan and dated May 2024 for that
phase (or implementation of those parts identified in the approved Travel Plan as
capable of being implemented prior to occupation). Those parts of the approved Travel
Plan that are identified therein as being capable of implementation after occupation
shall be implemented in accordance with the timetable contained therein and shall
continue to be implemented for a period of 5 years following occupation of the
residential or commercial development, or 7 years following occupation of the school.
REASON: To ensure that sustainable travel options associated with the development
are promoted and maximised to be in accordance with Policies 3, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of
Hertfordshire’s Local Transport Plan (adopted 2018).
26. Lighting details
Prior to the first occupation of each phase or sub phase of the development hereby
approved, details of any external lighting proposed in connection with each phase of
the development shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   41
Appeal Decision 6008238


Authority. Thereafter, the development shall be implemented in accordance with the
approved details.
REASON: In order to ensure inappropriate light pollution does not occur, in line with
Policy EQ3 of the East Herts District Plan 2018.
27. Contaminated land verification report
Prior to first occupation / use of each phase or sub phase of development the following
shall be submitted and approved by the local planning authority: A validation report
detailing the proposed remediation works and quality assurance certificates to show
that the works have been carried out in full accordance with the approved methodology
shall be submitted to and approved by the Local Planning Authority prior to first
occupation of the development/the development being brought into use. Details of any
post-remedial sampling and analysis to demonstrate that the site has achieved the
required clean-up criteria shall be included, together with the necessary documentation
detailing what waste materials have been removed from the site.
REASON: To minimise and prevent pollution of the land and the water environment and
in accordance with national planning policy guidance set out in section 11 of the
National Planning Policy Framework, and to protect human health and the environment
in accordance with policy EQ1 of the adopted East Herts District Plan 2018.
28. Vehicle / cycle parking details
Prior to first occupation/use of each phase/sub phase of the hereby approved
development, details of car/cycle parking provision for each phase/sub phase, which
shall have regard to the Councils Vehicle Parking SPD, shall be submitted for approval
by the local planning authority. No building/use shall be first occupied unless and until
on-site cycle and car parking for that building/use has been provided. The approved
car/cycle parking shall thereafter be retained.
REASON: In order to promote sustainable transport and reduce environmental impacts
in the District in accordance with Policy TRA1 Sustainable Transport, EQ4 Air Quality,
DES4 Design of Development of the adopted East Herts District Plan 2018 and the
East Herts Vehicle Parking Standards SPD 2007.
29. Waste recycling details
Prior to the commencement of any above ground construction works for each
phase/sub phase of the development, details of waste and recycling stores consistent
with the reserved matters shall be submitted for approval to the local planning authority.
No building/use shall be first occupied unless and until waste and recycling stores for
that building/use has been provided. The approved waste recycling details shall
thereafter be retained and maintained.
REASON: To ensure adequate refuse storage is provided, in accordance with Policy
DES4 of the East Herts District Plan 2018.
30. Thames Water infrastructure phasing plan
The development shall not be occupied until confirmation is provided that either:
1. All necessary upgrades to the foul water network to accommodate additional flows
from the development have been completed; or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   42
Appeal Decision 6008238


2. A phasing plan for development and infrastructure, agreed with Thames Water and
the Local Planning Authority, is in place. Where such a plan exists, no occupation shall
occur other than in accordance with the approved phasing schedule.
REASON: Network reinforcement works may be required to accommodate the
proposed development.
31. Details of play provision
Prior to the first occupation of each phase or sub phase of the development hereby
approved, details of the proposed play provision, including Locally Equipped Area for
Play (LEAP) and Local Area for Play (LAP) if appropriate for that phase, shall be
submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Details shall
include:
o a site plan showing the detailed layout of the play spaces;
o scaled drawings of new play equipment and furniture;
o scaled drawings of any boundary treatments; and information on any surface
coverings.
o implementation timetable of no later than the occupation of 60% of the dwellings
within that phase.
No dwelling within the phase hereby approved shall be occupied until the approved
play provision for that phase has been installed in accordance with the approved details
and implementation timetable. The approved play provision shall thereafter be retained
and maintained.
REASON: To ensure the provision of high-quality play spaces, in accordance with
Policies DES4 and CFLR1 of the East Herts District Plan 2018.
32. Details of landscaping
Prior to the commencement of any above ground construction works for each
phase/sub phase of the development, full landscaping details for that phase/sub phase
consistent with the reserved matters shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
the Local Planning Authority. Details shall include:
o Hard surfacing materials;
o Soft landscaping proposals;
o Retained landscape features;
o Planting plans detailing schedule of plants, species, planting sizes and density of
planting
o Areas for community gardens for food growing / edible landscaping if appropriate for
that phase, and
o An implementation timetable.
Thereafter, the site covered by that phase/sub phase shall be landscaped in full
accordance with the approved details and implementation timetable.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   43
Appeal Decision 6008238


REASON: To ensure the provision of amenity afforded by appropriate landscape
design, in accordance with Policies DES3 and DES4 of the East Herts District Plan
(2018).
33. Details of landscape maintenance
Prior to the first occupation of each phase/sub phase of the development hereby
approved, a schedule of landscape maintenance for a minimum period of five years,
following completion of that phase/ sub phase of the development, shall be submitted
to, and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Thereafter, the landscaping
shall be maintained, in accordance with the approved schedule.
REASON: To ensure the maintenance of landscaping, in accordance with Policy DES3
of the East Herts District Plan 2018.
34. Habitat Management & Monitoring plan
Prior to the first occupation / use of each phase or sub phase of development hereby
approved, a Habitat Management & Monitoring Plan (HMMP), in line with the statutory
HMMP template and informed by the Statutory Metric, shall be submitted to and
approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority for that phase. This HMMP shall
demonstrate that a biodiversity net gain would be achieved on the site and shall also
include:
o Descriptions and evaluations of features to be managed;
o Aims and objectives of management;
o Appropriate management options for achieving target condition for habitats as
described in the metric;
o Details of management actions;
o Details of the body or organisation responsible for implementation of the plan;
o Ongoing monitoring plan and remedial measures to ensure habitat condition targets
are met;
Details of species and mixes selected to achieve target habitat conditions as identified
in the metric.
The phase of development shall be implemented and retained in full accordance with
the approved HMMP. A Biodiversity Gain Plan is required separately to discharge the
general biodiversity gain condition prior to commencement. A draft of this BGP will be
produced alongside the above HMMP.
REASON: To ensure that a biodiversity net gain is delivered and habitats are
appropriately managed, in accordance with Policies NE2 and NE3 of the East Herts
District Plan 2018 and Schedule 14 of the Environment Act (2021).
35. Ecological enhancements
Prior to the commencement of each phase or sub phase of development hereby
approved, details of the ecological enhancements on that phase of the site and
timetable for implementation, including bat boxes, bird boxes, swift boxes, bee bricks
and hedgehog nest domes, as outlined in the submitted Ecological Appraisal and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   44
Appeal Decision 6008238


consistent with the reserved matters, shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by
the Local Planning Authority.
No occupation / first use for that phase shall take place until the approved details have
been implemented in accordance with the approved details. The approved ecological
enhancements shall thereafter be retained.
REASON: In order to create opportunities for wildlife, in accordance with Policy NE3 of
the East Herts District Plan 2018.
36. Details of housing mix and tenure
Concurrent with the submission of reserved matters for each following phase or sub
phase, the housing mix for that phase shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by the
local planning authority. This shall include a schedule of the mix of house types and
sizes to be provided within the reserved matters, which shall take account of the latest
Strategic Housing Market Assessment and any additional up-to-date evidence, unless
otherwise agreed. The approved details shall be adhered to in the reserved matters
applications submitted for that phase or sub phase.
REASON: To ensure that an adequate mix of housing by unit/tenure/position is
provided
37. Details of fire hydrants
Prior to occupation / use of each phase or sub phase of development details of fire
hydrant provision for that phase shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
local planning authority. The approved details shall thereafter be implemented in full
prior to first occupation / use of the development and thereafter retained and
maintained.
REASON: In order to make adequate provision for fire hydrants and to ensure fire
safety for future occupiers.
38. Noise mitigation
Prior to first occupation / use of each phase or sub phase of development, details of
noise mitigation measures, to ensure internal noise levels within that part of
development accord with relevant standards (BS 8233:2014), shall be submitted to and
approved by the local planning authority. The hereby approved details shall thereafter
be implemented and thereafter retained and maintained in perpetuity.
REASON: To safeguard the amenity of future occupiers.
39. M4(2) dwellings
All dwellings within the development (except those completed to M4(3) requirements)
hereby approved shall be completed in compliance with Building Regulations Optional
Requirement Part M4(2) 'accessible and adaptable dwellings' (or any subsequent
replacement) and shall be retained as such thereafter.
REASON: To ensure that the proposed development is adequately accessible for future
occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   45
Appeal Decision 6008238


40. M4(3) dwellings
At least 10% of all dwellings within the development hereby approved shall be
completed in compliance with Building Regulations Optional Requirement Part M4 (3)
'wheelchair user dwellings' (or any subsequent replacement) prior to first occupation
and shall be retained as such thereafter.
REASON: To ensure that the proposed development is adequately accessible for future
occupiers.
41. NDSS compliance
Reserved Matters Applications shall demonstrate that all the residential units hereby
approved will be designed and constructed to meet the standards contained within the
Nationally Described Space Standards.
REASON: To ensure that reasonable living conditions are provided for future occupiers
42. Trees and hedgerows retained
All existing trees and hedges shall be retained, unless shown on the approved drawing
BHA_5798A_02 as being removed. All trees and hedges on and immediately adjoining
the site shall be protected from damage as a result of works on the site, to the
satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority, in accordance with BS5837: 2012 Trees in
relation to design, demolition and construction, or any subsequent relevant British
Standard, for the duration of the works on site and until at least five years following
contractual practical completion of the approved development. In the event that trees or
hedging become damaged or otherwise defective during such period, the Local
Planning Authority shall be notified as soon as reasonably practicable and remedial
action agreed and implemented. In the event that any tree or hedging dies or is
removed without the prior consent of the Local Planning Authority, it shall be replaced
as soon as is reasonably practicable and, in any case, by not later than the end of the
first available planting season, with trees of such size, species and in such number and
positions as may be agreed with the Authority.
REASON: To ensure the continuity of amenity afforded by existing trees and hedges, in
accordance with Policies DES3 and NE3 of the East Herts District Plan 2018.
43. Pre commencement
Prior to the commencement of each phase/sub phase of the development, a Tree
Protection Plan showing how retained trees and hedgerows will be protected in
accordance with Condition 43 shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
planning authority. The construction phase of the development shall be undertaken in
full compliance with the Tree Protection Plan.
REASON: To ensure adequate protection of trees during construction, in accordance
with Policies DES3 and NE3 of the East Herts District Plan 2018.
44. Unexpected contamination
If, during development, contamination not previously identified is found to be present at
the site then no further development shall be carried out until a remediation strategy
detailing how this contamination will be dealt with has been submitted to and approved
in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Thereafter, the remediation strategy shall be
implemented as approved.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   46
Appeal Decision 6008238


REASON: To ensure that the development does not result in risk of water pollution and
in the interests of ensuring that the occupiers of the development are not at risk from
unidentified contamination sources, in accordance with Policies WAT3 and EQ1 of the
East Herts District Plan 2018.
45. Pavilion
Notwithstanding the details shown on the Building Heights Parameter Plan approved
under condition 1, the Sports Pavilion identified on the Land Use Components Plan
shall be no greater than 8m in height.
REASON: To comply with the provisions of the outline planning permission including
the parameters assessed, considered, and established by this permission.
46. Local Centre
Prior to commencement of the development, full details in relation to the marketing and
delivery of the Local Centre identified on the Land Use Components Plan shall be
submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority to detail the
following:
a. Details of how and when the units in the Local Centre will be marketed (to include
marketing of the units prior to first occupation of any approved residential dwelling and
for the duration of the construction of the development (unless fully occupied), and the
submission of evidence of marketing to the local planning authority to allow for 6
monthly reviews by the local planning authority;
b. Details of the size, location and timetable for provision of the temporary
retail/community provision within the Local Centre (to include the construction of the
temporary provision prior to the occupation of the 100th dwelling and its removal only
when the permanent facilities are established).
Thereafter, the development shall be implemented, in accordance with the approved
details.
REASON: To ensure that future occupiers have the potential to access local services
on site and reduce reliance on private car. Thereby ensuring that the development can
function in a sustainable manner in accordance with policies DPS1 and TRA1 of the
East Herts District Plan.
47. Local Centre
Prior to the occupation of the 500th dwelling, the buildings proposed to accommodate
at least 435 square metres of retail floorspace (Use Class E) shall be erected in their
approved location with only internal works remaining to these buildings to enable them
to be occupied.
REASON: To ensure that future occupiers have the potential to access local services
on site and reduce reliance on private car. Thereby ensuring that the development can
function in a sustainable manner in accordance with policy TRA1 of the East Herts
District Plan.
48. No change of use class E to residential
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3(1) and Class MA of Part 3 of Schedule 2 to
the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   47
Appeal Decision 6008238


2015 (or any order revoking and re-enacting that Order with or without modification), no
local centre class E floorspace shall be occupied at any time for purposes within class
C3.
REASON: To ensure that future occupiers have the potential to access local services
on site and reduce reliance on private car. Thereby ensuring that the development can
function in a sustainable manner in accordance with policy TRA1 of the East Herts
District Plan.


                                           - End of Conditions -




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        48
Appeal Decision 6008238


APPEARANCES
For the Local Planning Authority:
Josef Cannon KC
He called:
    -   Kate Carpenter, Jacobs
    -   Richard Lewis, ActivePlanning
    -   Phillip Hughes, PHD Chartered Town Planners Limited
Round table landscape discussion – Robert Browne, Wynne-Williams Associates
Round table planning obligation discussion – Mr Neil Button, East Hertfordshire District
Council; Steve-Frazer Lym, East Hertfordshire District Council; Jamie Glazebrook,
Hertfordshire County Council Education Authority, Kate Ma, Hertfordshire County
Council Education Authority; Oliver Sowerby, Hertfordshire County Council Highway
Authority
Round table planning conditions discussion – Phillip Hughes, PHD Chartered Town
Planners Limited
For the Appellant:
Stephanie Hall, Barrister
She called:
    -   Peter Blaire, Tetra Tech
    -   James Duffy, Ridge and Partners LLP
Martin Carter KC
He called:
    -   Gary Stephens, Marrons
Round table landscape discussion – Natasha Jones, Stantec
Round table planning obligation discussion – Cairo Nickolls, Freeths LLP, and Ben
Hunter, Education Facilities Management Ltd
Round table planning conditions discussion - Gary Stephens, Marrons
Other Interested Persons:
Councillor Duncan Wallace – Buntingford Town Council
Councillor Sue Nicholls – Buntingford Town Council
Chris Berry – CPRE Hertfordshire
Tracey Russ (resident of Throcking)
Documents Submitted at the Inquiry
ID1 – Appearances on behalf of the appellant
ID2 – Appearances on behalf of the Local Planning Authority

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   49
Appeal Decision 6008238


ID3 - Opening statement on behalf of the Local Planning Authority
ID4 – Opening statement on behalf of the appellant
ID5 – written statement from Chris Berry of CPRE Hertfordshire
ID6 – written statement and photographs from Tracey Russ and including comments
from the Development Management Forum
ID7 – Education statement of common ground
ID8 – Written summary position of Robert Browne, Wynne-Williams Associates as part
of the landscape round table discussion
ID9 – Written summary position of Natasha Jones, Santec as part of the landscape
round table discussion
ID10 – East Hers District Local Plan inset map 1 showing the settlement boundary for
Buntingford
ID11 – Grid reference Automatic Traffic Survey locations to the north and south of the
Baldock Road roundabout - annotated on Google maps
ID12 – Correction and replacement for pages 137 and 139 of Peter Blaire’s proof of
evidence
ID13 – Summary of agreed draft section 106 agreement prepared by Freeths
ID14 – Hertfordshire County Council Education Authority note relating to the need for a
fist school on the site
ID15 – Draft agreed planning obligation submitted on 11 September 2026
ID16 – Council’s closing submissions
ID17 – Appellant’s closing submissions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   50
