Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 July 2026
by N Unwin BSc (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008197
Barn at Low Farm, Post Office Lane, Norley, Northwich Cheshire
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jamie Pugh against the decision of Cheshire West and Chester Council.
•    The application Ref 24/03166/S73 was approved on 29 January 2026 and planning permission was
     granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is for the conversion of agricultural building to two dwellings, addition of
     detached garage and new access on to School Lane. This application is to vary condition 2
     (approved plans, including the removal of the detached garage element of the permission) of
     planning permission 20/03235/FUL.
•    The condition in dispute is No 4 which states that: Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and
     Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-
     enacting that Order with or without modification), other than as hereby approved no building,
     enclosure or structure (including boundary treatments) shall be erected within the site curtilage, nor
     enlargement, improvements or extensions be made to the dwelling, nor additions or alteration to its
     roof (including chimneys, flues or soil and vent pipes), without the grant of planning permission by
     the local planning authority.
•    The reason given for the condition is: To preserve the agricultural character of the barns.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref 24/03166/S73 for the
       ‘conversion of agricultural building to two dwellings, addition of detached garage
       and new access on to School Lane. This application is to vary condition 2
       (approved plans, including the removal of the detached garage element of the
       permission) of planning permission 20/03235/FUL’, at Barn at Low Farm, Post
       Office Lane, Norley, Northwich Cheshire granted on 29 January 2026 by Cheshire
       West and Chester Council, is varied by deleting condition 4 and substituting for it
       the following condition:
       4) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
          Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-
          enacting that Order with or without modification), no development permitted by
          virtue of Classes A, AA, B, D, and E of Part 1 of Schedule 2, and Class A of
          Part 2 of Schedule 2 to the Order, shall be undertaken.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) on 17 August 2026. It does not change the planning policy context in
       respect of the main issue, and I have determined the appeal accordingly.
       References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008197


3.     The original permission 20/03235/FUL granted was granted for the conversion of
       agricultural building to two dwellings, addition of detached garage and new access
       on to School Lane and a subsequent s73, 24/03166/S73, application was made
       and decision issued. This appeal concerns condition 4 attached to permission
       24/03166/S73.
Main Issue
4.     In granting permission, the Council imposed condition 4, which removed certain
       permitted development (PD) rights of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (the Order). The reason for the
       imposition of the condition was to preserve the agricultural character of the barns.
5.     Accordingly, the main issue is whether the disputed condition is necessary or
       reasonable to make the development acceptable in planning terms, having regard
       to the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
6.     The appeal building is an attractive, traditional agricultural barn with its form and
       architecture reflective of its rural character. Whilst set back from the highway at a
       reduced elevation, the appeal site remains partially visible from the public realm.
       Excluding other agricultural buildings within the vicinity there is limited
       development surrounding the barn, allowing it to draw focus and reflect the
       isolated character of agricultural development within the landscape. Thus, the barn
       contributes to its rural and agricultural setting and therefore the character and
       appearance of the area.
7.     Planning approval 24/03166/S73 included condition 4:
       Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-enacting that
       Order with or without modification), other than as hereby approved no building,
       enclosure or structure (including boundary treatments) shall be erected within the
       site curtilage, nor enlargement, improvements or extensions be made to the
       dwelling, nor additions or alteration to its roof (including chimneys, flues or soil and
       vent pipes), without the grant of planning permission by the local planning
       authority.
8.     Condition 4 does not refer to any specific provisions or Classes within the Town
       and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015
       (the GPDO). However, it describes a broad range of permitted development rights
       which, from my reading, would at least include Schedule 2, Part 1, Classes A, AA,
       B, C, D, E and G, and Schedule 2, Part 2, Class A.
9.     The Planning Practice Guidance (the PPG) requires the scope of conditions
       removing permitted development rights to be precisely defined, by reference to the
       relevant provisions in the GPDO, so that it is clear exactly which rights have been
       limited or withdrawn. There is a lack of precision in the wording of condition 4
       given the lack of reference to any specific provisions or classes. Therefore, the
       wording could lead to different interpretations of the condition being applied in
       each case and I do not find it to be suitably precise.
10. Policy DM6 of the Framework says that Planning conditions restrict national
    permitted development rights should not be used unless there is clear justification

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008197


       to do so. In this case, the justification given by the Council is to preserve the
       agricultural character of the barns. Given the brief justification provided, I do not
       find this to be sufficient to restrict the broad range of permitted development rights
       above.
11. Schedule 2, Part 1, Classes A, AA, B, and D allow for the enlargement of a
    dwellinghouse and Class E and Schedule 2, Part 2, Class A allow for development
    within its curtilage. These classes would allow additions and alterations to the barn
    in addition to development within its curtilage that could harm its traditional
    agricultural form and design, and isolated nature, that contribute to the character
    and appearance of the area. It is therefore reasonable and necessary to prohibit
    the aforementioned classes of the GPDO so as to retain this isolated, agricultural
    form and design.
12. Class C and G of Schedule 2, Part 1 permit other alterations to the roof of a
    dwelling house, and chimneys and flues respectively. Class C specifically prohibits
    any alteration that would protrude more than 0.15 metres beyond the plane of the
    slope of the original roof slope. As such, any alteration permitted by Class C would
    retain the original form and character of the barn whilst limiting alterations to the
    roof only. Further, Class G prohibits any chimney, flue or soil and vent pipe from
    exceeding the highest part of the roof by 1 metre or more. consequently, any
    development under this class would be relatively limited in scale and preserve the
    character of the existing barn. Therefore, the removal of permitted development
    rights under these classes would be unreasonable and unnecessary.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the planning permission should be
    varied as set out in the formal decision.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
