Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026 by L Clark MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008922
Land Adjacent To 9 Ashby Close and 19 Glenfield Road, Grimsby, North East
Lincolnshire, DN37 9HJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Ramella Rameco Ltd against the decision of North East Lincolnshire Council.
•   The application Ref is DM/0806/24/FUL.
•   The development proposed is erection of 4.no dwellings to vacant land.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of 4no.
   dwellings to vacant land at Land Adjacent To 9 Ashby Close and 19 Glenfield Road
   Grimsby, North East Lincolnshire, DN37 9HJ in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref DM/0806/24/FUL and subject to the conditions in the attached
   schedule.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The description above is taken from the application form. The decision notice refers
   to the erection of two pairs of two storey semi-detached dwellings totalling four
   units to include associated tree works, hardstanding and landscaping (Amended
   plans received 13th March 2026 including revisions and claimed public right of
   way). I have taken this detail into account, but since it is not fundamentally different
   to the scheme as set out above, I have not repeated it. The address is taken from
   the decision notice and appeal form. It reflects more accurately the position of the
   site rather than being referenced as 19 Glenfield Road which is situated outside of
   the appeal site.
4. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (The Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of
   the main issue in the appeal or the outcome thereof. Since their arguments would
   not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation with the
   main parties.
5. Amendments have recently been made to The Biodiversity Gain (Town and
   Country Planning) (Amendments and Transitional Provisions) (England)
   Regulations 2026 and came into effect on 6 August 2026. The amendments

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008922


     introduced a new 0.2 hectare exemption for small sites. The site area is 0.1075
     hectares and therefore the proposal would not be liable for biodiversity net gain.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the proposal would result in the unacceptable loss of
   public open space with specific regard to the living conditions of local residents.
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal site is a hard surfaced area that is located between Ashby Close and
   Glenfield Road. Each road is mainly made up of pairs of semi-detached dwellings.
   There are bollards on each side of the site that restrict vehicular access but allow
   pedestrian movement. The site sits alongside other residential properties and a
   playing field associated with the nearby John Whitgift Academy. Whilst during a
   weekday, the area was very quiet at the time of my site visit. There was no one
   using the space.
8. Policy 43 of the North East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2018 (LP) states that the
   Council will safeguard against any loss of public or private green spaces, sport and
   recreation and equipped play facilities in recognition of their importance to the
   health and wellbeing of residents and visitors to the Borough, and their importance
   to biodiversity. The green spaces, sport and recreation and equipped play facilities
   that are safeguarded under this Policy are identified on the Policies Map.
9. The appeal site is not a green space, sport and recreation facility and nor is it an
   equipped play facility. It is not identified as a safeguarded space and is therefore
   not protected by the policy above. The evidence suggests that historically the
   intention may have been to use the land as a play area and that it was held as a
   public open space by the Council. Nevertheless, such a proposal did not come to
   fruition, and an intention to dispose of the land was issued by the Council.
10. It is important for residents to have access to accessible outdoor space and open
    space can be any open space of public value. However, there are ample available
    green spaces within close proximity of the site along Great Coates Road and
    around the River Freshney that appear to be more visually pleasing and usable
    than the appeal site. Local residents are able to access these spaces within a short
    and safe walking distance. Furthermore, on a smaller scale, most of the nearby
    dwellings have their own private rear gardens and they are not therefore reliant
    upon communal spaces for outdoor areas.
11. The proposal would therefore not result in the unacceptable loss of a public open
    space that would be detrimental to the living conditions of the occupants of the
    nearby residential dwellings. The proposal would therefore comply with Policies 5
    and 43 of the LP which are concerned with open space and recreation.
Other Matters
12. Given that it does not form part of the main issue of the appeal scheme and would,
    for some part, be outside of the development site, any future Traffic Regulation
    Order (TRO) for the imposition of double yellow lines on Glenfield Road would be
    outside of the scope of this appeal. The track path analysis over the proposed
    plans clearly shows a large vehicle movement in the turning head even with a car
    parked on Glenfield Road. It would be unlikely that road users would park across
    the driveways for the new plots. Any TRO could be imposed at a later date,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008922


     regardless of the outcome of this appeal. The same can be said for any future
     adoption of the turning head on Glenfield Road.
13. Open space does not need to be in public ownership to be considered as such.
    However, the circumstances of the Henlow appeal were different in terms of the
    requirements of the local plan policy that applied to more relevant spaces without a
    specific designation, the green nature of the site and its use for informal sport. I
    have set out how there is suitable provision close by, and that the appeal site is not
    protected by any designation in the development plan.
14. There is a footpath proposed that will continue to provide a link between Ashby
    Close and Glenfield Road. That being said, and whilst construction is taking place, I
    fail to see why pedestrians, particularly children using the land as a school route,
    could not use the alternative route along Larmour Road which would not be
    significantly further.
15. Concerns relating to safety, noise, pollution and parking during construction are
    proposed to be addressed by conditions, particularly the construction management
    plans. The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupants of the
    nearby properties in terms of noise, privacy and loss of light after construction are
    not contentious matters in the appeal and I have no reason to disagree with the
    Council’s conclusions thereon. The same can be said for the design of the proposal
    and the effect upon the character and appearance of the area.
Conditions
16. Other than the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to ensure that the
    development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans for certainty and
    enforcement. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, a
    condition relating to the agreement of materials is necessary. The information
    should also include details of the boundary treatments and lighting for the footpath
    in the interests of safety for users. I see no reason why these details should be pre-
    commencement, and I have therefore recommended that they are submitted prior
    to any development above slab level.
17. A landscaping plan has been submitted and therefore a condition should be
    imposed to ensure that it will be carried out in the first planting season after
    completion. This timescale is more reasonable than twelve months after
    commencement to ensure that the site is ready for planting. This is in the interest of
    the appearance of the site and to encourage biodiversity. The Council has
    suggested a condition for a landscape ecological management plan however given
    the landscape management proposed along with the ecological enhancements,
    such a management plan would be unreasonable for a scheme of this size.
18. A condition will also be imposed to ensure that details are submitted for a water
    efficiency standard of 110 litres per person per day to satisfy the development plan
    requirements set out in Policy 34 of the LP. The drainage details are shown on the
    approved plans and there is therefore no need for a further condition thereon. The
    same can be said for the tree protection details and the ecological enhancements
    that are already shown on the approved plans. There is therefore no need for
    further conditions in these respects.
19. The access and parking details are shown on the approved plans however there
    are further details required to ensure that they are in accordance with Highways

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008922


     specification and a condition will therefore be imposed to secure the details and to
     ensure that they are carried out prior to occupation. I have commented on the
     matter of offsite highway changes. A condition would be necessary to ensure that
     any contaminated land that is found throughout the course of the construction is
     identified, and a procedure is followed for its removal. In satisfaction of LP Policy 5.
20. The construction transport management plan has been submitted and in table one
    states the site opening times. A condition would be reasonable, in the interests of
    the living conditions of local residents, to ensure that the management plans are
    adhered to throughout the construction period.
21. The Council has suggested a condition that would remove a number of permitted
    development rights. However, I have not been provided with any evidence as to
    why such a condition would be reasonable or necessary given that the site is not
    within a particularly sensitive area and there is a reasonable separation distance
    between the proposed and existing dwellings. Similarly, the Council has suggested
    ensuring that the first floor side windows of plots 2 and 4 are obscure glazed
    however these windows only serve staircases which would face towards the side
    gable of the neighbouring properties and therefore such a condition would not be
    reasonable or necessary.
Conclusion and Recommendation
22. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would comply with the
    development plan and there is nothing compelling to suggest a decision other than
    in accordance. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

L Clark
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER
Inspector’s Decision
23. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed. Planning permission is therefore granted, subject
    to the conditions set out in the attached schedule.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008922


Schedule of Conditions
    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans: PL(A)050 revision J, PL(A)051 revision J, PL(A)055
       revision J, PL(A) 060 revision J, PL(A)150 revision D, PL(A)151 revision G,
       PL(A)260 revision J, PL(A)250 revision E and the plan showing elevations of
       plots 3 & 4.
    3) Notwithstanding the plans hereby approved, no development above slab level
       shall take place until details of the materials to be used in the construction of the
       external surfaces of the development have been submitted to and approved in
       writing by the local planning authority. These shall also include details of the
       boundary treatments and the lighting for the footpath. Development shall be
       carried out in accordance with the approved details and retained thereafter.
    4) The landscaping works shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
       detail shown on drawing number PL(A) 060 revision J during the first planting
       season immediately following completion of the development. The completed
       scheme shall be maintained in accordance with the establishment/aftercare
       details annotated on the plan.
    5) Prior to the first occupation of the first dwelling hereby permitted, details of how
       each will adhere to the Water Efficiency Standard of 110 litre per person per day,
       shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
       Once approved, the measures shall be implemented for each dwelling in
       accordance with the approved details prior to first occupation and retained
       thereafter.
    6) Prior to the first occupation of the first dwelling hereby permitted, details of the
       location, layout, design and method of construction for the access and parking
       for each shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
       authority. The access and parking for each dwelling shall be constructed in
       accordance with the approved details prior to their first occupation and thereafter
       retained.
    7) Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the
       approved development shall be reported immediately to the local planning
       authority. Development on the part of the site affected shall be suspended and a
       risk assessment carried out and submitted to and approved in writing by the
       local planning authority. Where unacceptable risks are found remediation and
       verification schemes shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
       planning authority. These approved schemes shall be carried out before the
       development is resumed.
    8) The details within the Construction Management Plan and the Construction
       Transport Management Plan shall be adhered to throughout the construction
       period for the development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
