Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Andrew Owen MA BA(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008989
Land to the south west of Stonards Hill, Epping CM16 4PX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Wates Group Ltd against the decision of Epping Forest District Council.
•   The application Ref is EPF/1215/25.
•   The development proposed is change of use to the keeping of horses for recreational purposes.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a change of use to
   the keeping of horses for recreational purposes at land south west of Stonards Hill,
   Epping, CM16 4PX in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   EPF/1215/25, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. During the consideration of this appeal, the government published a revised version
   of the National Planning Policy Framework (the ‘Framework’). I have taken account
   of that in my decision.
3. The site is within the Green Belt. Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out that
   material changes of use of land, or appropriate facilities for outdoor recreation, are
   not inappropriate, providing the impact on the openness of the Green Belt is
   minimised and there would not be a significant conflict with the Green Belt
   purposes. This is similar to the corresponding parts of the previous version of the
   Framework and policy DM4 of the Epping Forest Local Plan (2023) (the ‘Local
   Plan’). The main parties consider the development would not be inappropriate. As
   the proposal is for the keeping of horses only and does not include any built
   development such as fencing, buildings or equine related equipment, I have no
   reason to disagree.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect on the proposal on biodiversity.
Reasons
5. The appeal site currently comprises nearly 14 hectares of undeveloped undulating
   land on the edge of Epping. It accommodates areas of woodland, grassland and
   scrub. It is understood that there are also some ponds and streams, but at the time
   of my site visit, at the end of a very hot and dry summer, some ponds and the
   stream were dry. However, some of the ponds, in particular the large one in the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008989


     west of the site which I understand is used for fishing, were inaccessible to me due
     to the density of the surrounding woodland, so may have contained water.
6. In fact, the scrub and much of the woodland was so thick as to be inaccessible, but
   there were clear pathways across the grassland. This indicates it is a well-used
   recreational area for the public, even though it is in private ownership, and the
   correspondence from interested parties supports this. It is understood that there are
   pending applications to have public rights of way across the site formalised.
7. The appellant’s covering letter sets out that the proposal is for up to eight horses.
8. In terms of the quality of the site currently, the appellant’s Preliminary Ecological
   Appraisal Report and Outline Ecological Assessment (PEAR) found the grassland
   to be neutral in quality; the extensive areas of woodland to contain some protected
   and veteran trees of ecological importance; and the stream banks to provide wet
   habitats supporting a number of plant and tree species.
9. The introduction of horses would result in some trampling and grazing of the
   grassland and nutrient enrichment from manure. But given the limited number of
   horses, who would have free reign over the whole site, it would be unlikely in my
   view that these effects would be excessive in any one part of the site such that the
   quality of the grassland, which is not species rich, would be unacceptably harmed.
   With regard to the woodland, I see no reason why horses would cause harm to that
   habitat. In addition, from my site visit, I saw that all the locations where water may
   sometimes be present were surrounded either by dense woodland or thick scrub. It
   is unlikely, in my view, that these waterbodies would be readily accessible by
   horses. Nonetheless, the PEAR recommended that the opportunity be taken to
   protect and restore the wetland habitat on-site. A River Condition Survey could
   inform this, and a fenced 10 metre buffer either side of the stream could be
   provided to prevent access to the stream margins by horses and hence support
   habitat restoration there.
10. The Council suggest that fencing would be inevitable, either for ecological or site
    management reasons, and that it would be harmful to flora and fauna. However,
    details of any necessary fencing could be secured by condition to ensure its
    position and design allowed for the retention of habitat and the free flow of existing
    fauna throughout site.
11. With regard to fauna, the PEAR found grass snakes on the site. It recommended a
    further reptile survey to ascertain the size of the population and to establish if any
    other reptile species were present. It also found evidence of badgers, and that the
    site is medium to high quality for bats and amphibians, though found no record of
    great crested newts being at the site. It concluded that the proposal would not be
    likely to have any adverse effect on amphibians, bats, badgers or any other
    mammals or their habitat.
12. A further reptile survey was undertaken although only two visits were able to be
    completed due to the surveying equipment being interfered with. Nonetheless, the
    surveys that were done showed that slow worms and common lizards were
    present. As such, suggested mitigation included log piles/hibernacula and buffer
    areas around field boundary features. The Council’s ecological consultant, in a
    response during the determination of the application, considered that on that basis
    a detailed mitigation strategy could be secured by a planning condition. I agree.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008989


13. Overall, the introduction of horses would be a new element in the ecosystem of the
    site and would introduce new activities such as grazing, trampling and nutrient
    enhancement. However I have no substantive evidence before me to suggest such
    activities by just eight horses over the whole site would be harmful to its
    biodiversity, particularly with mitigation in place. Indeed, all these species, including
    horses, are commonly found side by side in rural areas.
14. This site is within the zone of influence for Epping Forest Special Area of
    Conservation (SAC). Its qualifying features include north Atlantic wet heaths,
    European dry heaths, Atlantic acidophilous beech forest and the stag beetle. The
    conservation objectives for the SAC are generally to maintain and restore the
    distribution, structure, function and supporting processes of the habitats and the
    population and distribution of the qualifying species. Atmospheric pollution from
    additional traffic on roads within the SAC, or on roads within 200 metres of the
    SAC, could result in a significant effect on the integrity of the SAC. However as the
    development would result in a negligible amount of additional traffic, the Council
    consider there would be no material harm to air quality and a financial contribution,
    as suggested by Natural England which would be normally sought for new homes,
    would not be appropriate. I agree that any traffic generated by the development
    would most likely be less than that generated by a single dwelling and therefore the
    mitigation suggested by Natural England would be excessive. As such I conclude
    the development would not be likely to have significant effects on the integrity of the
    SAC.
15. In summary the development would not be likely to unacceptably harm biodiversity.
    It would therefore accord with policy DM1 of the Local Plan which states that
    development must seek to avoid harm to, protect and enhance natural habitats and
    species.
Other Matters
16. The Council refer to an inherent conflict between public access and the proposed
    use, and this is a common concern by local residents. However there is no reason
    why formal public access, if granted, could not be sustained as any obstruction of a
    public right of way would be contrary to the Highways Act 1980. Indeed, if public
    access were to be formalised, it would not even necessarily require the grazing
    areas to be fenced off, though would require dogs to be kept on a lead.
17. Many other concerns are focussed around the anticipation that this proposal is a
    precursor to future plans for housing. However I can only determine the appeal on
    the basis of what is proposed within it. Similarly, though there are concerns relating
    to the welfare of the horses and what additional infrastructure may be needed to
    support that, I can only consider the proposal before me and I have no reason to
    consider the horses could not be appropriately cared for by visiting owners with
    mobile equipment.
18. It is understood that there is currently an application for the site to become an Asset
    of Community Value. Even if this were granted, there is no reason why that would
    be incompatible with the use of the site for the keeping of horses. The Council’s
    position on this supports my view.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008989


Conditions
19. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council against the advice in the
    Planning Practice Guidance and the Framework. Where necessary I have slightly
    altered the wording of the conditions to better reflect that advice.
20. I have imposed the standard condition relating to the commencement of the
    development and identifying the approved plan in the interests of certainty. For the
    same reason I have included a condition limiting the number of horses that may be
    kept on the site.
21. I have also imposed conditions relating to the submission of a reptile method
    statement, to ensure reptiles are protected; relating to landscape management, to
    ensure all existing habitats are suitably protected; and relating to planting, to
    ensure any landscape features that are lost are appropriately replaced. The
    landscape management condition would address the recommendations of the
    PEAR to protect and manage the river margins habitat. Similarly, a condition
    preventing the installation of external lighting is necessary to ensure that some
    species, such as bats, are not adversely affected. Likewise, to ensure all protected
    species and their habitats are not harmed, a condition requiring the provision of
    details of any fencing is included.
22. A condition relating to the removal of any materials, structures and equipment upon
    the cessation of the use is necessary to ensure that the character and appearance
    of the site is maintained in the long term.
23. A condition was suggested relating to unexpected contamination of the site.
    However as no built development is proposed, and so no excavation likely, there is
    no reason to consider that any ground contamination would be disturbed.
    Furthermore, the officers report confirms that no specific former potentially
    contaminating uses have been identified for this site. This condition is therefore
    unnecessary.
Conclusion
24. The proposal would accord with the development plan taken as a whole and there
    are no other considerations that indicate a decision other than in accordance with
    the development plan. Therefore the appeal is allowed.

Andrew Owen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008989


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plan: EP_PSP_01.
     3)       Within three months of the date of this decision, a Reptile Method Statement
              shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              The Statement shall include the following details:
              i)    purpose and objectives for the proposed works;
              ii) detailed design(s) and/or working method(s) necessary to achieve
                    stated objectives;
              iii) extent and location of proposed works shown on appropriately scaled
                    maps and plans;
              iv) persons responsible for implementing the works;
              v) initial aftercare and long-term maintenance.
              The works shall be carried out strictly in accordance with the approved
              Statement and shall be retained in that manner thereafter.
     4)       Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved, a plan
              indicating the position, height, design, materials and type of any fencing or
              boundary treatment to be erected, shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. Any such development shall be
              completed as approved before the use is commenced and retained as such
              thereafter.
     5)       Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved, a
              Landscape Management Plan, including long and short term design
              objectives, management responsibilities and maintenance schedules for all
              landscape areas, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The Plan shall be carried out as approved.
     6)       No more than eight horses shall be on the site at any time.
     7)       No external lighting shall be installed on the site.
     8)       Upon cessation of the use hereby permitted any materials, structures and
              equipment brought onto the site in connection with the use shall be removed
              and the land shall be restored to its condition before the development took
              place.
     9)       If any tree, shrub or hedge is removed, uprooted, destroyed, dies, or
              becomes severely damaged or diseased as a result of the development,
              another tree, shrub or hedge of the same size and species shall be planted
              within 3 months at the same place. If, within a period of five years from the
              date of planting, any replacement tree, shrub or hedge is removed, uprooted
              or destroyed, or dies or becomes seriously damaged or defective, another
              tree, shrub or hedge of the same species and size as that originally planted
              shall, within 3 months, be planted at the same place.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
