Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by R Standfield BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008434
Land at Brakenhill Mews, Upper Seagry, Chippenham, Wiltshire SN15 5EU
     • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
     • The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Allun and Kate Sutherland against the decision of Wiltshire
       Council.
     • The application Ref is PL/2025/09810.
     • The development proposed is permission in principle for residential development consisting of a
       minimum of 4 no. dwellings and a maximum of 9 no. dwellings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
    2.   The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
         advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
         the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a
         development is suitable in-principle and the second ‘technical details consent’
         stage is when the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal
         relates to the first of these 2 stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
         permission in principle is granted. Accompanying plans have been submitted
         which I have taken into account on an indicative basis only.
    4.   The National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was updated on 17 August
         2026. Both of the main parties to this appeal have had the opportunity to comment
         in light of the revised document and such comments as were submitted have
         been taken into account accordingly.
    5.   Additional information regarding the lawful extent of the current use has been
         provided by the Council to suggest that only a small part of the site should be
         considered previously developed land. I have taken into account my observations
         from my site visit and the appellants response that the site has existed in its
         current form for in excess of 12 years. Appeal decisions referenced by the
         appellant1 have not been provided and neither do I have any details before me,
         therefore these have not been considered further. Nevertheless, I have

1
    APP/F0114/W/25/3363091, APP/D3125/W/19/3235474 and APP/Y0435/W/17/3178790

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008434


       approached the appeal on the basis of the current site layout comprising
       previously developed land in line with the NPPF definition.
Main Issue
6.     The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
       regard to the proposed land use, its location and the amount of development. In
       doing so, having particular regard to the settlement, delivery and community area
       strategies of the development plan; the accessibility of services, facilities and
       employment by walking, cycling and public transport; and the character and
       appearance of the North Wiltshire landscape.
Reasons
Land Use
7.     The appeal site is a low-key equestrian use that is in keeping with the rural
       environs, comprising a modest stable block and outdoor riding arena
       supplemented by a storage building (Nissan hut) and hard standing. Two linear
       rows of mature trees subdivide and border the site, contributing to the verdancy of
       the surroundings. The site is adjacent to a small cluster of dwellings positioned in
       open countryside to the south-east of Upper Seagry with paddock to the
       immediate east and farmland surrounding. Neither the cluster nor the small village
       of Upper Seagry benefit from a settlement boundary, and the appeal site is
       located outside of a settlement for planning policy purposes.
8.     Policy 2 of the Wiltshire Core Strategy (2015) (the Core Strategy) states that
       development will not be permitted outside the limits of development, and then
       further sets out that development at the small villages will be limited to infill within
       the existing built area that both meets housing needs and complies with criteria
       relating to position, character and form.
9.     Upper Seagry stretches along an unnamed road with wide, open highway and
       several lengths of flat verge which cease when the road narrows, clearly
       representing the southern edge of the village proper. Various farm buildings,
       including residential conversions and isolated dwellings continue to be accessed
       off the narrowed unnamed road albeit in an irregular form that is distinct from the
       more compact arrangement of the village.
10. Due to the distance and nature of the surroundings, the appeal site, adjacent to
    the further cluster, is physically and visually separate from the village with
    agricultural land in-between. The connecting highway is at national speed limit of
    60mph, narrow with steep banking and no footpaths extending for a distance of
    approximately 300m. Appeal decision APP/F2605/W/25/3370598 has been
    quoted by the appellant to suggest that a site can form part of a settlement without
    being expressly connected by a footpath. I have not been provided with the full
    details of the case nor the characteristics of the site in relation to the settlement in
    question therefore I am unable to establish comparability to the scheme currently
    before me.
11. The explanatory text to Core Strategy Policy 2 describes infill development as the
    filling of a small gap within the village that is only large enough for ‘not more than
    a few dwellings, generally only one dwelling’. Notwithstanding that the site does
    not fall within the village, the closest neighbouring dwelling, Brakenhill Mews, is a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008434


         bungalow set approximately 85m away from the shared boundary with no
         definitive relationship to the site. The absence of significant built form to either
         side and presence of surrounding farmland confirm the inability of the proposed
         development site to be considered a gap and consequently, the proposed
         development would not ‘infill’ at this location.
12. Core Strategy Policy 2 also limits the scale of development to ‘not more than a
    few’ dwellings, with the expectation being generally single dwellings. This has
    been subject to commentary within previous appeal decisions, two of which have
    been provided by the appellant to support the view that ‘not more than a few’ can
    comprise more than one dwelling and that four dwellings could be considered ‘a
    few’ 2. I concur that up to four dwellings could be considered ‘a few’ but am not
    persuaded that up to 9 dwellings would also fall within this definition. Appeal
    decision APP/Y3940/W/25/3367502, also referenced by the appellant, concludes
    that a proposal for up to 8 dwellings falls contrary to the requirements of Core
    Strategy Policy 2.
13. I note the appellants evidence with regards to criteria ii) and iii) of Policy 2
    however, these matters do not alter my findings with regards to infill development
    and therefore the proposal would not accord with Policy 2 as a whole.
14. The proposed development would have a materially harmful effect upon the
    settlement, delivery and community area strategies and therefore the land use. It
    would conflict with Core Strategy Policies 1, 2 and 10, and saved Policy H4 of the
    North Wiltshire Local Plan 2011 (the Local Plan). Taken together, these policies
    focus on securing sustainable development by way of a spatial strategy of
    settlements and specific criteria for residential development within small villages
    to protect the open countryside.
15. My decision in this respect is reinforced by the ‘made’ Seagry Parish
    Neighbourhood Plan 2019-2036 (the Neighbourhood Plan) Policy SNP6 which
    reiterates Core Strategy Policy 2 and specifically categorises infill development to
    be a relatively small gap between existing buildings in Upper Seagry. Further to
    this, the Neighbourhood Plan map 8 marks out residential clusters associated with
    the village. The appeal site cluster is not identified as forming part of the village,
    instead being located within the open countryside. Whilst not specified on the
    Council’s decision notice and not determinative in my decision above, the
    Neighbourhood Plan, as part of the formal development plan, provides additional
    support to the conclusions reached.
Location
    16. Upper Seagry is within the Chippenham Community Area and categorised as a
        small village where there is a low level of services, facilities and few employment
        opportunities, namely a primary school, village hall, public house and recreation
        ground. A wider range of provision, including employment opportunities, is
        available further afield in the towns of Malmesbury and Chippenham. Within the
        village, the width of the road, flat verges and speed limits of 20mph and 30mph
        make the pedestrian environment more attractive however, the site is located
        outside the village where it opens onto an unmarked, narrow rural road that is
        designated at national speed limit with no footpath provision or streetlighting. The
        roadside verges here, where they are present, are generally raised and unsuitable
2
    APP/Y3940/W/16/3154507 and APP/Y3940/W/24/3352756


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6008434


         for walking. Two possible pedestrian routes to Upper Seagry, one via the
         unnamed road and one via Public Right of Way SEAG4 would both necessitate
         sharing the carriageway with vehicles at speed for distances that are likely to be a
         deterrent for future occupiers in most instances.
17. The appellant indicates that public transport services are available via the no 91
    bus, currently providing 8 services per weekday and 5 services on a Saturday.
    Bus stops are situated on the southern part of Seagry Road. This limited service
    would not be safely accessible on foot, and it is expected therefore that occupiers
    of the proposed dwellings would be highly reliant on both the need to travel and
    for such travel to be car-based, to access facilities, services and employment
    dispersed in neighbouring places. Therefore, the proposal offers poor accessibility
    which would be counter to the need to reduce car-based travel and encourage
    use of sustainable transport modes.
18. My attention has been drawn to other appeal decisions3 however, insufficient
    information has been provided on these other schemes, and I cannot be sure they
    are directly comparable to the appeal scheme, particularly with regards to
    location, relationship with surroundings, main issues and scale of development.
19. I have had regard to the Councils Highway Development Management comments
    detailing that the scheme would not be detrimental in highway capacity terms.
    Nevertheless, this matter would not outweigh the harm in terms of the appeal site
    being poorly located to enable any meaningful proportion of daily trips to be
    undertaken by sustainable transport modes for the dual reasons of lack of safe
    and convenient provision of walking, cycling and public transport opportunities
    combined with the very limited services and facilities within a reasonable distance.
20. The absence of recorded vehicular crash incidents for a period of 10 years is not
    determinative in this matter with highway safety arrangements around the
    proposed access as well as parking provision, transport patterns and types of
    vehicles attending the site being properly part of a Technical Details Consent
    application.
21. The appellant refers to Court of Appeal judgement City & Country Bramshill Ltd v
    Secretary of State for Housing, Communities And Local Government & Ors [2021]
    EWCA Civ 320 which deals with the concept of isolated homes. This matter,
    however, does not alter my findings above with regards to the proposal being in
    an unsuitable location with regards to services.
22. The proposed development would not be suitably located and would fail to provide
    a reasonable degree of accessibility to daily services, facilities and employment
    by walking, cycling or public transport. The proposal would therefore conflict with
    Core Strategy Policies 60 and 61 which aim to reduce the need to travel,
    particularly by private car, and encourage the use of sustainable transport
    alternatives.
Amount of development
    23. As referenced above, the site sits well within its rural setting, with minimal visual
        impact from the two built structures and surfacing. Management guidelines set out
        within the North Wiltshire Landscape Character Assessment (2004) confirm the

3
    APP/Y3940/W/24/3348998; APP/F2605/W/25/3370598; APP/Y3940/W/25/3367502


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
Appeal Decision 6008434


       importance of conserving the rural character in this area. Further to this, small
       scale development within such context needs to be appropriately associated with
       existing built form.
24. The principle of redeveloping the site for dwellings, regardless of the number of
    units, would undermine the countryside character and value that the site
    contributes. Whilst the site is deemed to comprise previously developed land by
    definition, the site clearly relates most closely to its countryside surroundings. Its
    openness, vegetation, two modest structures appropriate within a rural setting and
    typical countryside use contribute positively to its environs.
25. The scale of development proposed would significantly extend and consolidate
    the cluster of dwellings to the south, as a minimum doubling the number of
    dwellings at this location and potentially more than tripling it. As such, in this
    specific context, and notwithstanding that the development would not be classified
    as major development in planning terms, the proposal, especially towards the
    upper parameter, is not small scale in relation to the effects that would be
    generated.
26. The current appearance of the site is influenced to a degree by the condition of
    the Nissan hut and various paraphernalia distributed around the site giving a
    somewhat untidy appearance. However, this could be addressed by the appellant
    without the need for planning permission. The change in ground levels to the
    riding arena referenced by the appellant was not evident at my site visit although
    this is not determinative in my decision. The current hedgerow boundary to the
    highway provides some effective screening however the Highways Officer advises
    that the existing gated access would need to be upgraded to provide the
    necessary visibility splays and it is not clear at this in-principle stage how the
    boundary may need to be altered to accommodate this.
27. Notwithstanding that the detailed proposal, including the upgraded access,
    potential cul-de-sac arrangement and landscaping would be considered as part of
    a Technical Details Consent application, the rurality of the site within the farmland
    context would be lost, detrimentally changing the character of the site and
    therefore, having regard to its location and land use, the site is not suitable for
    residential development.
28. For the above reasons, the proposal, including the amount of development, would
    materially harm the character and appearance of this part of the North Wiltshire
    landscape, contrary to Core Policy 51 which seeks to protect, conserve and
    enhance Wiltshire’s distinctive landscape character, particularly the landscape
    settings of settlements.
Other Considerations
29. The Biodiversity Net Gain requirement would be subject to further detail at the
    Technical Detail Consent stage and, as a mandatory element of development, is
    considered neutrally at this in principle stage. In the absence of any evidence
    setting out any benefits, the loss of the commercial / equestrian use of the site is
    also weighed neutrally.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008434


Planning Balance
30. Further to the above conclusions, the proposed development would conflict with
    the development plan taken as a whole. Planning law requires that decisions
    should be made in accordance with the development plan unless material
    considerations indicate otherwise4. The development plan policies are broadly
    consistent with those of the NPPF insofar as they relate to the principles of
    sustainable development, including reducing the need to travel.
31. NPPF Policy S3 sets out a general presumption in favour of development under
    which Policy S5 lists development proposals outside of settlements that should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    of the NPPF. Whilst the proposed development could not proceed under Policy S5
    1j, as the site is not physically well related to an existing settlement with no
    justification for the proposed development to be located separately, Policy S5 1d
    does provide for the redevelopment of previously developed land (including a
    material change of use to residential).
32. The proposal would be a small site development that contributes towards local
    housing supply in a context of unmet need, quantified by a housing land supply of
    2.42 years (as of June 2025). Compliance with NPPF Policy HO7 to deliver
    homes which will contribute towards meeting the accommodation needs of the
    community weighs in favour of the proposal. It would also have economic and
    social benefits to the community both during and after construction. In line with
    NPPF Policies HO7 and L2, which relates to the effective use of land, I therefore
    attribute substantial weight to these benefits.
33. However, in providing additional housing, the proposed development would
    conflict with other policies of the NPPF, including Policies TR3, CC2 and DP3 2d
    with regards to limiting the need to travel, particularly by private car, and offering a
    genuine choice of transport modes for residents, noting that the upper parameter
    of development in particular could generate an amount of movement that would
    be significant within the locational context. In addition, the proposed development
    would conflict with the broad objectives of Policies N2 in relation to the natural
    environment and DP3 regarding site character.
34. Further to this, the building of dwellings in an unsuitable location would undermine
    the economic, social, and environmental objectives of sustainable development
    set out in NPPF Chapter 1, paragraph 17. Specifically, the community benefits
    associated with the proposed development would be diluted across a wide area
    and the valued rural character of the location would be permanently altered.
35. In combination, I afford these adverse effects very substantial weight.
36. As such, the adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the NPPF, would substantially outweigh the benefits of the
    proposed development. Therefore, the presumption in favour of development in
    Policy S3 is not applied.




4
    Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2024 and section 70(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 6
Appeal Decision 6008434


Conclusion
37. The proposed development conflicts with the development plan and the material
    considerations, including the NPPF, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. As such, the appeal should be
    dismissed.

R Standfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
