Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by J D Clark BA (Hons) DpTRP MCD DMS MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008087
Nine Oaks, Stocks Lane, Over Peover, Cheshire East WA16 8TU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Paul Elliott against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/2665/HOUS.
•    The development proposed is demolition of existing extensions and construction of new extensions.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The decision notice quotes Site Allocations and Development Policies Document
       (SADPD)1 Policy RUR 13. The Council has confirmed that this is an error and the
       correct policy is RUR 11. The appellant’s statement refers to both policies so I am
       satisfied that no injustice has occurred as a result of this error.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. Whilst there are various alterations to the new Framework those
       relevant to this proposal remain similar and although the format and wording have
       changed, these do not have a bearing on the matters before me. Therefore, given
       the scope of the changes relevant to this case, and having considered the
       principles of natural justice, I do not consider it necessary to request the views of
       the main parties. My assessment is made on the basis of the 2026 version of the
       Framework.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt having
                regard to the National Planning Policy Framework and relevant
                development plan policies and its effect on openness;
           •    the effect of the proposal on a protected priority species, in particular bats;
                and
           •    whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is
                clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very
                special circumstances necessary to justify the development.

1
 Cheshire East Council – Cheshire East Local Plan Site Allocations and Development Policies Document Adopted December 2022
(SADPD).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008087


Reasons
Green Belt
5.       The appeal site is a detached two storey house in a row of linear residential
         properties within the settlement of Over Peover, an infill village within the Green
         Belt. It was originally a dormer bungalow but has been previously extended. Some
         additions appear to be lawful whilst others are not. My view is mostly based on the
         matter of an outstanding enforcement notice for the removal of a two-storey rear
         extension, a first floor side extension, a single storey side extension, and
         alterations made to the roof including a roof lantern. The notice requires the house
         to be re-instated to its prior appearance shown on Drawing No 2530 102, marked
         Plan B. A copy of the Inspector’s decision and plans have been submitted2.
6.       There is some dispute regarding the percentage increases for the house. The
         planning approval in 1987 increased the dwelling by between 44% and 47%. The
         Inspector dismissed the appeal based on the increase being 142% of the original.
         The appellant states that this proposal would see an increase of 86% or 71% if the
         garage is excluded, whilst the Council state it would be almost 100%. Some
         figures seem to include internal dimensions whilst others are external. It is likely
         that some discrepancies are also due to microfilmed plans or inaccurately scaled
         plans.
7.       The Framework explains that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful
         to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special
         circumstances. Policy GB7 sets out categories of development which are not
         inappropriate in the Green Belt. GB7 1) (b) cites the reuse, extension, alteration or
         replacement of an existing building, provided that the existing building is of
         permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in planning terms, and any
         extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in size
         compared to the original building. Whilst the wording in Local Plan Strategy3 Policy
         PG 3 differs from the Framework, the thrust of it remains largely consistent.
8.       SADPD Policy RUR 11 criterion1 (i) also requires extensions and alterations not to
         be disproportionate. Criterion 1 (ii) and (iii) require extensions and alterations to
         respect the character of the existing building and not unduly harm the rural
         character of the countryside by virtue of prominence, excessive scale, bulk or
         visual intrusion.
9.       In considering disproportionate additions, Policy RUR 11 indicates that matters
         such as height, bulk, form, siting and design will be taken into account, with
         particular attention given to the increase in the overall building height. Taking
         these matters into account, in the Green Belt a threshold of 30% is usually
         considered to represent disproportionate additions. An exception to this threshold
         can be accepted within an infill village, amongst other things.
10. Whichever calculations are taken into account, the 30% threshold is substantially
    exceeded. Given a larger increase may be acceptable in an infill village, as is the
    case here, and criteria (ii) and (iii) referred to above, a greater increase may be
    justified. However, the proposed dwelling bears little resemblance to the original
    dormer bungalow and it would be out of character in terms of general scale, form

2
    Appeal Ref: APP/R0660/C/24/3346262.
3
    Cheshire East Council – Cheshire East Local Plan Local Plan Strategy 2010 – 2030 July 2017.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6008087


         and design. Also, it would be a much more prominent building than the original and
         of a greater scale and bulk. Although the original dwelling has long been
         subsumed by previous extensions, Green Belt assessment is based on the original
         dwelling and from the information submitted I cannot come to any other conclusion
         other than the proposal would be disproportionate and therefore inappropriate
         development in the Green Belt.
11. Furthermore, openness is an established characteristic of Green Belts having both
    a spatial and visual impact. Numerically the extension would have a spatial impact
    given the size of the percentage increase in floorspace. Visually the proposed
    building would be larger, in terms of its height, bulk and massing. It cannot
    therefore have anything other than a greater impact on openness.
12. I therefore conclude that the proposed dwelling would represent a disproportionate
    addition to the original dormer bungalow. This would be inappropriate development
    which carries substantial weight. The proposal would also have a greater impact
    on Green Belt openness which would cause further harm. This would conflict with
    Local Plan Strategy Policy PG 3 and SADPD Policy RUR 11.
Protected Species – Bats
13. The submitted bat surveys found evidence of bats in the building in terms of minor
    roosting activity. Mitigation measures are suggested comprising the installation of
    bat boxes. A condition is suggested to ensure this.
14. Regulation 9(3) of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as
    amended) (the Regulations) requires a competent authority to have regard to the
    requirements of the associated Directive so far as it may be affected by the
    exercise of its functions. This includes any proposal that might lead to the
    deterioration or destruction of the breeding sites and resting places of European
    Protected Species (EPS) under Article 12(1)4. This includes bats and the places
    that they roost, irrespective of whether or not they are present at the time the
    development is carried out.
15. The Courts5 have established that planning permission should ordinarily be
    granted save only in cases where a proposed development would be likely to
    offend Article 12(1) and unlikely to be licensed pursuant to the delegation powers.
    The duty to have regard to the Directive, as set out in Regulation 9(1), remains but
    the judgement establishes that there is no need to carry out a detailed assessment
    as to whether there would be a breach of Article 12(1) or whether derogation from
    that article would be permitted and a licence granted.
16. Nevertheless, I am still required to ensure that any potential harm to an EPS would
    be adequately mitigated and whether or not the proposed development is likely to
    be licensed. Bearing in mind the suggested mitigation measures I find that the
    proposal would not offend Article 12(1). I am satisfied that the mitigation hierarchy
    has been followed and there would be no significant harm to the long term
    conservation status of the bat species identified.
17. I am satisfied that conditions would provide the necessary detail and certainty to
    ensure mitigation. As the PPG makes clear, conditions should be used to enable
    development to proceed where it would otherwise have been necessary to refuse
4
    Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild Fauna and Flora (the Directive).
5
    Morge v Hampshire County Council [2011] UKSC 2.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   3
Appeal Decision 6008087


       planning permission, by mitigating the adverse affects. Having reviewed the
       suggested condition, I have no reason to doubt that it would be ineffectual in this
       instance.
18. Turning to licensing matters, there is no evidence that Natural England has been
    consulted but I have no reason to doubt that a mitigation license would not be
    issued on the basis of the evidence before me. Furthermore, it is not for me to
    determine whether the legal tests for a licence would be met as this would
    duplicate the function of another regulatory body and would be contrary to the well-
    established principle that non-planning regimes are assumed to operate
    effectively.
19. I conclude that, subject to conditions, no significant harm to a protected priority
    species, in particular bats or their roosts would be caused. Consequently, the
    proposal would not conflict with Local Plan Strategy Policy SE 3 or SADPD Policy
    ENV 2. Amongst other things, these seek to ensure that there is no overall loss of
    biodiversity and any development follows the mitigation hierarchy, in this case by
    the steps put forward by the appellant and agreed by the Council’s ecologist. I am
    also satisfied that the proposal would not conflict with Chapter 19 of the
    Framework which, amongst other things, seeks to safeguard important habitats
    and species.
Other Considerations
20. As referred to above, the original dwelling was a dormer bungalow. However, it
    has significantly changed over the years so that the dwelling that now stands is a
    larger two storey house. Part of it is unlawful and an enforcement notice, also
    referred to above, requires partial demolition. The resulting house is shown on the
    submitted Plan B. From the plans submitted, the works required under the
    Enforcement Notice would result in a dwelling that would be quite different in scale
    and appearance compared to the original dwelling.
21. The proposal would result in a yet larger dwelling than that under the 1987
    approval; which the enforcement notice would require the building to be reinstated
    to. It would be larger, especially at the rear but its impact would be lessened by the
    removal of the existing front gable projection. The house is set back from the road
    but it is visible. The existing garage sits very close to the front of the house,
    removing the front gable projection would create some space between the house
    and the garage.
22. The bulk of the additions would be to the rear of the house which in the context of
    its setting would not appear unduly prominent. The rear elevation as built is similar
    to that proposed with large areas of glazing on the ground floor and Juliet
    balconies on the first floor. The existing house also incorporates a roof lantern
    which, whilst is slightly incongruous, is only glimpsed from positions further away
    from the house. Given that the large front gable projection would be removed, the
    impact of the extra bulk added to the rear is lessened.
23. I am mindful that this is not an isolated dwelling or even part of a small group of
    dwellings in the Green Belt but is within the identified village settlement. In this
    case, the differences between the permitted dwelling and that proposed would
    have a neutral effect.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008087


Other Matters
24. The appellant argues that the garage could be excluded from these calculations as
    outbuildings are considered in their own right but in any event the increase is
    consistent with other examples cited. These allowed 62%, 82% and 85%
    increases6. On this basis, the appellant considered the proposal not to be
    inappropriate development. However, although it does not come as a surprise that
    other examples can be brought forward and there does seem to be cases where in
    percentage terms the Council has allowed large additions to dwellings in the
    Green Belt, I do not have sufficient information about these cases to draw direct
    comparisons. I therefore can afford them only limited weight.
Planning Balance
25. I have found that the proposal to be inappropriate and the Framework is clear that
    harm caused by inappropriateness, and any other harm, should be clearly
    outweighed by other considerations. In this case, although the demolition of part of
    the existing dwelling would reduce the bulk of the house from the front, overall, the
    differences between the permitted dwelling and that proposed would have a
    neutral effect which does not go far enough to amount to the very special
    circumstances necessary to overcome the identified harm. Furthermore, whilst I
    have not found additional harm in relation to a protected priority species, in
    particular bats, the lack of harm in this matter does not overcome the substantial
    harm caused by inappropriateness and harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
Conclusion
26. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Consequently, for the above reasons, the appeal should be dismissed.



J D Clark
INSPECTOR




6
    Planning Application Refs: 23/4711M; 23/2120M; and 21/2084M.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                5
