Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 25 August 2026
Site visit made on 24 August 2026 and 25 August 2026
by K Allen MEng (Hons) MArch PGCert ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008014
Land on north side of Longwood Road, Kenley, Croydon CR8 5DX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class E of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Dennis and Reiko Pepper against the decision of the Council of
     the London Borough of Croydon.
•    The application Ref is 25/02896/GPDO.
•    The development proposed is the formation of a private way for forestry use.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     Two applications for costs in relation to this appeal have been made. The first was
       made by Mr and Mrs Dennis and Reiko Pepper against the Council of the London
       Borough of Croydon while the second was made by the Council of the London
       Borough of Croydon against Mr and Mrs Dennis and Reiko Pepper. These
       applications are the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class E of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
       (GPDO), planning permission is granted for the carrying out on land used for the
       purposes of forestry, including afforestation, of development reasonably necessary
       for those purposes consisting of (b) the formation, alteration or maintenance of
       private ways. Such permission is subject to limitations and conditions.
4.     The parties agree that there has been a valid Article 4 Direction in place since
       2003, which amongst other things, removes permitted development rights for the
       formation, laying out and construction of a means of access to a highway as
       outlined in Schedule 2, Part 2 Class B of the GPDO and that it is applicable to the
       appeal site.
Background and Main Issues
5.     The Council refused the application because it was not satisfied that the proposal
       fell squarely within development permitted by the GPDO. The Council also stated
       that it had not been demonstrated that the proposal was reasonably necessary for
       the purposes of forestry and that it was not restricted by the limitations set out in
       paragraph E.1. A further reason for refusal refers to concerns related to highway
       safety, protected trees and biodiversity in relation to the siting and means of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008014


         construction of the private way, which are matters requiring prior approval in
         relation to Class E development.
6.       Accordingly, the main issues are:
             •   Whether the proposal would comprise the formation, laying out or
                 construction of a means of access and hence would fall outside of the
                 scope of the GPDO; and if not
             •   Whether the proposal would constitute permitted development under
                 Schedule 2, Part 6, Class E of the GPDO, having particular regard to
                 whether the proposal is reasonably necessary for the purposes of forestry,
                 includes the provision of a dwelling and the height of any building or works
                 within 3 kilometers of the perimeter of an aerodrome would exceed 3
                 meters in height; and if so
             •   whether the siting and means of construction would be acceptable, with
                 particular regard to highway safety, protected trees and biodiversity.
Reasons
Means of access
7.       The appeal site comprises a 1.96 ha area of land within a wider 4 ha holding. The
         holding comprises areas of woodland and open grassland. There is an existing
         field gate in the northeast corner of the site adjacent to Hawkhirst Road which was
         erected around 10 years ago as part of a residential caravan site on an adjacent
         plot of land. The corresponding retrospective planning application was refused and
         an enforcement notice issued1. The application was later dismissed at appeal with
         the enforcement notice upheld with minor modifications2.
8.       The appellant submits that following on from the enforcement appeal, concrete
         blocks and rubble were deployed as a temporary solution to restrict the means of
         vehicular access onto the site. Based on the information submitted, these blocks
         were subsequently cemented in by the Council as a permanent means of
         restricting access. The blocks were then covered by a large bund of earth and
         vegetation. On my site visits, whilst I was able to locate the field gate set back from
         Hawkhirst Road, the portion of verge in front of the gate and within the red line
         boundary of the proposal, was largely indistinguishable from other areas of the
         verge and concealed the gate from view.
9.       At the hearing the appellant stated that the appeal site is not actively in use due to
         its current derelict state and that the proposed private way topped with gravel is
         necessary for vehicles and machinery, including tractors, excavators, winches and
         shredders to safely enter the appeal site and allow for active woodland
         management to take place. The appellant suggested that the necessary vehicles
         and machinery would enter the site across the verge and through the existing gate.
         I acknowledge that it was once possible for vehicles to cross the verge and enter
         the appeal site through the gate, however both pedestrian and vehicular access is
         currently restricted via this route as a result of the existing arrangement on site,
         which is more akin to a means of enclosure.
10. Development is described in Section 55(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act
    1990 (the Act) as the carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other
1
    Application Reference: 15/03909/P
2
    Appeal References: APP/L5240/W/16/3145361 and APP/L5240/C/15/3136626


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6008014


       operations in, on, over or under land, or the making of any material change in the
       use of any buildings or other land. Section 336(1) of the Act goes on to state that
       “engineering operations” include the formation or laying out of a means of access
       to highways. The works need not be substantial, but more must be done than
       merely driving onto land; in other words, something that amounts to the ‘formation’
       or ‘laying out’ must take place as a matter of fact and degree.
11. The appellant maintains that no new access would be created and that the
    removal of the blocks would not amount to development. To allow for the required
    vehicles and machinery to enter the site, there would need to be vegetation
    clearance, the bund of earth would need to be excavated, and the cemented
    concrete blocks would need to be broken out and removed. There would also be a
    potential need for further works, such as surfacing of a similar specification to the
    rest of the private way to prevent the erosion of the verge when trafficked by the
    required vehicles.
12. Notwithstanding the appellant’s common law rights of access and assertions
    regarding the gate and verge, when considering the current state of the verge and
    the works that would be required to make it functional for use by vehicles and
    machinery, I do not consider that it forms an existing means of access and as such
    I conclude that the proposal would comprise the formation and laying out of a new
    means of access and hence an act of development in the form of an engineering
    operation.
13. As agreed by the appellant at the hearing, in this circumstance and where
    permitted development rights for the formation, laying out and construction of a
    means of access in accordance with Schedule 2, Part 2, Class B of the GPDO
    have been removed by an Article 4 Direction; the proposal would fall outside of the
    scope of the GPDO and would therefore require planning permission.
Permitted development/ prior approval
14. Given my conclusion that the proposal would require planning permission, there is
    no need for me to consider whether the proposal would be permitted development
    under Schedule 2, Part 6, Class E or whether prior approval would be required, as
    it would not alter the outcome of the appeal.
Other Matters
15. The parties agree that Ash Dieback has spread within the woodland and that there
    are many dead or dying trees, and I noted such on my site visits. Nevertheless,
    this does not alter my findings set out above.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given, the appeal is dismissed.


K Allen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008014


APPEARANCES

FOR THE APPELLANT:

Stephen John Whale                             Counsel for the Appellants

Reiko Pepper                                   Appellant

Dennis Pepper                                  Appellant



FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:

Jeffrey Chu                                    Counsel for the Local Planning Authority

Hayley Crabb                                   Senior Planning Officer

Thomas Wilson                                  Deputy Team Leader



INTERESTED PARTIES:

Cllr Ola Kolade                                Kenley Ward Councillor

Cllr Gayle Gander                              Kenley Ward Councillor


DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED AT OR AFTER THE HEARING
1. Signed Statement of Common Ground
2. Letter from Chris Philip MP, dated 19th August 2026.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
