Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by P Hatch BA (Hons) Ad. Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008914
50 St Helens Road, Bolton BL3 3NH
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal to
  grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr S Patel against the decision of Bolton Council.
• The application Ref is 00060/26.
• The development proposed is for the erection of a single storey rear and first floor extension with
  installation of new shop front, window and extractor flue.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a
   single storey rear and first floor extension with installation of new shop front,
   window and extractor flue at 50 St Helens Road, Bolton, BL3 3NH in accordance
   with the terms of the application Ref 00060/26 and subject to the following
   conditions.
     1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans, numbered 2776.P.104.A Site Location Plan and
        2776.P.103.B Proposed Plans and Elevations.
     2) Within three months of the date of this decision, a scheme for the installation of
        equipment to control the emission of fumes and noise from the premises shall
        be submitted to the local planning authority for approval. If the submitted
        scheme is refused, an amended scheme shall be submitted to the local
        planning authority within one month of that refusal. Once approved, the scheme
        shall be implemented within three months of the local planning authority's
        written approval and shall thereafter be retained as such at all times in the
        future.
Preliminary Matters
2. I have assessed the appeal scheme based on the plans before me, but I observed
   at the time of the site visit that the external works of the development were largely
   complete. Therefore, the development is retrospective. I have dealt with the appeal
   on that basis.
3. In the banner heading above and my formal decision, I have used the description of
   development taken from the Council’s decision notice, as opposed to the
   application form, as it more accurately and succinctly describes that for which
   permission is sought. However, in doing this I have also had full regard in my
   reasoning to the description on the application and appeal forms. I have removed
   wording that does not refer to acts of development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008914


4. The Council’s reason for refusal clearly relates to the use of black cladding on the
   building frontage and no concerns are raised with the elements of the appeal
   scheme comprising the single storey rear and first floor extensions, as well as an
   extractor flue. I have no reason to come to a different conclusion on those elements
   of the appeal scheme, and I have determined the appeal on that basis.
5. A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’) was published on 17
   August 2026 after the statements in relation to this appeal had been exchanged
   and final comments made. However, as the changes that have been made are not
   material to the main issue in this appeal, the cases of the parties have not been
   prejudiced by not being able to comment on the new Framework. I have therefore
   determined the appeal on the basis of the statements and comments that have
   been received.
Main Issue
6. The effect of the development on the character and appearance of the surrounding
   area.
Reasons
7. The appeal property is a two-storey building located on St Helens Road which is a
   busy main route into Bolton town centre. Situated within the Daubhill Local
   Shopping Centre, the area around the appeal property consists of commercial and
   business uses fronting onto St Helens Road, with an abundance of shops and hot
   food takeaways in particular.
8. The character of buildings on St Helens Road includes commercial units at a
   ground floor level. Many of which contain security features such as grilles and
   shutters which generate a more commercial appearance to properties when viewed
   from the street. This creates a uniformity and rhythm along St Helens Road. To the
   first floor, buildings have broadly retained a more traditional frontage which includes
   original brickwork and rendering detail.
9. While the use of black cladding on the frontage is not replicated on other buildings
   locally, within the context of the commercial street scene, with a diverse range of
   different shop fronts, including a mix of materials, as well as grilles and shutters to
   the frontage of buildings, the use of black cladding at ground and first floor levels
   does not appear stark. Indeed, in many respects, and with the modern design of
   the windows, the use of black cladding offers a modern appearance to the building.
10. Furthermore, even though there is no opportunity for landscaping or planting, set
    within a busy street scene, with a highly urbanised nature and relatively high levels
    of footfall, I am not persuaded that it is required in any event.
11. For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that the development does not harm the
    character and appearance of the area. Therefore, it is consistent with Policy JP-P1
    of the Places for Everyone Joint Development Plan which sets out that new
    development should be distinctive, visually stimulating, durable, inclusively
    designed and be of a high quality and should respect and acknowledge the
    character and identity of the locality in terms of design, siting, size, scale and
    materials used.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008914


Conditions
12. As the development has been carried out, a commencement condition is not
    necessary. However, I have imposed a plans condition in the interests of certainty.
13. Condition 2 is imposed to ensure that further details regarding the extractor flue, in
    particular, equipment to control the emission of fumes and noise from the
    premises, are submitted, approved and implemented so as to make the
    development acceptable in planning terms. There is a strict timetable for
    compliance because permission is being granted retrospectively, and so it is not
    possible to use a negatively worded condition to secure the approval and
    implementation of the extractor flue before the development takes place.
Conclusion
14. The development accords with the development plan, and there are no material
    considerations to lead me to determine the appeal other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal is allowed.

P Hatch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
