Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by S Ramsden BSc (Hons) MA MA IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008903
5 Blandford Road South, Slough SL3 7RT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Vikas Arora against the decision of Slough Borough Council.
•    The application Ref P/20265/004 was approved on 14 April 2026 and planning permission was
     granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is the Construction of a front porch, single storey side extension and part
     single part two storey rear extension.
•    The conditions in dispute are Nos 6 and 9 which state that:
     Condition 6:
     ‘The extension hereby permitted shall be used only in conjunction with the existing house
     and shall not be sub-divided or used in multiple occupation.’
     Condition 9:
     ‘Notwithstanding the terms and provisions of The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
     Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-enacting that Order), Schedule 2,
     Part 1, Classes B and E, no extension to the house hereby permitted or buildings or enclosures shall
     be erected, constructed or placed on the site.’
•    The reasons given for the conditions are:
     Condition 6:
     ‘To ensure that the site is developed in accordance with the submitted application and to ensure that
     the proposed development does not prejudice the amenity of the area, which may occur if the
     property is sub-divided or used in multiple occupation.’
     Condition 9:
     ‘The rear garden is considered to be only just adequate for the amenity area appropriate for houses
     of the size proposed. It would be too small to accommodate future development(s) which would
     otherwise be deemed to be permitted by the provision of the above order in accordance with Policy
     H14 of The Adopted Local Plan for Slough 2004.’

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref P/20265/004 for the
       construction of a front porch, single storey side extension and part single part two
       storey rear extension at 5 Blandford Road South, Slough SL3 7RT granted on 14
       April 2026 by Slough Borough Council, is varied by deleting Conditions 6 and 9.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Vikas Arora against Slough Borough
       Council. An application for costs was also made by Slough Borough Council
       against Mr Vikas Arora. These applications are the subject of separate Decisions.
Preliminary matters
3.     The Council has raised concerns with the length of the appellant’s statement of
       case and also asserts that the appellant has used the application for costs to
       advance arguments in support of the appeal which are outside the scope of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008903


       costs application. I do not consider the statement of case to be excessive in
       length. Whilst the appellant’s costs application contains some additional
       commentary on the appeal itself, it does not in my view introduce any substantive
       new evidence or different arguments, to those made in the appellant’s statement of
       case.
4.     The Council has had the opportunity to comment on the information presented by
       the appellant in the costs application and has done so in its costs’ rebuttal
       statement, whilst adding additional commentary of its own. As such I am satisfied
       that anyone involved in the appeal has not been prejudiced on the basis of the
       comments received.
5.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes
Main Issues
6.     The appeal seeks to remove Condition 6 which itself removes the ability to sub-
       divide the extension from the host dwelling or its use in multiple occupation. As a
       result, the first main issue is whether Condition 6 meets the tests in the Framework
       and the Planning Practice Guidance (the PPG), with particular regard to the
       amenity of the area.
7.     The second main issue is whether both parts of Condition 9 are reasonable or
       necessary; particularly, in relation to the second part of Condition 9, with regard to
       the size of the rear garden.
Reasons
Condition 6
8.     Permitted development rights allow the change of use of dwellings (Use Class C3)
       to a small house in multiple occupation (HMO) (Use Class C4). Condition 6 seeks
       to ensure that the permitted extension shall be used only in conjunction with the
       existing house and shall not be sub-divided or used in multiple occupation. The
       reason given is to ensure that the proposed development does not prejudice the
       amenity of the area.
9.     Policy DM6 of the Framework states that planning conditions should not be used
       to restrict national permitted development rights unless there is clear justification
       for doing so. The PPG advises that conditions restricting the future use of
       permitted development rights or changes of use may not pass the test of
       reasonableness or necessity.
10. The Council Officer’s Delegated Report does not offer any convincing or
    substantiated evidence as to any specific harms to the amenity of the area that
    might arise from sub-division or use of the proposed development in multiple
    occupation. The general reason accompanying the Condition does not equate to a
    justification for restrictions of such rights in this particular instance.
11. The Delegated Report refers to concerns regarding possible impacts on the
    character of the area from over-development of the site, however this is primarily
    in the context of the scale of a previous iteration of proposals at the site. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008903


       Report does not set out any specific harmful impacts on the amenity of the area
       that might arise if the appeal property were to be sub-divided or used in multiple
       occupation.
12. No clear justification for the Condition has, therefore, been put forward by the
    Council as required by the Framework. For this reason I do not consider that this
    Condition has been shown to be necessary or reasonable. It does not therefore
    meet the tests set out in the Framework or PPG.
Condition 9
13. Condition 9 removes the following permitted development rights as set out in the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order
    2015 (GPDO):
      - Class B for additions or alterations to roofs which enlarge the house; and,
      - Class E for the provision of buildings and other development on land
             surrounding the house.
14. The reason accompanying Condition 9 contains no mention or justification for the
    removal of permitted development rights under Class B.
15. The Officer’s Delegated Report makes reference to concerns regarding potential
    over-development of the site. However, as noted above, this is largely in the
    context of a previous iteration of the proposals at the appeal site and is not related
    to the scheme as permitted. Again, this does not constitute convincing evidence
    regarding any specific harmful impacts which might arise from future additions or
    alterations to roofs which would enlarge the house on the appeal site.
16. Therefore, no clear justification for the part of Condition 9 relating to Class B of the
    GPDO has been put forward by the Council.
17. In terms of Class E and the rear garden, the Delegated Report states that the
    length of the garden, as a result of the rear extension, would be around 14 metres,
    which would be slightly below the 15m guideline set out in the Council’s
    Residential Extensions Guidelines Supplementary Planning Document (the SPD)
    2010 for a property of the proposed size.
18. The SPD, which is a material consideration, also states that in cases where rear
    extensions are permitted, but the retained garden area is at or just marginally
    above the guidelines, planning conditions will be imposed which remove permitted
    development rights on the property. This is to give the Council a degree of control
    over the scale, size, appearance and siting of any structures or buildings which an
    owner/occupier may wish to construct in the rear garden at some future date.
19. Policy H14 of the Local Plan for Slough (2004) has been cited in the reason given
    for condition 9. It seeks to ensure appropriate levels of amenity space based on
    the type and size of dwelling and the type of household likely to occupy the
    dwelling; taking into account the quality of the proposed amenity space in terms of
    area, depth, orientation, privacy, attractiveness, usefulness and accessibility.
20. Whilst the length of the rear garden would be below the 15m recommended in the
    SPD, the appeal site is a detached house on a wide corner plot. The site would
    provide over 350 sqm metres of amenity space to the rear and side of the house,
    as well as a small amenity area to the front of the building, adjacent to the car
    parking spaces.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008903


21. The amenity area to the rear would be rectangular, of reasonable proportions, as
    well as being flat. It would not be overshadowed or overlooked to any significant
    extent by surrounding development. It would provide a large and useable space,
    which would be an appropriate level of amenity space for a large 4 bedroom
    detached house. I do not consider that it is constrained to such a degree or is so
    small that it would be incapable of accommodating structures permitted under
    Class E of the GPDO, in a manner that would be likely to result in policy H14 being
    breached.
22. Although the length of the proposed garden would fall below the 15m
    recommended in the SPD, given the overall size and nature of the site, in my view
    restricting development allowed under Class E as recommended in the SPD would
    be unreasonable in this instance.
23. For these reasons, no clear justification for Condition 9, relating to Class E of the
    GPDO, has been put forward by the Council, and I do not consider that this
    Condition is necessary or reasonable. It does not therefore meet the tests set out
    in the Framework or PPG.
Other Matters
24. My attention has been drawn to an appeal decision at 193 Vicarage Way,
    Colnbrook, in which a proposal to remove a condition restricting rights to sub-
    divide or use the property in multiple occupation was dismissed. The decision is
    clear that, in that case, the condition was justified in response to site-specific
    concerns regarding the potential that a more intensive use of the site, such as a
    HMO, would have on existing car parking in the area. In the case before me, no
    such evidence has been presented.
25. My attention has also been drawn specifically to paragraph 8 of that decision and
    whether such a condition would be inconsistent with the overarching aim of the
    Council in providing safe and good quality housing for all residents and in
    particular with the protection of family dwellings. However, in the case before me.
    loss of a family dwelling has not been put forward as a reason for Condition 6, and
    I therefore attach limited weight to the decision at 193 Vicarage Way as a
    comparator.
26. An appeal decision relating to a similar condition on a planning permission at 100B
    Waterbeach Road, Slough, has also been drawn to my attention. In that case there
    was clear evidence of adverse impacts as a result of the previous unauthorised
    use of the site as a HMO. Additionally a previous appeal decision considered the
    impacts of the use of the site as a HMO, and these provided a clear justification for
    the imposition of such a condition. No such evidence has been presented in
    relation to the appeal before me.
27. With regards to an appeal decision at 140 Langley Road, Slough, in that case the
    Council presented specific concerns regarding the potential intensified level of
    activity that would be experienced were the site to be used as HMOs rather than
    the two single family dwellinghouses permitted. These concerns related to noise
    and disturbance which might be caused by an intensification of use resulting from
    multiple, unrelated occupants, impacting upon neighbours and the character of the
    area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008903


28. As the appeal at 140 Langley Road related to the construction of two semi-
    detached, 5-bedroom dwellings, their change of use to HMOs would have been
    more impactful than that of a single family dwelling as in the appeal before me. I
    therefore give limited weight to these decisions and they do not lead me to an
    alternative conclusion in this case.
29. My attention has also been drawn to an appeal decision at 88 and 90
    Quinbrookes, Slough, relating to the removal of a condition removing Class E
    permitted development rights, which was imposed due to concerns about provision
    of outdoor amenity space. Such a condition was retained for one of the properties,
    in part because the outdoor amenity space was some way below the 100sqm that
    the SPD suggests would be necessary for a four-bedroom dwelling where the
    garden is less than 15m deep. That is not the case in the appeal before me. I
    therefore attach limited weight to this decision and it does not lead me to a
    different conclusion in this appeal.
Conclusion
30. For the reasons given above, I find that the disputed conditions are unnecessary
    and unreasonable. The permission should therefore be varied by deleting the
    disputed conditions.

S Ramsden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
