Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 June 2026 by A Chan Markovitz BA (Hons)
Decision by Tamsin Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008348
25 Faber Gardens, Hendon, Barnet, London NW4 4NP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr M. Hassan against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Barnet.
•   The application Ref is 26/0482/HSE.
•   The development proposed is “Part single, part two storey rear extension. Ground Floor side
    extension. First floor side extension. Conversion of garage into habitable room including new window
    to replace existing door. Alterations to porch. Changes to external finishes including removal of
    Tudor boards at first floor level and first floor side facing window”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. In this instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal are unaffected
   by the revisions to the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that there is no
   requirement to seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no
   party would be disadvantaged by this.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. Faber Gardens generally consists of detached two-storey houses with large rear
   gardens, white render and black timber (mock-Tudor) elevations and hipped tiled
   roofs. Houses along the street, including the appeal property, are distinguished by
   their mock-Tudor elevations and two-storey front-gabled or hipped bay windows.
   Many houses have altered over time creating a changing roof and building line
   along the street. Houses are set back from the highway behind paved driveways
   generally bounded by low brick walls. Together, this gives the area a varied and
   visually interesting character and appearance and an open feel.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008348


6. The host dwelling is a detached two-storey house, typical of development in the
   surrounding area. It is located in a large corner plot with its principal elevation set
   back from Faber Gardens behind a paved driveway bounded by low brick walls,
   and its side elevation set in from Talbot Crescent and bounded by tall timber
   fencing. It has a mono-pitched front porch and flat-roofed side garage attached to
   its right side elevation.
7. As the host dwelling has an existing side garage, the further side extension
   proposed would give the host dwelling a significantly broader frontage than that of
   neighbouring properties, appearing incongruous within the street scene. Whilst the
   proposed side extension would be of a minor scale relative to the host dwelling and
   would not extend significantly above the existing timber boundary fencing, its siting,
   flush with the appeal site’s boundary with Talbot Crescent, would make it appear as
   a prominent addition to the host dwelling and would erode the open feel of the area.
   It would be visible in the streetscapes of both Faber Gardens and Talbot Crescent,
   drawing the eye and harming the character and appearance of the area.
8. The proposed single-storey rear extension would extend significantly beyond the
   host dwelling’s rear elevation, and together with the proposed first-floor balcony,
   would appear as a dominant addition to the host dwelling. Although the proposed
   balcony’s materials would be visually permeable, its siting on the left of the rear
   elevation would make it appear prominent in views from Talbot Crescent, drawing
   attention to the excessive size of the appeal scheme in relation to the host dwelling.
   Whilst there are examples of balconies and larger rear extensions in the area, the
   cumulative effect of the scale of the proposed extensions, would be
   disproportionate to the host dwelling that would create a cramped appearance,
   harming the open feel and distinctive character of the area. Consequently, the
   examples that the appellant has drawn my attention to do not justify the
   unsympathetic design proposed.
9. I have been referred to a fallback position that exists through extant planning
   permission at the appeal site. The extant permission has a shallower single-storey
   rear extension and does not include the erection of a single-storey side extension
   or first-floor balcony. The appellant has argued that the fallback scheme is more
   harmful to the character and appearance of the area than the appeal scheme. The
   proposed two-storey rear extension’s taller crown roof responds more sensitively to
   the host dwelling and reduces the prominence of the extension; however the
   fallback scheme comprises fewer and smaller additions to the host dwelling which
   would appear subservient. Cumulatively these additions would be less harmful to
   the character and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area than
   the appeal scheme. Consequently, the real prospect of the construction of the
   fallback position does not justify allowing the appeal.
10. I have had regard to the appellant’s submission that the proposal enhances the
    functionality of the host dwelling. However, they have not demonstrated that the
    existing property does not provide suitable living accommodation, or that additional
    accommodation could not be achieved through a less harmful proposal.
    Consequently, this does not outweigh the harm I have identified of the proposal on
    the host dwelling and surrounding area.
11. For these reasons, the proposed development would harm the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area. The adverse effects
    identified under the main issue substantially outweigh any benefits derived from the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008348


     proposed development. Consequently, it would conflict with Policy D3 of the
     London Plan (2021), Policies CDH01 and CHD05 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-
     2036 (2025), and the guidance contained within the Barnet London Borough Local
     Plan Supplementary Planning Document: Residential Design Guidance (2016).
     Together these seek to ensure that development is well-integrated with its
     surroundings, particularly in terms of style, form and materials, and does not result
     in unacceptable harm to the character and distinctiveness of the built environment.
Conclusion and Recommendation
12. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

A Chan Markovitz
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
13. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

Tamsin Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
