Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 May 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008692
52 Culverhouse Road, Luton LU3 1PY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Tabish Khan against the decision of Luton Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/01189/FULHH.
•   The development proposed is single storey side extension and single storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for single storey side
   extension and single storey rear extension at 52 Culverhouse Road, Luton LU3
   1PY in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/01189/FULHH, subject
   to the following conditions.
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing nos: 04/04 in relation to the 1:1250 Location Plan Only, 04A/04
              Proposed Block Plan, 01A/04 Existing and Proposed Floor Plans and 03A/04
              Proposed Elevations.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. With regard to the main issue of this appeal, the relevant policies are
   not materially different from the previous iteration of the Framework. I am therefore
   satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation with the main parties since,
   with the above in mind, their respective cases would not be prejudiced.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
   occupiers of 50 Culverhouse Road (No 50), with particular regard to outlook and
   light.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008692


Reasons for the Recommendation
5. Relative to the proposed development, the nearest clear glazed, main habitable
   room windows serving No 50 are located to the rear elevation of a single storey
   rear projection. They have a spacious outlook, looking down an extensive rear
   garden.
6. Whilst the proposed extensions would form a substantial projection along the
   shared boundary with this property, they would be modest in height. Moreover, the
   space between the development and the identified windows at No 50, together with
   the intervening outbuilding at this neighbouring property, would ensure that the
   extensions would not be overbearing. Consequently, an acceptable outlook would
   be retained for neighbouring occupiers, and this would also be the case when
   experienced from those areas of the garden that are most likely used for sitting out
   at No 50. Having regard to the development’s low height and the relationships
   described, there is also no substantive evidence to suggest that there would be any
   material loss of daylight or sunlight for occupiers of No 50.
7. Moreover, the space to the immediate side of the dwelling at No 50 and the
   obscure glazed ground floor windows that look onto it only provide limited levels of
   outlook and light for occupiers of this neighbouring dwelling. Accordingly, there
   would also be no material harm resulting from the proposed development in these
   respects.
8. I conclude, the proposal would have an acceptable effect on the living conditions of
   occupiers of No 50, with particular regard to outlook and light. In that regard, the
   proposal accords with Policies LLP1, LLP19 and LLP25 of the Luton Local Plan
   (2017) which require sustainable development, development which responds to its
   context and that extensions do not adversely affect the amenity of nearby occupiers
   in respect of visual intrusion and loss of light.
Conditions
9. In addition to the standard three-year period implementation condition, it is
   necessary, in the interest of certainty, to define the plans which the development
   should be carried out in accordance with.
Conclusion and Recommendation
10. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
11. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
