Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by L Reid BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008762
Land north west of Holly Tree Cottage, Howlett End, Thaxted Road, Wimbish,
Essex CB10 2XW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr J Evans, Abbots Grange Development against the decision of Uttlesford
     District Council.
•    The application Ref is UTT/25/3094/FUL.
•    The development proposed is erection of two dwellings and vehicular access.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr J Evans, Abbots Grange Development
       against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Since the application was determined, the Uttlesford Local Plan 2021 – 2041
       March 2026 (the Local Plan) has been adopted and replaces the Uttlesford Local
       Plan January 2005 (the previous Local Plan). The Council has provided the
       relevant policies, and both main parties have had the opportunity to comment on
       the implications for this appeal. I am therefore satisfied that my consideration of
       the appeal against the policies in the new Local Plan has prejudiced no party.
4.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) and the 2024 and 2025 Housing Delivery Test (HDT) results after the
       appeal was made. Both main parties were invited to make representations on
       these changes, and I have considered the comments received. The Council
       confirmed that, following publication of the HDT results, it can currently
       demonstrate a 5.35-year housing land supply. The appellant was invited to
       comment on this updated position, and I have considered their response.
5.     As part of the appeal, the appellant has submitted the habitat baseline assessment
       sheets. These documents do not result in a substantial or fundamental change to
       result in a different application. The Council has also had the opportunity to
       comment. Given their nature, the acceptance of these documents would not
       deprive those who should have been consulted of the opportunity of such
       consultation. I have therefore considered them in determining this appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008762


6.     In their final comments, the appellant referred to and submitted a copy of “ProPG:
       Guidance for the Assessment and Management of Noise from Dog Kennels”,
       which I accepted as late evidence. The Council was given an opportunity to
       comment on this additional evidence, and I have taken into account only those
       comments that relate directly to the document itself.
Main Issues
7.     The main issues are:

     •       Whether the appeal site is a suitable location for housing having regard to the
             spatial strategy and the effect on the character of the area,
     •       Whether the living conditions of future occupiers would be acceptable, with
             regard to noise and disturbance; and,
     •       Whether sufficient information has been submitted to demonstrate the provision
             of Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG).
Reasons
Suitable location for housing, having regard to:
       (i)      Spatial strategy
8.     Core Policy 3 of the Local Plan sets out the spatial strategy defining the settlement
       hierarchy. It sets out that in smaller villages limited infilling may be appropriate and
       lists Wimbish as a smaller village. Whilst Howlett End is within the parish boundary
       of Wimbish, there is nothing substantive before me to demonstrate that this
       reflects the settlement boundary defined under Core Policy 3. The village of
       Wimbish can be reached from the appeal site. However, the two are physically and
       visually separated by countryside by some distance. Consequently, Howlett End is
       experienced as a separate hamlet rather than a part of Wimbish village.
9.     Whilst previous topic papers formed part of the evidence base informing
       preparation of the Local Plan, the plan has since been adopted. The appeal must
       therefore be assessed against the adopted policy wording. Core Policy 3 states
       that those villages and settlements not included within the categories described
       are considered to form part of the open countryside. Howlett End is not listed in the
       policy wording. In the absence of an adopted policy or defined settlement
       boundary in the Local Plan expressly incorporating the appeal site as part of
       Wimbish, for planning policy purposes it falls within the open countryside
       classification.
10. Development in the open countryside will not be permitted unless specifically
    supported by other relevant policies as set out in the Development Plan or national
    policy. I have not been advised of any other policies in the Local Plan which
    specifically support development of this type in this location.
11. In terms of national policy, criterion e. of paragraph 1 of Policy S5 of the
    Framework allows for limited infilling within groups of houses and this form of
    development should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. Given that the appeal site lies
    within a group of houses and only two dwellings are proposed, the proposal would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008762


       amount to limited infilling within a group of houses. However, I will need to
       consider this further in my planning balance below as to whether it fully accords
       with this.
       (ii)     Character
12. Policy S7 of the previous Local Plan required consideration of character. The
    Council has directed me to Core Policy 3, but this does not explicitly require
    character to be considered in locations which are classified as open countryside by
    the policy. I have therefore had regard to paragraph 1. of Policy DP3 of the
    Framework, which amongst other things, requires development proposals to
    respond to their context, (the character), so that they integrate with and enhance
    their surroundings.
13. My site visit indicates that Howlett End is characterised by a loose pattern of
    development, with dwellings interspersed with woodland, vegetation and open
    countryside. These undeveloped gaps are an integral part of the hamlet, breaking
    up the built form and reinforcing its rural qualities. The appeal site, which
    comprises an area of woodland, makes a positive contribution in this regard.
14. Whilst the dwellings on one side of the appeal site form a relatively close-knit
    frontage, the site marks a clear transition to a more dispersed pattern of
    development, characterised by wider gaps between properties and a stronger
    countryside presence. Despite lying between two dwellings, its woodland character
    means that it does not read as part of a continuous built-up frontage, but instead
    as a break in development.
15. Although the proposal would represent limited infilling within a group of houses,
    that conclusion relates only to the principle of development under criterion e. of
    paragraph 1 of Policy S5 of the Framework. The appeal site's character derives
    not only from the presence of trees, but also from its undeveloped and woodland-
    like appearance, which provides a noticeable break in the built form and reinforces
    the rural character of the locality. Introducing two dwellings, associated domestic
    paraphernalia, and residential activity would fundamentally alter that role. As a
    result, the site would no longer be experienced as an undeveloped woodland
    parcel, and its contribution to the area's character would be diminished, causing
    harm to the local character.
16. Whilst the Council has raised no objections to the design of the proposed
    dwellings, and I see no reason to take a different view, the harm arises from the
    development of the appeal site itself rather than from the detailed design of the
    dwellings. Consequently, the acceptability of the design would not negate the harm
    identified to the character of the area. In settlements classified as Smaller Villages,
    Core Policy 3 of the Local Plan allows for limited infill development where it meets
    the set criteria. Even if I were to consider the proposal against this strand of the
    policy, for the reasons given above, it would not be in keeping with the local
    character.
17. The retention of the frontage trees, together with the proposed additional
    landscaping, would soften the appearance of the proposal and maintain some of
    the site's verdant qualities. In addition, a substantial proportion of the woodland
    would remain undeveloped. The effects of the proposal would be largely localised,
    with moderate harm caused to the character of the area. Nevertheless, this would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008762


       therefore conflict with paragraph 1. of Policy DP3 of the Framework, the purposes
       of which are set out above.
Noise and disturbance
18. The appeal site is next to Newfields, which is a dwelling that also operates as a
    dog breeding and boarding kennel business. The licence allows for a maximum of
    10 boarded dogs and 7 dogs can be owned. Newfields has a large garden where
    the dogs are exercised. Although I am not aware of any formal noise complaints,
    representations indicate that barking can be heard from properties some distance
    away. The proposal would introduce a noise-sensitive residential use in much
    closer proximity to Newfields. The absence of complaints does therefore not
    necessarily demonstrate that future occupiers would be unaffected by noise.
19. The application is supported by a Noise Assessment (Reference: ENV351-WIMB-
    003, Version Number: Version 4.0, Report Date: 14th November 2025), which
    assesses noise from the dogs at Newfields and identifies mitigation measures. The
    Council’s Environmental Health Officer advises that the measured barking noise
    would at times be highly perceptible and intrusive. Such noise therefore has the
    potential to cause disturbance and, if not adequately mitigated, could result in
    significant harm to the living conditions of future occupiers.
20. Mitigation is proposed in the form of a 2 metre acoustic fence along the shared
    boundary and a 5 metre tall garage. The modelling within the Noise Assessment
    predicts that with the acoustic fence positioned 0.5 metres away from the noise
    source, the maximum noise levels would be reduced to 57dB. However, the
    Council’s Environmental Health Officer has provided technical evidence indicating
    that the effectiveness of the fence is highly dependent on the position of the noise
    source. Their modelling, based on a source located 9 metres from the fence,
    predicts a receptor noise level of 63.5dB. This shows that alternative source
    positions produce materially different results.
21. Whilst the Noise Assessment assumes barking occurs close to the fence, dogs are
    likely to move around the garden, resulting in noise originating from different
    locations. It does therefore not clearly demonstrate how effective the acoustic
    fencing would be in such circumstances. Given the counterevidence put forward
    by the Council’s Environmental Health Officer, there is some uncertainty as to
    whether the attenuation predicted in the Noise Assessment would be achieved.
22. The Noise Assessment also considers the combined effect of the acoustic fence
    and garage wall, concluding that maximum barking noise levels would reduce to
    32.3dB. However, as the software used is unable to model a barrier and building
    simultaneously, the garage was assessed using noise levels that had already been
    reduced by the attenuation attributed to the fence. As a result, the predicted
    benefit of the garage is dependent on the accuracy of the fence attenuation
    calculations. Any uncertainty regarding the effectiveness of the fence therefore
    carries through to the final noise prediction, reducing confidence in the predicted
    level.
23. Even if consideration of the cumulative attenuation effects of the acoustic fence
    and garage reflects accepted acoustic practice, I have not been provided with
    sufficient evidence to demonstrate this. Moreover, whilst the modelling is said to
    rely upon software referenced within the ProPG: Guidance for the Assessment and
    Management of Noise from Dog Kennels, that guidance remains in draft form.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008762


       Accordingly, I attach limited weight to reliance placed upon it in support of the
       modelling. I have also had regard to the explanation provided by the appellant's
       noise consultant in their letter dated 26 June and recognise that the reported
       17.6dB reduction includes both distance attenuation and the effect of the fence.
       Nevertheless, uncertainty remains regarding the degree of attenuation that would
       be achieved in practice.
24. The Noise Assessment predicts that the internal noise level of dog barking noise
    would be 28dB and complies with BS8233:2014 for daytime periods. However, this
    conclusion depends on the predicted external noise level, which itself relies on the
    attenuation attributed to the fence. Given my concerns regarding the modelling
    assumptions, I am not persuaded that the predicted internal noise levels have
    been demonstrated with sufficient certainty.
25. Although the Noise Assessment does not specify the number of barking dogs
    during the monitoring period, the survey was undertaken over seven days, and I
    have no substantive evidence indicating that the recorded data is unreliable. Whilst
    the Council questions the suitability of monitoring position U1, I have not been
    provided with a preferable alternative location or methodology. In addition, the
    appellant’s noise consultant has explained the rationale for the monitoring position.
    In the absence of persuasive evidence to the contrary, I have no reason to doubt
    the survey results. However, acceptance of the survey data does not resolve my
    concerns regarding the attenuation modelling and the performance of the
    proposed mitigation measures. The conclusion that the proposal would meet
    relevant noise standards is dependent upon those predictions.
26. I also recognise that the proposal seeks to follow the agent of change principle
    through design and mitigation measures. However, this does not overcome my
    concerns. As the uncertainty relates to the effectiveness of the proposed mitigation
    itself, if further assessment identified a need for additional mitigation, this could
    necessitate material changes to the scheme. The issue is therefore fundamental to
    the acceptability of the proposal and cannot reasonably be deferred by planning
    condition.
27. For these reasons, I therefore conclude that it has not been demonstrated that the
    proposal would not cause significant harm to the living conditions of future
    occupiers with regard to noise and disturbance. Accordingly, the proposal would
    conflict with Core Policy 42 of the Local Plan. This policy, amongst other things,
    states that development proposals that have not clearly demonstrated how noise
    and other nuisances will be mitigated and managed should not be permitted.
28. It would also conflict with criterion d. of paragraph 2 of Policy P3 of the Framework
    which states that development proposals should mitigate and reduce to a minimum
    potential adverse impacts resulting from noise and not result in levels of noise
    exposure which would have a significant observed adverse effect.
BNG
29. BNG is a mandatory requirement of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country
    Planning Act 1990 (as inserted by Schedule 14 of the Environment Act 2021). The
    application is supported by a BNG Biodiversity Metric, BNG Statement and the
    BNG habitat baseline assessment sheets for both ‘Mixed scrub’ and ‘Lowland
    Mixed Deciduous Woodland’ form part of the appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008762


30. Whilst the Council's ecologist considers that further supporting information would
    have strengthened the evidence base, it is nevertheless minded to support the
    conclusions regarding habitat degradation. I have no reason to reach a different
    view. The photographs within the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal also provide
    sufficient information to assess the existing on-site habitat. I therefore find that the
    evidence before me sufficiently confirms the on-site BNG pre-development
    baseline.
31. Policy 40 of the Local Plan requires development proposals to demonstrate a
    minimum of 20% BNG, unless it can clearly be demonstrated that provision in
    excess of 10% would make development unviable. As it has not been claimed that
    20% BNG would make the development unviable and the BNG supporting
    information relates to how a 10% net gain would be achieved, the proposal would
    conflict with this policy. However, this is given limited weight because paragraph 2
    of Policy N1 of the Framework states that development plans should only set local
    standards for biodiversity net gain which are in excess of the statutory net gain
    requirement where this is for specific site allocations, and is fully justified and
    deliverable.
Other Matters
32. Regarding the other Council decisions listed in the Planning Statement, each
    application must be determined on its own merits. The Inspector is not bound by
    previous decisions of the Council, particularly where those decisions pre-date the
    adoption of the current Local Plan and were made under a different policy context,
    which is a material change in circumstances. These decisions are therefore of
    limited weight.
33. The decision at Hawkesmead (Appeal Ref: APP/C1570/W/24/3356349) was made
    under the previous Local Plan. As the Inspector's comments on infill development
    related to Policy S7, which is no longer an adopted policy, that decision is of limited
    relevance to the proposal and carries only limited weight.
34. Any dissatisfaction with the way the Council has handled the application is a
    separate matter and is not relevant to the planning merits of the appeal.
Planning Balance
35. The proposal would conflict with Policy 40 of the Local Plan. However, as explained
    above, this is of limited weight. It would also conflict with Policy 42 of the Local
    Plan. Consequently, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole.
36. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that development proposals should apply a
    presumption in favour of sustainable development, noting that Policy S5 should be
    applied. Paragraph 2. of Policy S5 states that the circumstances in which the
    benefits of approving development proposals are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where
    the development proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-
    making policies which state that development proposals should be refused in
    specific circumstances.
37. The proposal would deliver two additional dwellings, which could be occupied by
    families. Small-scale housing developments make an important contribution to
    housing delivery, and the proposal would also support the Government's objective


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008762


     of significantly boosting the supply of homes. It could also be built out quickly.
     Given the quantum of development proposed, the delivery of housing carries
     moderate weight in favour of the proposal.
38. The appeal site is not isolated, and future occupiers would provide some support
    for services in nearby villages through additional expenditure. There would also be
    some temporary economic benefits, including employment and spending during
    construction. However, given the scale of the proposal, those social and economic
    benefits would be limited. The proposal seeks to retain some of the existing trees
    and provide additional landscaping, which would have some limited environmental
    benefits.
39. Set against these benefits, the proposal would cause moderate harm to the
    character of the area. Paragraph 3. of Policy DP3 of the Framework states that
    development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict
    with paragraph 1 of this policy. As I have found that the proposal would conflict with
    paragraph 1. of Policy DP3, the proposal should be refused on this basis. This
    weighs heavily against the proposal.
40. It has also not been demonstrated that the living conditions of future occupiers
    would be acceptable, regarding noise and disturbance. I attach significant weight to
    this harm, given that criterion a. of paragraph 2 of Policy P3 of the Framework
    states that development proposals should provide healthy living conditions for
    occupiers in terms of exposure to levels of noise which could have an unacceptable
    adverse effect on the quality of life.
41. Taking all matters into account, the moderate housing benefit and the limited social,
    economic and environmental benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework. The proposal would therefore not satisfy
    paragraph 1.(e) of Policy S5 of the Framework.
       (iii)    Conclusion – Suitable location for housing, having regard to the spatial
                strategy and character
42. As already explained, the proposal would cause harm to the character of the area.
    In light of my findings in relation to criterion e. of paragraph 1 of Policy S5 of the
    Framework, the principle of development is not supported by that policy. The
    proposal is therefore not supported by national policy in this respect and, as a
    consequence, is not permitted by Core Policy 3 of the Local Plan. Accordingly, the
    appeal site is not a suitable location for housing, in regard to the spatial strategy
    and the character of the area and therefore conflicts with Core Policy 3 of the Local
    Plan.
43. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it.
Conclusion
44. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.



L Reid INSPECTOR
https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
