Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 June 2026 by S Jamieson BA(Hons) MPlan MRTPI
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008366
11 Lonsdale Road, Southend-on-Sea SS2 4LZ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr James King against the decision of Southend-on-Sea City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/01350/FUL.
•   The development proposed is described as ‘creation of hardstanding to front of property’,

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The description in the appeal decision banner heading is taken from the application
   form. However, during the planning application process, the appellant agreed that
   the formation of a vehicle crossover onto Lonsdale Road also formed part of the
   proposal. This is reflected in the description on the Council’s decision notice and is
   shown on the proposed drawings. I have considered the appeal on that basis.
4. It was clear from the appeal site visit, that the hardstanding and vehicular crossover
   have already been installed. Therefore, the appeal has been considered on the
   basis that planning permission is sought retrospectively.
5. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. With regard to the main issue of this appeal, the highway safety
   requirements are not materially different from the previous iteration of the
   Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation
   with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective cases would
   not be prejudiced.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is the effect of the development on highway safety.
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal relates to a semi-detached property. It is located within a residential
   area and a short distance from a school. When I visited the site on a weekday
   mid-morning, I observed regular vehicles movements travelling in both directions

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008366


    along Lonsdale Road, as well as pedestrian activity in the vicinity of the appeal site
    consistent with the residential character if the area. While my observations are only
    a snapshot in time, it is likely that such activity increases during peak times, such as
    for school drop off or pick up.
8. The Southend-on-Sea Vehicle Crossover Policy – Traffic and Highways (2021) (the
   VPC) sets out that for parking that is parallel to the footway, there must be an
   unobstructed off-street parking place of not less than 2.6 metres deep and 6.5
   metres wide. It goes on to state that in all cases, the off-street parking space must
   be “sufficient to accommodate the entire vehicle, with no part overhanging the
   footway, cycleway or verge” and that “there are no concessions from the absolute
   minimum dimensions in any circumstances”. Whilst guidance, the VPC is directly
   concerned with the safety and efficient operation of the highway. Therefore, it is
   pertinent to my assessment.
9. There is dispute between the parties regarding the precise extent of the red line
   boundary. While it is beyond the scope of this appeal to reach a definitive
   judgement on land ownership, even based on the dimensions presented within
   ‘Appendix E’ of the appellant’s appeal statement, the indicated frontage width of
   4.75 metres is significantly narrower than the absolute minimum width set out in the
   VPC.
10. I have not been provided with a swept path analysis by either party. Nonetheless,
    having regard to the evidence before me and my observations on site, the
    constrained dimensions of the hardstanding and its parallel relationship with the
    highway are such that multiple manoeuvres are likely required for a vehicle to enter
    and exit the space. Even at low speeds within a residential environment, this has
    the potential to cause inconvenience to other footway and road users and to
    undermine the safe and efficient functioning of the highway.
11. Moreover, while the appellant suggests that a ‘typical residential vehicle’ could be
    accommodated, this could not be reasonably controlled. It has not been
    demonstrated that the hardstanding could cater for a larger car or a van for example
    without overhanging the pavement. In that regard, there is a realistic prospect that
    vehicles could impede pedestrian movement on the footway, particularly for the
    visually impaired or those with limited mobility including users of wheelchairs, prams
    and mobility scooters, all of whom rely heavily on a clear footway and predictable
    traffic movements to navigate the footway safely.
12. Consequently, the development has an unacceptable effect on highway safety. In
    that regard, it conflicts with Policy CP3 of the Southend-on-Sea Core Strategy
    (2007) and Policies DM3 and DM15 of the Southend-on-Sea Development
    Management Document (2015) which require, amongst other things, that
    developments contribute to improving safety, quality of life and equality of access
    for all; are well designed; for access to not unreasonably harm the surroundings;
    and to prioritise the needs of pedestrians, including disabled persons and those with
    impaired mobility. Furthermore, Policy TR6 of the Framework also confirms that
    development which has an unacceptable impact on highway safety should be
    refused.
Other Matters
13. I have had regard to the appeal decision (Ref. APP/D1590/W/24/3341538) cited by
    the appellant. However, the Inspector dismissed that appeal and, in doing so, did

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008366


     not refer to a lack of technical evidence or giving limited weight to manoeuvring
     concerns. It is therefore unclear how this decision supports the appellant’s case. In
     any event, I have considered the appeal before me on its own merits.
14. The acceptability of the principle of development and the lack of harm in terms of
    design, residential amenity and flood risk are neutral factors and do not justify the
    harm identified.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. In conclusion, the development conflicts with the development plan and the
    material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Jamieson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
