Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 July 2026 by T Morris BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 08 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008579
The Granary, Old Carlton Farm, Sandy Lane to Boundary, Stockton on the Forest,
York YO19 5XS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Philip Hodgson against the decision of City of York Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/02300/FUL.
•   The development proposed is single storey side extension and first floor side extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The description of development on the application form refers to extensions to a
   detached residential dwelling. I have therefore used the description from the
   decision notice within the banner heading above as it more accurately describes
   the extensions. I have removed reference to it being retrospective as that is not a
   description of development, albeit I have assessed the scheme on this basis.
4. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published by the Government. This is a material consideration in
   the decision-making process from the day of publication. Although the assessment
   of development in the Green Belt changed in the new version, the relevant
   exception put forth by the appellant was not materially altered. As such, it was not
   necessary to consult the main parties for their views on the new Framework and
   delay the decision.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
    i)        whether the development is inappropriate in the Green Belt, having regard to
              the Framework and relevant development plan policies;
    ii)       the effect of the development on the openness of the Green Belt;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008579


       iii)     the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the host
                dwelling and the surrounding area; and
       iv)      whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm,
                would be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the
                very special circumstances required to justify the development.
Reasons for the Recommendation
        Whether Inappropriate Development
6. The appeal site comprises a detached dwelling which is located in the York Green
   Belt. The Framework advises that inappropriate development is, by definition,
   harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special
   circumstances.
7. The Framework establishes that development in the Green Belt should be regarded
   as inappropriate, subject to the exceptions which are set out in policy GB7. Policy
   GB1 of the City of York Local Plan (2025) (LP) provides similar direction in terms of
   its approach to development in the York Green Belt. As such, it is generally
   consistent with the Framework in this regard.
8. The exception set out in policy GB7(1)(b) of the Framework allows for the reuse,
   extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building, provided that the
   existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in planning
   terms, and any extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase
   in size compared to the original building. The Council concluded that the
   development is a disproportionate addition and would fail to meet this exception.
   The appellant has provided no reasons to disagree with this conclusion.
   Accordingly, I agree that the development is a disproportionate addition over and
   above the size of the original building. It therefore fails to meet the exception given
   in policy GB7(1)(b).
9. The appellant’s case concerning the Green Belt is instead focussed on the policy
   GB7(1)(e) exception. This relates to the redevelopment of previously developed
   land (including a material change of use to residential or mixed-use including
   residential), which would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green
   Belt. The appellant argues that the development meets this exception because it
   represents the partial or complete redevelopment of previously developed land.
10. The Inspector on the most recent appeal decision at the site1, issued in December
    2025, considered this exception. Although they found that the appeal site
    constitutes previously developed land, they concluded that the development would
    not meet the paragraph 154 (g) exception at that time. This was because, as they
    explain at paragraph 6 of their decision, ‘the redevelopment of land almost always
    involves the construction of new buildings, typically after demolition of previous
    ones. Whilst the proposal would involve some alteration to existing extensions and
    construction of new extensions, the original building would be altered but remain
    intact. What is proposed is therefore essentially the extension and alteration of the
    original building, rather than amounting to either the partial or complete
    redevelopment of the land’.


1
    Appeal reference APP/C2741/D/25/3370861


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6008579


11. I do not have all the evidence that the Inspector considered on the most recent
    appeal. However, I agree with their assessment that the redevelopment of land
    almost always involves the construction of new buildings, typically after demolition
    of previous ones. In the current appeal, the description of development originally
    provided by the appellant does not refer to any demolition or removal of previous
    buildings. The plans show the removal of a conservatory and store, but the new
    extensions do not appear to replace these in terms of their siting. I also can’t be
    certain of the extent to which the sections of the building where the new extensions
    are situated were demolished prior to the erection of the latest additions.
12. Even if the previous extensions were fully demolished to make way for the
    extensions subject of this appeal, the original building remains in situ.
    Consequently, the works do not constitute the redevelopment of previously
    developed land as required by policy GB7(1)(e). Therefore, it represents
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt, contrary to the Green Belt aims of the
    Framework, as well as policy GB1 of the LP which seeks to prevent inappropriate
    development.
        Openness
13. The Framework states that the fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent
    urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The essential characteristics of
    Green Belts are their openness and their permanence. Openness has a spatial and
    a visual dimension.
14. The extensions have introduced a considerable amount of additional bulk and mass
    to the appeal building, thus reducing the openness of the Green Belt in spatial
    terms. Although the building is visible from the access road which serves the group
    which the property forms part of, and is also visible from the surrounding fields, the
    site is relatively well screened by virtue of the trees and hedges in its garden.
    Therefore, I accept that the harm to visual openness is somewhat limited as a
    result of the site’s screening, similar to the findings of the Inspector in the Chiltern
    Hill Field appeal decision, which was provided by the appellant2.
15. Nevertheless, the development has still resulted in some harm to the openness of
    the Green Belt. Although it would not amount to substantial harm to openness
    specifically, it is still harm. This should be given substantial weight in accordance
    with policy GB6(2) of the Framework. Moreover, this is in addition to the harm
    caused by reason of its inappropriateness. The development therefore conflicts
    with policy GB1 of the LP which seeks to protect the openness of the Green Belt.
        Character and Appearance
16. Notwithstanding the works which have already taken place at the site, I understand
    that the property was originally a modest agricultural building, possibly of similar
    scale and appearance to some of the other buildings within this small group which I
    observed on my site visit. This is also reflected in the existing plans which indicate
    that the main two-storey part of the building had a simple linear form and there
    were a series of subservient single storey extensions to this.
17. I have had regard of the Council’s House Extensions and Alterations
    Supplementary Planning Document (2012) (SPD). This advises that a basic

2
    Appeal refence APP/P0240/W/23/3316421


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6008579


     principle is that any extension should normally be in keeping with the appearance,
     scale, design and character of both the existing dwelling and the street scene, and
     that the proposal should not dominate the house or clash with its appearance.
18. Due to their combined scale and mass, the single storey side extension and first
    floor side extension dominate the appearance of the original building, contrary to
    the SPD. Furthermore, the flat roof design of the single storey side extension jars
    with the pitched roof form of the main part of the building, with its harmful visual
    effects exacerbated by its conspicuous siting on the elevation facing the site’s
    access. Consequently, the linear form of the main part of the building is barely
    perceptible, and it no longer appears as a modest agricultural building, contrary to
    the character of the rural buildings in the surrounding group. The use of matching
    materials in the extensions is not sufficient to overcome the excessive bulk and
    mass of the additions.
19. In reaching this conclusion, I recognise that the appellant would be willing to
    provide additional landscaping if necessary. Although the screening and additional
    landscaping would possibly go some way to further offset the limited harm in terms
    of the visual openness of the Green Belt, notwithstanding the observations of the
    Inspector on the most recent appeal, the extensions would remain, regardless of
    their visibility.
20. While matters of character and appearance are generally considered together, they
    are different assessments. To that end, just because a development may not be
    readily visible does not mean it would not be harmful to the character of a building
    or the relationship between a building and the local area. Moreover, the Framework
    is clear in policy DP3 that development should respond to its context (the history,
    character and features of their site and its setting), so that it integrates with and
    enhance its surroundings, such as through the arrangement of development plots
    and buildings, the use of materials and architectural features.
21. For the above reasons, the development is harmful to the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area. It conflicts with policy
    D11 of the LP, which requires that developments respond positively to their
    immediate architectural context, local character and history.
     Other Considerations
22. The appellant has drawn my attention to a comparison between what has been
    constructed on site and what could be built using permitted development rights.
    They suggest that this includes a potential two storey extension, a single storey
    extension, a roof extension, a porch, as well as single storey outbuildings. This
    would be after removing the existing extensions and that the quantum of
    development would be larger but would not be inappropriate development.
23. However, if a person wishes to ascertain whether an existing or proposed use or
    development is or would be lawful, the correct approach is for them to make an
    application for a lawful development certificate (LDC) under section 191 or 192 of
    the Town and Country Planning Act 1990. Although plans for a permitted
    development scheme have been provided, the appellant has not referred me to a
    LDC for the potential works they refer to, in order to confirm that the development
    depicted in the plans would be lawful. This limits the amount of weight I can give
    this fallback position.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008579


24. Even if the permitted development scheme put forward by the appellant was
    supported by a lawful development certificate, some of the works would be in the
    form of single storey outbuildings, rather than extensions to the dwelling. The
    addition of outbuildings would not be as practical or desirable as an extension
    attached to the host building and as such, I would doubt the likelihood of this being
    a suitable fallback.
25. Therefore, I give the fallback position referred to by the appellant limited weight in
    support of the appeal. Moreover, the removal of permitted development rights in the
    event that I recommend that the appeal should be allowed would not alter this
    conclusion, since the harm of the development has already occurred.
26. Even if the building is now more sustainable and efficient as a result of the works
    and it better meets the modern-day needs of a family with ties to the local area,
    these benefits are of limited weight in the context of the substantial weight I am
    required to give to any harm to the Green Belt.
27. The absence of harm in terms of other technical matters and to neighbouring
    properties are neutral factors which do not weigh in favour of the appeal.
Planning and Green Belt Balance
28. The development amounts to inappropriate development in the Green Belt while
    there is also harm to openness. Consequently, the scheme should not be approved
    except in very special circumstances. Additional harm is caused to the character
    and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area. The totality of the
    harm in terms of the Green Belt and character and appearance attracts substantial
    weight on each ground. Very special circumstances will not exist unless the harm to
    the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm resulting from
    the proposal, is clearly outweighed by the other considerations.
29. For the reasons set out above, I attach limited weight to the permitted development
    fallback position, as well as to the other considerations put forward by the
    appellant. Consequently, the very special circumstances which are necessary to
    justify the development do not exist.
Conclusion and Recommendation
30. The development is contrary to the development plan as a whole as well as the
    advice in the Framework and there are no other material considerations which
    would outweigh this conflict. Therefore, I recommend that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

T Morris
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
31. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
