Appeal Decision
by K Lancaster BA (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008723
Land to the rear of Abbey Gardens, Southport Road, Lydiate L31 4EQ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Robert Barton against the decision of Sefton Metropolitan Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is DC/2025/02052.
•      The development proposed is the erection of up to 4No. bungalows.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
         August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
         and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
         latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
3.       The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (the
         PPG) advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage (PiP)) establishes whether
         a site is suitable in principle and the second (technical details consent (TDC))
         stage is when the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal
         relates to the first of these two stages.
4.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. The PiP procedure requires
         the minimum and maximum number of dwellings to be specified. My assessment
         is based on a maximum of four dwellings as applied for. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent TDC application if PiP is granted. I have
         determined the appeal accordingly.
Main Issues
5.       The main issues are whether the site is suitable for residential development having
         regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development, with
         particular regard to:
             •    whether the scheme would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt;
             •    the effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt; and


1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008723


             •   if the development is inappropriate, whether the harm by reason of
                 inappropriateness and any other harm is clearly outweighed by other
                 considerations so as to amount to the very special circumstances
                 necessary to justify the development.
Reasons
6.      The appeal site comprises an area of land to the rear of 294 Southport Road,
        which is a detached bungalow, set back from the road within a large curtilage.
        Immediately to the rear, is a site currently under construction for 5 bungalows2.
        There are no existing built structures within the site, although there is some
        evidence of hardstanding. However, for the most part, these features have mostly
        blended into the landscape.
7.      The wider area is characterised by open rural land, with the exception of a small
        stable building close to the western boundary of the site. Whilst there is evidence
        that the land formed part of the former poultry and pig farm, the site is not
        previously developed land, having previously been used for agriculture. It is
        located within the Green Belt.
Whether Inappropriate Development
8.      Policy GB6(1) of the Framework states that development in the Green Belt is
        inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in policy GB7.
9.      Under Policy GB7(g) of the Framework, development in the Green Belt should not
        be regarded as inappropriate where: the development would utilise grey belt land,
        and would not fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of the
        remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan, there is a evidenced unmet need
        for the type of development proposed and the development would be in a
        sustainable location, with particular reference to Policy TR3 of the Framework.
10. The Framework defines Grey Belt land is defined as land in the Green Belt
    comprising previously developed land and/or any other land that, in either case,
    does not strongly contribute to any of purposes (a), (b), or (d) in policy GB2.
11. In relation to Green Belt purpose (a), which seeks to check the unrestricted sprawl
    of large built-up areas, the Framework states that villages should not be regarded
    as large built-up areas. In this case, the parties disagree as to whether the appeal
    site lies within a village or forms part of a larger built-up area.
12. The appeal site is located on the edge of Lydiate. The appellant emphasises
    Lydiate’s separate identity, including the existence of a Parish Council and
    Neighbourhood Plan. However, the Council refers me to the Sefton Local Plan,
    adopted April 2017 (the SLP) which identifies Maghull and Lydiate collectively as a
    large town and consistently treats them as a single settlement.
13. I have had regard to an appeal decision3 cited by the appellant in which the
    Inspector concluded that the settlement of Eccleston was a village and, therefore,
    did not contribute to purpose (a). However, that decision concerned a settlement
    identified in the development plan as a Rural Service Centre rather than a town or


2
    Planning Application Ref: DC/2023/00249
3
    Appeal Reference: APP/D2320/W/25/3376087


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6008723


       large built-up area. The circumstances are therefore materially different, and I
       attach very limited weight to that decision.
14. Whilst Lydiate may have originated as a distinct village, the evidence before me
    indicates that development has resulted in a continuous urban form with Maghull.
    Having regard to the way in which the Local Plan identifies and treats the
    settlements, I find that Lydiate forms part of the same large built-up area as
    Maghull.
15. Annex E(3) of the Framework indicates that land is likely to contribute strongly to
    Green Belt purpose (a) where it is largely free from development and lacks
    physical features that would contain or restrict development. Such land is also
    likely to be adjacent or close to a large built-up area and, if developed, result in an
    incongruous pattern of development, for example an extended finger of
    development into the Green Belt.
16. The appeal site adjoins the large built-up area formed by Maghull and Lydiate and
    occupies a transitional area between the urban edge and the open countryside.
    The site is not bounded by robust or permanent physical features capable of
    containing future development. Whilst residential development is currently under
    construction on adjacent land, the appeal proposal would extend beyond that
    development into a predominantly open landscape.
17. The site is surrounded largely by agricultural land and contains no substantial built
    development, save for limited remnants of former hardstanding. Although the land
    formerly formed part of a pig and poultry farm, the previous buildings have been
    removed, and the site now exhibits a largely open and rural character.
    Consequently, the site is largely free from development and lacks physical
    features that would restrict further expansion into the surrounding countryside.
18. If developed, the proposal would project the settlement edge further into the Green
    Belt, creating an extended finger of development beyond the established and
    emerging built form. In my view, this would amount to the type of incongruous
    pattern of development identified in Annex E(3). Taking these matters together, I
    conclude that the appeal site makes a strong contribution to Green Belt purpose
    (a), namely checking the unrestricted sprawl of a large built-up area.
19. Green Belt purpose (b) seeks to prevent neighbouring towns from merging. Given
    the site's location, the proposal would not materially reduce the separation
    between settlements, and the appeal site therefore does not make a strong
    contribution to this purpose. Similarly, there is no dispute that the site does not
    make a strong contribution to purpose (d), which seeks to preserve the setting and
    special character of historic towns.
20. Nevertheless, because I have found that the appeal site makes a strong
    contribution to Green Belt purpose (a), it does not meet the Framework's definition
    of Grey Belt land. Consequently, the proposal would not fall within the exception in
    Policy GB7(1)(g) of the Framework.
21. For the above reasons, the proposal would therefore comprise inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt that would, by definition, be harmful to the Green
    Belt. It would fail to meet the exceptions set out in Policy GB7 of the Framework.
    There would also be conflict with Policy MN7 of the Local Plan for Sefton, adopted


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008723


       2027 (the SLP), which amongst other things, requires that proposals within the
       Green Belt are considered in line with the provisions of the Framework.
Openness
22. The Framework establishes that the primary purpose of the Green Belt is to
    prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. Openness has both
    spatial and visual aspects.
23. The site is currently characterised by open grassed land, with only limited
    remnants of former hardstanding remaining. Although buildings associated with
    the site's former agricultural use may once have occupied parts of the land, they
    have largely disappeared and any remaining evidence has blended into the
    surrounding landscape. As a result, the site presently makes a meaningful
    contribution to the openness of the Green Belt.
24. The introduction of residential development and its associated domestic features
    would urbanise the site and erode both its visual and spatial openness. In a
    landscape surrounded by open fields, this loss of openness would be readily
    apparent. I therefore find that the proposal would result in harm to the openness of
    the Green Belt.
25. This adds to the harm found above from inappropriate development in the Green
    Belt. In accordance with Policy GB6(2) of the Framework, substantial weight
    should be given to any harm to the Green Belt, including harm to its openness.
Other Considerations
26. The evidence before me indicates that the Council is currently unable to
    demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites. In these
    circumstances, the provision of up to four additional dwellings would contribute,
    albeit modestly, towards local housing delivery. Furthermore, the proposal would
    come forward on a small site capable of being developed in the short term,
    consistent with the Framework's support for housing delivery from small and
    medium-sized sites. The site would also be located where there is good
    accessibility to services, facilities and public transport, including bus services
    operating along Southport Road. Overall, I attribute moderate weight to these
    benefits.
27. I acknowledge that the appeal site forms part of a former pig and poultry farm
    which historically contained agricultural buildings, yards and areas of
    hardstanding. Whilst this indicates that the land was previously developed to some
    extent, those structures have long since been removed and the site now appears
    largely open and undeveloped in character. Consequently, I attach very limited
    weight to the site's former use as a factor weighing in favour of the proposal.
28. The proposal would adjoin the Abbey Gardens development and comprise a
    relatively modest number of dwellings. However, the acceptance of residential
    development on neighbouring land does not establish that further development
    beyond that scheme would be acceptable. I therefore attach very limited weight to
    these considerations.
29. No objections have been raised by the relevant technical consultees in respect of
    matters such as highway safety, drainage or other technical considerations.
    Nevertheless, even if I were to agree with the Council on these points, the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008723


       absence of harm would be a neutral matter which would not carry weight in favour
       of the scheme.
Green Belt Balance
30. Policy GB6(2) of the Framework states that inappropriate development is, by
    definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very
    special circumstances. Such circumstances will not exist unless the potential harm
    to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm resulting
    from the proposed development, is clearly outweighed by other considerations. In
    making this assessment, substantial weight should be given to the harm to the
    Green Belt which would be caused, including harm to its openness.
31. I give moderate weight to the provision of additional dwellings. However, the other
    considerations would not clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt by reason of
    inappropriateness and other harm. Consequently, the very special circumstances
    necessary to justify the proposed development do not exist. As such, it would be
    contrary to Policy MN7 of the SLP and Policy GB6 the Framework.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
32. Policy S3 of the Framework establishes a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. The appeal site lies outside of the settlement, accordingly Policy S5
    applies.
33. Policy S5(5) makes clear that development proposals in the Green Belt are not
    subject to the general presumption contained within Policy S5 and are instead to
    be determined in accordance with the Framework's Green Belt policies. However,
    as I have found that the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in
    the Green Belt, Policy S5(5) provides that the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development does not apply.
34. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    the material considerations, including the Framework and the very special
    circumstances test therein, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

K Lancaster
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
