Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by K Dryden BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008439
274 Ground Floor Portobello Road, Kensington and Chelsea, London W10 5TE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mohammed Zomlot of The Grand Portobello Ltd against the decision of
     the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application reference is PP/25/03918.
•    The development is described as side extension at ground floor level.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Subsequent to the Council’s decision on the application to which this appeal
       relates, the Government published a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) on 17 August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework
       published in December 2024, and all other iterations. Both the appellant and the
       Council were given the opportunity to comment on changes relevant to the main
       issues in this appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching
       this decision.
3.     At the time of my site visit, I observed that alterations to the property had taken
       place, with a substantial extension erected to the side of the building. I found that
       there was a difference with what was built out at the site and the plans considered
       by the Council, insofar as the pitched roof and supporting beams are shown on the
       proposed plans at a higher level on the building than has been constructed. For
       the avoidance of doubt, I have determined this appeal on the basis of the plans on
       which the Council determined the planning application, where it is not the role of a
       section 78 appeal to address matters of enforcement.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
     •    the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the host
          property and the surrounding area;
     •    the effect of the development on the setting and significance of the Oxford
          Gardens Conservation Area (CA);
     •    the effect of the development on public access, with particular regard to market
          uses on Acklam Road;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008439


     •    whether the development would achieve the highest standard of fire safety.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5. The appeal site relates to an unlisted period property situated on a prominent
   corner of Portobello Road and Acklam Road, within a parade of commercial units
   with residential uses over upper storeys. There is a general consistency to the
   building line of the parade, which contributes positively to the character and
   appearance of the area. The Westway flyover lies to the south of the site. The
   appeal property’s side elevation prominently fronts Acklam Road, which is
   characterised by an expansive area of hardstanding associated with the
   established market uses in this locality.
6. The development includes a single storey extension that spans the full length of the
   side elevation of the property. The appellant sets out that the structure encloses an
   existing external seating area to protect diners from adverse weather conditions
   and enable its use throughout the year.
7. The appellant alleges that the side extension is subordinate to the host dwelling,
   lightweight in appearance and visually permeable. However, whilst the
   development features a retractable canopy, it reads as a permanent and largely
   solid extension, incorporating a substantial fixed steel structure and fixed glazing
   panels. Furthermore, the extension is largely flush with the prominent corner
   frontage of the building and runs the entire length of the side elevation. The
   proposed plans also indicate that the large supporting roof beams would project
   above ground level to the first floor of the property, further reinforcing its visual
   presence.
8. The excessive size and scale of the structure, in combination with the substantial
   metal supporting beams, results in an incongruous addition that fails to read as a
   well-integrated extension to the period, host property. The development draws the
   eye to its resultant bulk and massing, thereby detracting from the appreciation of
   the original front and side elevations of the building, including the first-floor
   fenestration. The unsympathetic positioning of the supporting beams further
   reinforces this harm.
9. Furthermore, with regard to materials, the use of a black steel frame appears
   visually oppressive and discordant within the street scene, particularly given the
   prominence of the corner property. Overall, the addition does not appear
   subordinate to the host building and, by virtue of its size, scale, siting and design,
   detracts from the character and appearance of the host property.
10. The expansive area of hardstanding fronting the side elevation on Acklam Road is
    used as a market on certain days of the week, accommodating both temporary and
    permanent market structures. I noted at my site visit, on a day when the market
    was not fully in operation, that the development appeared discordant in the open
    setting. By projecting intrusively into the street scene, it would interrupt the
    prevailing sense of openness and detract from the character of the area.
11. The appellant has drawn my attention to Policy DM3 of the Framework and has
    suggested that the precise specification of materials and technical details could be
    addressed by planning condition. However, for the reasons given above, these


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008439


     considerations do not overcome the harm that I have identified arising from the
     bulk, scale and siting of the development in this sensitive location.
12. I therefore conclude that the development would have a detrimental effect on the
    character and appearance of the host property and the surrounding area. I find
    conflict with Policies CD1, CD2 and CD10 of the Royal Borough of Kensington and
    Chelsea New Local Plan Review (2024) (NLPR), which together seek high quality
    development which enhances the quality and character of buildings. I also find
    conflict with NLPR Policy CD13 which requires extensions to existing buildings to
    be subordinate to the original building, and to reinforce the character and integrity
    of the original building. Accordingly, I find conflict with Policy DP3 of the
    Framework, which requires development to achieve a high standard of design.
Setting and significance of the CA
13. Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires special attention to be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
    the character or appearance of conservation areas. In this appeal, the setting of the
    CA contributes to its significance, and the effect of the development on that setting
    is therefore a relevant consideration.
14. The CA boundary runs along nearby Cambridge Gardens, to the west of the site,
    and to the rear of the properties opposite the appeal site on Portobello Road. The
    Oxford Gardens – St Quintin Conservation Area Appraisal (2021) sets out that the
    significance of the CA derives from the uniformity, historic interest and architectural
    quality of its buildings.
15. The appellant states that the development is separated from the CA by intervening
    built form. It is also contended that the locality is characterised by a varied street
    scene, commercial activity, market trading and the presence of the Westway.
    However, given the considerable size and scale of the side extension, together with
    its prominent siting, I noted at my site visit that the development is readily visible in
    views along Cambridge Road, within the CA, when looking east towards the appeal
    site and the open area of hardstanding associated with market activities on Acklam
    Road. By virtue of its design, scale and siting, the development appears at odds
    with the uniformity and architectural quality of the surrounding period buildings and
    appears discordant within its open setting.
16. Whilst I acknowledge the presence of the Westway, it is not readily perceived within
    the immediate context of the site, and the numerous market stalls that occupy the
    area on trading days are not permanent features of this area of hardstanding.
    Furthermore, the development interrupts views into the CA when looking west
    along Acklam Road, thereby detracting from the significance of its setting.
17. I therefore find that the development would fail to preserve or enhance the setting
    and significance of the CA. Given its relatively modest scale, the development
    would, under the terms of the Framework, result in a moderate level of harm to the
    setting and thereby the significance of the CA. It is noteworthy that even a
    moderate level of harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset, including
    development within its setting, carries considerable importance and weight. Policy
    HE6 of the Framework establishes that any harm should be weighed against any
    public benefits resulting from the development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008439


18. I have had regard to the benefits identified by the appellant, including the economic
    benefits arising from enabling an existing business to expand its seating capacity
    and accommodate additional customers. I also recognise that the weather-
    protected area would facilitate the use of outdoor seating at all times of the year.
    Furthermore, I have considered the appellant’s submission that the development
    supports the viability and vibrancy of the business, employment opportunities,
    commercial activity, and the functioning of the market and local commercial area
    and that there have been no objections from individual market traders. I am also
    mindful that Policy E2 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be
    given to the economic benefits of commercial development which allow a business
    to expand and/ or adapt. However, any such benefits would be countered, and in
    my judgement, comfortably outweighed by the harm that I have identified to the
    setting and significance of the CA.
19. In addition, the economic benefits of the development have not been quantified,
    and I have been provided with insufficient information to demonstrate that the
    claimed benefits of the development could not be provided in a less harmful way
    and/ or in a less sensitive location. Whilst I have given careful consideration to the
    public benefits advanced by the appellant, it is nevertheless my judgement that,
    when considered cumulatively, they would not outweigh the moderate harm that I
    have identified to the setting of the CA. Conflict therefore arises with the historic
    environment conservation and enhancement policies contained within the
    Framework.
20. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the development would have a
    harmful effect on the setting and significance of the CA. The development is
    contrary to NLPR Policy CD15 in so far as it requires development to protect and
    enhance views, including those into and out of conservation areas. I additionally
    find conflict with Policies CD3 and CD4 of the NLPR which requires development in
    the setting of a designated heritage asset to preserve or enhance the significance
    of the heritage asset.
Public access
21. The expansive area of hardstanding at Acklam Road reads as public realm, and the
    evidence before me indicates that the road is used as a market area on certain
    days of the week. There is dispute between the parties regarding the ownership of
    the appeal site, comprising an area of land adjacent to 274 Portobello Road. This
    includes a third-party representation from the West Way Trust, dated October 2025,
    referring to an ongoing application to register the land in the trust’s name with HM
    Land Registry.
22. From the evidence provided, it is not clear whether the appeal site is publicly or
    privately owned. Whilst the appellant has provided an extract which is claimed to be
    an excerpt from the title plan (figure 2), I have not been provided with current
    official land registry records for the site to clarify ownership. Nor have I been
    provided with sufficient information regarding any established rights of public
    access over the land. Consequently, I do not have sufficient evidence before me to
    reach a reliable finding on this matter.
23. As I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, this matter is not determinative
    and would be a matter to be addressed between the parties in the event of any
    future planning application. As I am unable to conclude with any confidence that the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008439


     development would have a harmful effect on public access, particularly in relation
     to market uses on Acklam Road, I cannot reach a finding as to whether conflict
     arises with NLPR policies TR3, TR4 and TR6 which relate to living streets, works to
     the public highway and safeguarding of public access rights.
Fire safety
24. Policy CD16 of the NLPR requires development to demonstrate the highest
    standards of fire safety. The Council’s third reason for refusal relates to the
    absence of a planning fire safety strategy (PFSS). A PFSS has been submitted with
    the appeal, dated the 14 April 2026. The document addresses means of escape,
    evacuation and assembly strategy, fire detection and alarm alongside access for
    firefighting and ongoing management. The Council has had an opportunity to
    review the PFSS as part of the appeal process and has agreed that sufficient detail
    has been provided, where I have no reason to disagree with that finding.
25. For the above reasons, I conclude that the development would satisfy the
    requirements of NLPR Policy CD16 and that the development would achieve the
    highest standard of fire safety.
Conclusion
26. I am satisfied that the development would achieve the highest standard of fire
    safety, and I have been provided with insufficient information to conclude with any
    confidence that the development would have a harmful effect on public access,
    particularly in relation to market uses on Acklam Road. Nevertheless, for the
    reasons given above, in relation to the effect of the development on the character
    and appearance of the host property and the surrounding area, in addition to the
    setting and significance of the CA, I conclude that the development would conflict
    with the development plan. There are no material considerations, including the
    Framework, that would outweigh that conflict. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.




K Dryden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
