Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by M Aqbal BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008548
Land at Polden View, Maunsel Road, North Newton, Bridgwater, Somerset
TA7 0BS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Jamie Lyones against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 37/26/00005.
•    The development proposed is outline planning application for the development of 2 dwelling houses
     with access thereto.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted for the
       development of 2 dwelling houses with access thereto at Land at Polden View,
       Maunsel Road, North Newton, Bridgwater, Somerset TA7 0BS, in accordance with
       the terms of the application Ref 37/26/00005 and subject to the Schedule of
       Conditions attached to this Decision.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The application is submitted in ‘outline’ including access details, with layout, scale,
       landscaping and appearance reserved for future consideration. Accordingly, I have
       treated any details relating to the reserved matters as being illustrative only.
3.     A neighbouring occupier has highlighted that the appeal site is situated adjacent
       to, rather than at ‘Polden View’. However, the appeal plans clearly identify the land
       to which the appeal relates and there is no evidence before me that any party has
       been misled as to the location or extent of the site. I am therefore satisfied that no
       prejudice has arisen and I have determined the appeal on the basis of the
       submitted plans.
4.     Following the submission of the appeal, a new National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
       were afforded an opportunity to comment on any implications arising from this. I
       have taken those submissions into account and have determined the appeal
       having regard to the Framework in force at the date of this Decision.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is whether the proposal would represent an appropriate form of
       residential development in the countryside having regard to the spatial strategy of
       the development plan and national planning policies.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008548


Reasons
6.     The appeal site comprises a parcel of land adjoining the settlement boundary of
       North Newton. It benefits from an extant outline planning permission, granted in
       April 2024, for the erection of two self-build dwellings.
7.     The appeal proposal seeks outline planning permission for two dwellings. Whilst
       the proposal would result in the same number of dwellings as the extant
       permission, those dwellings would not be subject to the self-build restriction
       imposed under the earlier consent.
8.     North Newton is identified as a Tier 4 settlement in the Sedgemoor Local Plan
       (LP). Policies S2 and CO1 form part of the LP's spatial strategy and seek to direct
       housing development to appropriate locations whilst exercising restraint over
       residential development in the countryside. LP Policy T4 supports certain forms of
       housing development within Tier 4 settlements and, in limited circumstances,
       affordable housing on sites outside but well-related to settlement boundaries. LP
       Policy D9 provides a specific exception for self-build housing outside settlement
       boundaries.
9.     The appeal site lies outside the settlement boundary and therefore within the
       countryside for the purposes of the LP. Although the proposal would provide the
       same number of dwellings as the extant permission, it would remove the self-build
       restriction that formed the basis upon which that permission was granted under LP
       Policy D9.
10. LP Policy D9 forms part of the adopted development plan and I attach significant
    weight to its objectives of directing self-build housing outside settlement
    boundaries and resisting its replacement with conventional market housing. The
    policy forms an important component of the LP's spatial strategy for managing
    housing development in the countryside and addressing identified self-build
    housing needs.
11. Consequently, the proposal would result in market housing outside the settlement
    boundary that does not benefit from the self-build exception provided by LP Policy
    D9. As such, it would not accord with the LP's spatial strategy for directing housing
    development, would be inappropriate development in the countryside, and would
    conflict with Policies S2 and CO1. Furthermore, the proposal would neither
    comprise housing development within the settlement boundary nor affordable
    housing of the type envisaged by LP Policy T4. Accordingly, it would also conflict
    with Policies T4 and D9 of the LP.
Other Considerations
12. The appellant has drawn attention to Policy S5 of the Framework. Annex A
    confirms that the policies of the Framework are material considerations in
    decision-making from the date of publication.
13. Policy S5 addresses the principle of development outside settlements. Policy
    S5(1)(j) supports housing development which would address an evidenced unmet
    need where the local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites, provided the development is physically well-related to an
    existing settlement and of a scale capable of being accommodated having regard
    to infrastructure.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008548


14. The Council accepts that it cannot currently demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites and identifies a supply of approximately 4.17 years.
    Consequently, an evidenced unmet housing need exists for the purposes of Policy
    S5(1)(j) of the Framework and the policy is therefore engaged.
15. The site immediately adjoins the built form and settlement boundary of North
    Newton. I therefore find that it is physically well-related to the settlement. North
    Newton also contains a range of facilities and services, including a primary school,
    pre-school, public house, church, village hall and recreational facilities. Whilst
    future occupiers would be likely to rely on private car travel for certain journeys,
    particularly to larger centres, that is not unusual in rural areas and does not alter
    my finding regarding the site's close physical relationship with the settlement.
16. The proposal would provide only two dwellings. Furthermore, the site already
    benefits from an extant permission for two dwellings. The Council has not
    identified any infrastructure constraints or capacity issues that would prevent
    development of this scale from being accommodated.
17. I therefore find that the proposal satisfies the criteria set out in Policy S5(1)(j) of
    the Framework and attracts support under that policy.
18. The appellant further advises that the approved self-build plots have attracted little
    interest since being marketed in February 2025, suggesting that implementation of
    the extant permission may be uncertain. Whilst I have not been provided with
    detailed marketing evidence or information regarding demand recorded on the
    self-build register, I attach limited weight to that contention.
19. Furthermore, Policy HO7 of the Framework indicates that substantial weight
    should be given to the benefits of providing homes which contribute towards
    meeting evidenced housing needs. Whilst the appeal proposal would not increase
    the quantum of residential development already permitted on the site, it may
    increase the likelihood that two dwellings are delivered in circumstances where the
    approved self-build scheme has yet to be implemented and would therefore make
    a modest contribution towards addressing the Council's identified housing land
    supply shortfall. In accordance with Policy HO7, I attach substantial weight to that
    benefit.
20. I also attach significant weight to the fact that the site benefits from an extant
    outline planning permission for two self-build dwellings granted in April 2024. The
    appeal proposal would utilise the same site and substantially the same access
    arrangements as that consent. The Council has therefore already accepted that
    residential development comprising two dwellings can be accommodated on the
    site. The principal distinction between the approved scheme and the appeal
    proposal relates to occupancy and tenure rather than any material difference in the
    physical effects of the development.
Conditions
21. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council having regard to the
    tests set out in the Framework and the advice contained within the Planning
    Practice Guidance.
22. Conditions 1 and 2 are necessary to secure approval of the reserved matters and
    to define the permission granted. In respect of Condition 1, I have imposed the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008548


       statutory time limits applicable to outline planning permissions. I have not been
       provided with any substantive justification for a longer implementation period and
       see no reason to depart from the normal approach. Conditions 3 and 6 are
       necessary to secure biodiversity enhancement and biodiversity net gain.
       Conditions 4 and 5 are necessary to secure satisfactory access and drainage
       arrangements in the interests of highway safety.
23. Where necessary, I have amended the wording of the suggested conditions in the
    interests of precision, enforceability and clarity.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
24. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires
    planning applications and appeals to be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
25. I have found that the proposal conflicts with the development plan. In particular, it
    would result in market housing outside the settlement boundary contrary to the
    spatial strategy of the LP and in circumstances where LP Policy D9 seeks to resist
    the replacement of approved self-build dwellings with conventional market
    housing. I attach significant weight to that conflict.
26. Against this, the Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites. I have found that the proposal satisfies the criteria of Policy S5(1)(j)
    of the Framework and therefore attracts support under that policy. Furthermore,
    Policy HO7 of the Framework directs that substantial weight be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which contribute towards meeting evidenced housing
    needs.
27. I also attach significant weight to the extant outline permission for two dwellings on
    the appeal site, which establishes the acceptability in principle of residential
    development of this quantum in this location.
28. Drawing these matters together, I find that the support afforded by Policy S5(1)(j)
    of the Framework, the housing benefits for which Policy HO7 directs substantial
    weight, and the extant planning permission outweigh the identified conflict with the
    development plan. Accordingly, these material considerations indicate that
    planning permission should be granted.
29. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be allowed.


M Aqbal
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008548


                                           Schedule of Conditions
    1) Details of the appearance, landscaping, layout and scale (hereinafter called “the
       reserved matters”) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
       planning authority before any development begins.

         Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
         planning authority not later than three years from the date of this permission.

         The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than two years from the
         date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans:
       Location & Existing Site Plan Drawing No. DR-A-050-001 Rev. B
       Proposed Site & Block Plan Drawing No. DR-A-050-002 Rev. A, and
       Existing & Proposed Roadside Elevations Drawing No. DR-A-050-003.

    3) Prior to the occupation of either dwelling, biodiversity enhancement measures
       shall be provided in accordance with a scheme that has first been submitted to
       and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved measures
       shall be implemented before occupation and thereafter retained and maintained.

    4) No dwelling shall be occupied until the access serving that dwelling has been
       constructed in accordance with drawing no. DR-A-050-002 Rev. A, and includes:
       a properly consolidated and surfaced access for the first 6 metres from the
       highway; a gradient no steeper than 1 in 10; and visibility splays of not less than
       43 metres in both directions.
       The approved accesses and visibility splays shall thereafter be retained and
       maintained.

    5) No dwelling shall be occupied until details of surface water drainage measures
       designed to prevent the discharge of surface water onto the public highway have
       been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
       approved measures shall be implemented before first occupation of the relevant
       dwelling and shall thereafter be retained and maintained.

    6) The Biodiversity Gain Plan required by Paragraphs 13 and 14 of Part 2 of
       Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 shall be broadly in
       accordance with the approved Biodiversity Gain Assessment prepared by South
       West Ecology (Ecology Report SWE Ref: SWE 2439 dated 6 January 2026).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
