Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026
by Andrew Phillips MPlan BA CertHE MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008668
Stables West of Green Street, Shenley Hertfordshire
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Sue Harrington against the decision of Hertsmere Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/1719/FUL.
•    The development proposed is redevelopment of the site for the erection of a bungalow.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for redevelopment of the
       site for the erection of a bungalow at Stables West of Green Street, Shenley
       Hertfordshire in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/1719/FUL,
       subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have used the site description from the decision notice, as this provides greater
       clarity of site location.
3.     Following the appellant submitting an Arboricultural Method Statement, the Council
       has stated that any impact on trees could be dealt with via a prior to
       commencement condition. On this basis, this reason for refusal is no longer a main
       issue.
4.     Different versions of the Block Plan have been provided, which have relatively
       minor changes. However, I will make my decision based on Rev B as this is the
       one that was determined by the Council.
5.     The Preliminary Ecology Appraisal that I have been provided is dated 31/01/2026
       in the document, though the Council refers to this as 9 February 2026. I presume
       this is the date that the Council received the document. I will go by the date on the
       document when referring to this document.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
         •     Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
               having regard to the National Planning Policy Framework 2024 (Framework)
               and relevant development plan policies.
         •     The effect of the proposal on the openness and purposes of the Green Belt.
         •     The effect of the proposal on the rural character and appearance of the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008668


Reasons
Is the proposal inappropriate development?
7.     I have noted the approved development under reference TP/2000/0451 that gave
       permission for the erection of stables and access. It also shows that the
       surrounding fields of where the stables are located and where the access track is
       located as part of the site. There are no details of when or if the siting of the mobile
       home adjacent to the stables gained permission.
8.     The proposal is seeking to demolish the existing stable building and replace it with
       a two bedroom single storey dwelling. The replacement of the stables with the
       dwelling is the primary element of the proposal. The proposal also seeks to
       increase the driveway size between the existing stables and Green Street and
       provide a new material of grasscrete or similar.
9.     The Council acknowledged in it’s Delegated Report that the existing stables would
       constitute as previously developed land, which the proposed dwelling would be
       situated on. The primary dispute between the two parties is whether the access
       track counts as previously developed land.
10. The appellant has provided details planning permission TP/2000/0451 for the
    erection of the stables. The Committee Report, provided by the appellant, for this
    previous permission details that the site consists of two adjoining fields, with one of
    these being access from Green Street. The proposed access was from Green
    Street and appears in approximately the same location as the existing site access.
    The application site plan shows the field adjacent to Green Street as being part of
    the proposal. An additional plan shows the division of proposed stables field, field
    adjacent to Green Street and a separate parcel for The White House.
11. The access between Green Street and the existing stables is not specifically
    defined, apart from access via specific gates. However, the field that the site
    crosses from the evidence before me is more likely to have been used for the
    keeping of horses for recreational purposes than it has for agriculture and would
    certainly have been crossed on a regular basis to provide access between the
    stables and the public highway. The hard landscaping of a new driveway is
    ancillary development to the creation of a new dwelling. On this basis, I conclude
    that the proposal would meet paragraph 154 (g) of the National Planning Policy
    Framework 2024 (Framework) in so far as it relates to previously developed land.
    On this basis, the proposal is not inappropriate development subject that it does
    ‘not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt’.
12. It is also noted that the access widening to the existing stables had a likely chance
    of being able to be secured via the definition of an engineering operation, which
    also constitutes as not inappropriate development if it preserves the openness of
    the Green Belt.
Openness and purposes of the Green Belt
13. Paragraph 142 of the Framework states ‘The fundamental aim of Green Belt policy
    is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open; the essential
    characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their permanence’.
14. The creation of additional hard landscaping over the current grass field to create an
    access would have some urbanising impact upon the rural character of the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008668


    The very low height of the built form of the proposed access and that the proposal
    would potentially lead to a noticeable increase in vehicles parking on the site would
    mean impact on the openness of the Green Belt is limited. Whilst it is noted that the
    impact might be greater during times when the grass is worn out or affected by
    draughts and winter it is still only likely to have a limited impact on the openness of
    the Green Belt. This in turn would cause limited harm the rural character of the area.
15. Given that the proposal would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the
    Green Belt the proposal complies with paragraph 154 and on this basis is not
    inappropriate development within the Green Belt. Therefore, there is no requirement
    to assess the proposal under paragraph 155 of the Framework that includes if the
    site is in a sustainable location.
16. The proposal therefore is not inappropriate development. On this basis, it complies
    with Policy CS13 of the Hertsmere Local Plan Core Strategy 2013 (Core Strategy)
    that seeks to prevent inappropriate development in the Green Belt as well as
    considering previously developed land in the Green Belt in line with the Framework.
    The proposal also complies with Policy SADM26 of the Hertsmere Local Plan Site
    Allocations and Development Management Policies Plan (Development
    Management Policies) details how development will be considered in the Green Belt
    including that replacement buildings should not be materially bigger than the one it
    replaced.
Additional harm
17. In relation to the harm to the impact on the rural and verdant surroundings of
    Green Street, I have concluded on this above in that it would cause limited harm
    upon the character and appearance of the local area.
18. With there being harm to the rural character of the area the proposal does not
    comply with Policy SP1 and CS22 of the Core Strategy that in total seek to
    enhance the character of an area and Policies SADM11 and SADM30 of the
    Development Management Policies that in total also seek to conserve or enhance
    the landscape. The proposal also does not comply with Policy SH1 of the Shenley
    Plan 2019-2036 Made May 2021 that seeks development to enhance the rural
    character
19. Whether the site is in a sustainable location has been raised by parties. However,
    this did not form a specific reason for refusal by the Council and as noted above
    there is not a requirement to consider the proposal under paragraph 155 of the
    Framework. In addition, the use of the site already requires people accessing the
    site on a regular basis to look after horses. I therefore do not find any additional
    harm that would materially affect my decision in this specific appeal.
Planning Balance
20. Whilst I have concluded that the proposal is not inappropriate development, other
    harm has been identified.
21. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires
    planning applications to be determined in accordance with the development plan,
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
22. The Council accepts that they cannot demonstrate a deliverable five year supply of
    housing land as required by Paragraph 78 of the Framework. Consequently,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008668


       paragraph 11 d) of the Framework, which is a material consideration of significant
       weight, is engaged. It states that planning permission should be granted unless
       any adverse impacts of doing so would significantly and demonstrably outweigh
       the benefits when assessed against the policies of the Framework taken as a
       whole, having particular regard to key policies for directing development to
       sustainable locations, making effective use of land, securing well-designed places
       and providing affordable homes, individually or in combination.
23. The Framework does not change the statutory status of the development plan as
    the starting point for decision making. The proposal is not in accordance with the
    aforementioned policies of the Local Plan, with the harm to the character and
    appearance of the local area. For this reason, the proposal conflicts with the
    development plan as a whole and should be refused unless other material
    considerations indicate otherwise.
24. The Framework promotes residential development where it will enhance or
    maintain the vitality of rural communities and acknowledges that this might be in
    nearby settlements. The benefit of the single dwelling in supporting services within
    nearby settlements is limited. There is a likely limited economic benefit during the
    construction phase and long-term from the additional potential workforce.
25. Given the limited harm to the rural appearance of the area and that there is a
    significant lack in the five year supply of housing land, the benefits clearly
    outweigh the harm in this case.
Conditions
26. The Council has provided a list of suggested conditions and confirms that all
    suggested pre-commencement conditions have been agreed by the appellant.
27. The commencement development condition is required to ensure the development
    is started within a reasonable timeframe.
28. The Council whilst suggesting a compliance with approved plans condition, did not
    provide the list of plans. I have therefore taken the most up to date plans provided
    to me, apart from the Block Plan as detailed in preliminary matters.
29. The suggested condition to ensure unexpected contamination is reported is a
    necessary condition to ensure long term public health is protected.
30. A materials condition is necessary to ensure the proposal meets the definition of a
    high quality development. However, this can be a prior to above ground works
    condition and on this basis I will amend the suggested wording.
31. The suggested condition by the Council to ensure the proposal meets Part M, M4
    (2), Category 2: Accessible and Adaptable Dwellings of the Building Regulations
    2013 has not been explained why this condition is necessary. On this basis, I will
    not be adding it.
32. A condition to secure suitable cycle storage is necessary to encourage some trips
    to be taken by more sustainable means. I will update the suggested condition by
    the Council to better ensure details are provided and complied with.
33. A condition to ensure long term sustainability of the site is considered reasonable
    and therefore will be added.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008668


34. The conditions on biodiversity as suggested by the Council will be duly added to
    ensure ecological protection and benefits from the proposal.
35.     The Council is seeking to ensure the appellant ensures protection of Great
       Crested Newts. However, the Council is not seeking to agree the details and uses
       the word ‘should’ several times. Given the Council is leaving this to the discretion
       of the developer and that there are separate conditions to protect biodiversity. This
       condition is not necessary or enforceable.
36. From the evidence before me, the appellant has provided an adequate
    Arboricultural Method Statement that the Council seemed to be supportive of. On
    this basis, I will add this document to the approved plan list, will add a separate
    condition to ensure compliance and will also add a landscaping scheme to ensure
    a detailed landscaping drawing is brought forward.
37. I have noted the concerns by a nearby resident regarding foul water
    drainage/treatment. It is also noted on the appellant’s application form that
    appellant does not know how foul sewerage will be dealt with. A condition will be
    placed to ensure that details of this are provided at a suitable stage and
    implemented before first occupation. It is expected that priority is given to ensure
    that sewerage is properly dealt with and treated to prevent water and/or ground
    pollution.
Conclusion
38. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.



Andrew Phillips
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008668


Schedule 1 – Conditions


     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:6270-OS1, Block Plan Revision B, 6270-P01
              and Arboricultural Method Statement April 2026.
     3)       In the event contamination is found at any time when carrying out the
              approved development, it must be reported in writing immediately to the
              Local Planning Authority. An investigation and risk assessment must be
              undertaken in accordance with details to be agreed in writing with the Local
              Planning Authority. Where remediation is necessary, a remediation scheme
              must be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
              Following completion of measures identified in the approved remediation
              scheme a verification report shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority
     4)       Prior to above ground works, samples of all external facing materials shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
              development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
     5)       The development shall not be occupied until facilities for the secure storage
              of cycles have been provided in accordance with details to be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and they shall be
              retained in perpetuity.
     6)       No development above damp proof course shall take place until a Climate
              Change and Sustainability Statement has been submitted to, and approved
              in writing by, the Local Planning Authority. As a minimum the statement shall
              include the following information:
                   •    How the scheme has been designed taking into account the generic
                        principles of Policies CS16 and CS17 (eliminate, reduce, substitute
                        and offset) taking a structured approach seeking to reduce carbon
                        emissions;
                   •    How materials will be selected having regards to carbon reduction
                        objectives;
                   •    Any other relevant information which has been taken into account to
                        minimise carbon emissions resulting from the scheme, such as the
                        principles of fabric first, energy efficiencies, emitted or embodied
                        carbon.
                   •    Measures taken to reduce water usage during occupation of the
                        development.
              The sustainability measures set out within the statement shall thereafter be
              implemented in full prior to the first occupation of the dwelling.
     7)       The development shall be constructed in accordance with the submitted and
              approved BNG Metrics calculation and the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal
              (dated 31/01/2026).



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     6
Appeal Decision 6008668


     8)       Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved ecological
              enhancement measures identified within Section 4 of the Preliminary
              Ecological Appraisal dated 31/01/2026, an Ecological Enhancement Plan
              (EEP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority.
              The EEP shall include:
              a) The precise location of each ecological enhancement measure identified
              within Section 4 of the approved ecological report, shown on a scaled plan;
              b) Full details and specifications of each enhancement measure, including
              dimensions, design, materials and installation methods where relevant;
              c) A timetable for implementation;
              d) Details of any habitat creation, landscaping and planting proposals,
              including species mixes and planting specifications;
              e) Details of the future management and maintenance of the enhancement
              measures for a minimum period of five years.
              The ecological enhancement measures shall thereafter be implemented and
              maintained in full accordance with the approved Ecological Enhancement
              Plan and retained for the lifetime of the development.
     9)       No development above ground level shall commence until there shall have
              been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority a
              scheme of landscaping. All planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the
              approved details of landscaping shall be carried out in the first planting and
              seeding seasons following the occupation of the buildings or the completion
              of the development, whichever is the sooner; and any trees or plants which
              within a period of 5 years from the completion of the development die, are
              removed or become seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the
              next planting season with others of similar size and species.
     10)      Prior to any demolition or construction works the tree protection details
              detailed in the Arboticiltural Method Statement April 2026 shall be put in
              place and maintained during all demolition and construction works.
     11)      No development above ground level shall commence until details of a
              scheme for the disposal of foul and surface water has been submitted to and
              agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The scheme shall be
              implemented in accordance with the approved details prior to the first
              occupation of the development and retained in perpetuity.




End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
