Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026
by Edward Dade BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29th December 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008791
Land west of Old Hall, Watton Road, Colney NR4 7TX
      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
      The appeal is made by Nigel & Julija Willgrass against the decision of South Norfolk District Council.
      The application Ref is 2026/0257.
      The development proposed is erection of 1no. self-build dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       On 17 August 2026, government issued a new National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework), replacing the previous Framework published in
         December 2024. During the appeal, the parties were invited to comment on the
         implications of the new Framework for the proposal.
3.       As required by regulation 63(3) of the Habitats Regulations 2017 (as amended),
         the statutory nature conservation body, Natural England, were consulted and I
         have regard to their representations. The parties were invited to comment on
         Natural England’s advice.
4.       In my decision I have had regard to the Council’s letter which sets out its response
         to both the new Framework and Natural England’s advice1. No response was
         received from the appellant.
5.       A draft deed of unilateral undertaking pursuant to section 106 of the Town and
         Country Planning Act 1990 as amended (hereafter, “draft UU”) has been provided.
         In my decision, I have had regard to the planning obligations on the assumption
         that the draft UU could be finalised were I minded to grant planning permission.
         However, since I am dismissing the appeal, it would be unreasonably onerous to
         seek the completion of the draft UU.
Main Issues
6.       The main issues in this appeal are:
            The effect of the proposed development on the integrity of European sites; and
            Whether the proposed development would be in a suitable location, having
             regard to the local development strategy.

1
    Received by email on 11 September 2026

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008791


Reasons
Integrity of European sites
       Nutrient enrichment
7.    The site is within the catchment of The Broads Special Area of Conservation
      (SAC) and Ramsar site and is therefore functionally related to this habitat. The
      SAC is a European Designated Site afforded protection under the Conservation of
      Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 as amended (the Habitats Regulations).
8.    The conservation objectives of The Broads SAC are to ensure that the integrity of
      the site is maintained or restored as appropriate and ensure that the site
      contributes to achieving the favourable conservation status of its qualifying
      features, which include hard oligo-mesotrophic waters; natural eutrophic lakes;
      Molinia meadows on calcareous, peat or clay-silt soil; transition mires and quaking
      bogs; calcareous fens; alkaline fens; alluvial woods; and populations of
      Desmoulin's whorl snail; otter; fen orchid; and little ram's-horn whirlpool snail.
9.    Natural England advise the SAC is vulnerable to nutrient impacts. Policy 3 of the
      Greater Norwich Local Plan 2024 (GNLP) seeks to ensure development has no
      negative impact on water quality through nutrient enrichment of internationally
      protected habitat sites. It requires relevant developments only be granted planning
      permission where there is certainty about the levels of nutrients which will be
      generated and where adequate mitigation would be provided so that the
      development will be nutrient neutral. This includes residential development that
      increases the level of overnight stays within the catchment of The Broads SAC.
10. The development would involve the provision of additional overnight residential
    accommodation within the SAC’s catchment. Therefore, without mitigation, the
    development would have likely significant effects on the integrity of The Broads
    SAC through additional nutrient loading.
11. The appeal proposal includes details from the Environment Agency concerning the
    existing permit for the operation and siting of the on-site septic tank which serves
    adjoining dwelling, The Old Hall. The Nutrient Neutrality Assessment and
    Mitigation Strategy, Canham Consulting March 2026, (NNAMS) identifies
    mitigation through the upgrade of the septic tank to a more efficient private
    treatment package plant (PTP). The Council’s nutrient neutrality team verified the
    baseline nutrient calculations and mitigation, raising no objection. Natural England
    confirm this approach is an applicable type of mitigation to achieve a nutrient
    neutral development.
12. However, Natural England advise the proposed mitigation must be appropriately
    secured and be capable of delivering nutrient neutrality for the lifetime of the
    development. The NNAMS suggests a s106 agreement would not be required in
    this instance since provision of the PTP would not utilise third-party land and the
    same party would perform both developer and donor property roles. However, the
    NNAMS indicates the PTP would be managed by each individual landowner by
    way of third-party agreements with a specialist. No such agreements have been
    supplied to demonstrate this management has been secured.
13. Whilst the NNAMS asserts the provision and maintenance of the PTP could be
    secured through a planning condition, no draft condition has been submitted for


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008791


       my consideration. As set out by the NNAMS, the PTP would require de-sludging at
       least every two years by an appropriately registered waste carrier, alongside
       regular inspections of the PTP’s condition by a competent person to ensure it is
       functioning appropriately. It is unclear how a planning condition would enable
       these procedures for management and maintenance of the PTP to be enforced
       over the lifetime of the development.
14. Consequently, the proposal fails to demonstrate that nutrient neutrality would be
    secured and maintained over the lifetime of the development.
       Recreational disturbance
15. The development falls within the ‘Zone of Influence’ (ZOI) for multiple European
    designated sites scoped into the Norfolk Green Infrastructure and Recreational
    disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy (‘GIRAMS’), which include The
    Wash Special Protection Area (SPA), The Wash and North Norfolk Coast SAC,
    The Wash Ramsar, North Norfolk Coast SAC, North Norfolk Coast SPA, North
    Norfolk Coast Ramsar, Norfolk Valley Fens SAC, Winterton-Horsey Dunes SAC,
    Great Yarmouth North Denes SPA, Broadland SPA, Broadland Ramsar, Breydon
    Water SPA, and The Broads SAC.
16. The conservation objective of these SACs is to ensure that the integrity of the sites
    is maintained or restored as appropriate, and ensure the sites contribute to
    achieving the favourable conservation status of their qualifying features. The
    conservation objective of the SPAs is to ensure that the integrity of the sites is
    maintained or restored and ensure the sites contribute to achieving the aims of the
    Wild Birds Directive.
17. The GIRAMS advises that the uplift in population associated with increased
    housing growth within the ZOI places additional recreational pressure on its
    constituent European sites. The proposed development would provide additional
    housing development within the ZOI and therefore, without mitigation, would have
    likely significant effects on the integrity of the constituent European sites.
18. The draft UU contains a planning obligation which, when finalised, would secure a
    financial contribution toward the mitigation measures identified by the GIRAMS.
    The GIRAMS represents a strategic approach to mitigation by several councils
    across the wider area and is endorsed by Natural England. Therefore, I have no
    reason to doubt the efficacy of its mitigation measures.
19. Securing mitigation through a UU can be problematic as there is no obligation on
    the Council to spend the money as envisaged and in a particular timescale.
    However, the evidence before me indicates that as a responsible public body it will
    transfer the funds to the organisation responsible for administrating the mitigation
    strategy. The obligation would therefore be necessary to mitigate the recreational
    disturbance associated with the proposed development.
       European sites - conclusions
20. Through providing additional permanent residential accommodation, the proposed
    development would have likely significant effects on the integrity of European sites
    in respect of additional nutrient loading and increased recreational pressure.
21. The draft UU contains a planning obligation which would be necessary to mitigate
    the recreational pressure associated with the proposed development. Subject to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008791


         completion of the UU, I am satisfied the proposal would not harm the integrity of
         European sites through recreational pressure.
22. However, in the absence of an enforceable mechanism to secure the long-term
    maintenance and management of the proposed PTP, I cannot be certain that the
    development would be nutrient neutral over its lifetime. The proposal therefore fails
    to demonstrate beyond reasonable scientific doubt that the development would
    avoid adverse effects of nutrient enrichment on the integrity of The Broads SAC
    and Ramsar, either alone or in combination with other development.
23. I am required to consider whether there are any imperative reasons of overriding
    public interest. Through the provision of one dwelling intended for occupation as a
    self-build unit, the proposal would contribute positively to the supply of housing.
    However, whilst beneficial, this would not amount to an overriding public interest
    for the purposes of the Habitats Regulations. Consequently, I must conclude the
    proposed development would result in unjustified harm to the integrity of The
    Broads SAC and Ramsar site.
24. The proposal would conflict with GNLP Policy 3, which protects water quality from
    nutrient enrichment, and Policy DM4.4 of the Development Management Policies
    Document 2015 (DMPD) which seeks to protect highest status natural
    environmental assets from any significant harmful impact arising from new
    development, requiring positive improvement of these natural environmental
    assets where opportunities arise. The Habitats Regulations indicate planning
    permission must not be granted and therefore harm associated with the proposal’s
    conflict with GNLP Policy 3 and DMPD Policy DM4.4 is of a very high order.
Whether in a suitable location
25. The front of the appeal site comprises a group of existing single-storey dwellings,
    Old Hall Mews, and planning permission has been granted for a garage building2.
    The rear portion of the site includes a tennis court, swimming pool, outbuildings
    and landscaped garden associated with The Old Hall, a large two-storey dwelling
    with a 1.5 storey detached garage. There are other dwellings along this northern
    side of Watton Road, and to the south there is substantial built development within
    the Norwich Research Park. Therefore, the site and its immediate surroundings
    are characterised by existing residential and employment development.
26. Beyond the rear of the site is the River Yare, Bowthorpe Southern Park, and open
    meadow land. Therefore, the site is at the periphery of the built area and has a
    physical and visual relationship to land with an open, countryside character.
27. The site is close to the development boundary for Colney, separated only by
    Watton Road’s carriageway. The development boundary encompasses Norwich
    Research Park and undeveloped land to the west of Hethersett Lane identified for
    future development phases. A short distance to the east of the site, the
    development boundary includes dwellings and other uses on the northern side of
    Watton Road. Nonetheless, the site lies outside Colney’s development boundary
    and is in the countryside for planning purposes.




2
    LPA ref: 2024/2674


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008791


28. DMPD Policy DM1.3 seeks the sustainable location of new development,
    supporting proposals for development outside of defined development boundaries
    only where supported by specific policies3 or where overriding economic, social
    and environmental benefits are demonstrated4.
29. Provided it does not result in incremental sprawl and respects the form and
    character of the settlement, GNLP Policy 7.5(1) enables small-scale residential
    development of up to three dwellings for self-build and custom build homes for
    people who meet the eligibility criteria for Part 1 of the district’s self-build register
    on sites that are within or adjacent to settlements with a defined settlement
    boundary. As indicated by the development description, the proposal would seek
    to provide one dwelling, intended for occupation as a self-build dwelling by the
    appellant who is enrolled on the Council’s self-build register.
30. The appellant’s Self/Custom Build Statement asserts the development would
    comply with the statutory definition of self-build and custom housebuilding.
    However, specifying this development type in the development description and a
    supporting statement does not provide adequate certainty the dwelling would be
    constructed and maintained as a self-build dwelling. A planning obligation is likely
    to be the most appropriate method of securing development of a self-build
    dwelling. However, no such formal mechanism has been provided. Consequently, I
    have little certainty the proposed dwelling would comply with the definition at
    section 1 of the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 so as to positively
    demonstrate compliance with the requirements of GNLP Policy 7.5.
31. Policy 2 of the Greater Norwich Local Plan 2024 (GNLP) seeks to ensure safe and
    convenient access for all, including by non-car modes, to local services and
    facilities and encourage walking, cycling and public transport. Likewise, DMPD
    Policy DM3.10(1) requires development support sustainable transport and
    development objectives, utilise all opportunities to integrate with local sustainable
    transport networks, be designed to reduce the need to travel and to maximise the
    use of sustainable forms of transport appropriate to the location.
32. The site has an existing vehicular access with a traffic light-controlled junction
    which adjoins the B1108 / Watton Road, a key route between Norwich and the A47
    Southern Bypass. The road is subject to a 40mph speed limit and has pedestrian
    footways, street lighting, and bus stops with frequent bus services. There is a
    signal-controlled crossings for pedestrians and cyclists between the site and
    Norwich Research Park, where public cycle hire facilities are located. Therefore,
    the site is served by pedestrian and cycle infrastructure and public transport.
33. The appellant has provided details of a range of services and facilities in proximity
    of the appeal site. Notably, the site is close to Norwich Research Park, Norfolk and
    Norwich University Hospital, and the University of East Anglia. As major locations
    for employment, health services and education, these institutions are significant
    trip generators. However, other day-to-day facilities, such as food shops and
    primary education, are located beyond a convenient walking distance from the site.
34. In a previous appeal decision for a similar proposal for a single dwelling at the site,
    the Inspector noted there are very few facilities in Colney and, whilst connectivity
    by foot and cycle to the research park, hospital, and facilities within the western

3
    DMPD Policy DM1.3(2)(c)
4
    DMPD Policy DM1.3(2)(d)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008791


         edge of Norwich and university campus, is of reasonable quality it would generally
         involve appreciable distances unlikely to deter regular use of the private car5.
         Furthermore, the Inspector considered nearby bus stops to be rudimentary and
         unlikely to be an attractive alternative to the car, concluding the appeal location is
         neither very sustainable or so well-connected to facilities so as to present
         overriding social or environmental benefits in an otherwise countryside location.
35. A further appeal decision on the site identified a degree of consistency with GNLP
    Policy 2, since the site is relatively close to some employment, services, and bus
    stops. However, the Inspector concluded there would be limited benefits
    associated with this location in terms of access to services and public transport6.
36. The appellant asserts future development at the research park will enhance the
    site’s accessibility. However, I have limited details of the delivery of such
    infrastructure and facilities and have no compelling evidence the site’s access to
    day-to-day services and facilities would materially and significantly change.
37. In the absence of a mechanism to secure the provision of self-build housing, the
    proposal fails to demonstrate it would comply with GNLP Policy 7.5. The site would
    offer limited opportunities for travel via non-car modes, thereby making only a
    small positive contribution to the objectives to promote sustainable transport use at
    GNLP Policy 2 and DMPD Policy 3.10 which would not amount to an overriding
    economic, social and environmental benefit and would not justify development
    outside the settlement boundary for the purposes of DMPD Policy DM1.3.
    Therefore, there are no development plan policies which positively favour a
    development of the type proposed in this location.
Other Matters
38. Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires I have special regard to the desirability of preserving listed buildings, their
    setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest.
39. The site is adjacent to The Old Hall, a substantial, two storey, brick-built Grade II
    listed building which dates from the 17th century with 19th century additions and
    has associated single-storey converted outbuildings. The area is characterised by
    historic buildings of traditional design within spacious settings, including grade II
    “The Old Rectory”, an early-18th century building with Dutch gables, to the east of
    The Old Hall, and non-designated heritage asset “Hall Farm” built in flintwork and
    brick with agricultural buildings to the west. The historic interest of these buildings
    is derived from their age, vernacular architecture and materials.
40. The design of the proposed dwelling would be akin to an agricultural building. It
    would be subservient in scale relative to The Old Hall and would be of limited
    visual prominence from public vantage points, maintaining physical and visual
    separation from the host building. The design would be in keeping with the
    character of surrounding development, and I am satisfied the development would
    not harm the setting of The Old Hall or other heritage assets. Subject to a pre-
    commencement condition requiring archaeological works, the Council’s Historic
    Environment Service indicate it raises no objection to the proposal. Consequently,
    I am satisfied the proposal would preserve the listed buildings and their settings.

5
    Appeal decision ref: APP/L2630/W/20/3258218
6
    Appeal decision ref: APP/L2630/W/23/3318141


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          6
Appeal Decision 6008791


         Presumption in favour of sustainable development
41. The proposal would contribute an additional dwelling to the area’s housing stock,
    and Framework Policy HO7 indicates substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community.
42. In addition, there would be small environmental benefits through efficient use of
    land, new and retained planting to provide ecological benefit, and construction to
    contemporary standards with broadband and electric vehicle charging
    technologies. Occupation would provide modest social and economic benefits
    through additional expenditure and footfall to sustain local services and facilities.
43. The site is outside Colney’s development boundary, and the Council cannot
    demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites. Framework Policy
    S5(1) identifies forms of development which should be approved, including
    ‘development which would address an evidenced unmet need’7, unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
44. Notably, Framework Policy N6(1) seeks to conserve habitats sites. The
    appropriate assessment does not conclude that the proposal will not adversely
    affect the integrity of The Broads SAC, the proposal would not comply with the
    derogation tests, and there is no Environmental Delivery Plan in force in the area.
    Therefore, Policy N6(1) indicates the proposal should be refused. Consequently,
    the scheme’s benefits would be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
Conclusion
45. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are
    no other considerations which outweigh this finding. Therefore, for the reasons
    given the appeal should be dismissed.



Edward Dade
INSPECTOR




7
    Policy S5(1)(j) of the National Planning Policy Framework


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   7
