Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by D Ellis MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008167
Land To The Rear Of Dovedale, Ware SG12 0XL
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr R Hormozi against the decision of East Hertfordshire District Council.
•      The application Ref is 3/25/1159/FUL.
•      The development proposed is erection of four, two-storey houses, together with the creation of new
       vehicular and pedestrian access way and 10 car parking spaces.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
         August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
         2024. This latest version of the Framework has introduced plan-making and
         national decision-making policies and is effect from the day of publication. The
         appellant and the Council have had the opportunity to comment on the new
         Framework and I have had regard to their submissions in this appeal.
3.       The appeal proposal includes a terrace of three dwellings and one detached
         dwelling. The terrace has previously been granted planning permission1 and that
         scheme had been largely implemented at the time of my site visit. The appeal
         scheme seeks permission for the additional detached dwelling and would make
         minor alterations to the front gardens of the terraced properties. It is the additional
         detached dwelling that the Council objects to and forms the reason for refusal. I
         have therefore proceeded on this basis.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is the effect of the proposed detached dwelling on character and
         appearance of the area.
Reasons
5.       The appeal site is an area of land to the rear of 14-30 Dovedale and the dwellings
         in The Larches, with trees and a footpath immediately to the west of the site. The
         site is narrow at the access from Dovedale and widens towards the rear of the site.
         The previously approved terrace of three dwellings has been constructed near the
         rear of the site. In front of the terrace lies the car parking spaces and an open
         area, which includes the location of the proposed detached dwelling, which I

1
    Planning application refs. 3/22/1575/FUL and 3/25/0054/VAR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008167


       understand would be used for a wildflower meadow as part of the previous
       permission. The car parking and landscaping area currently provides a pleasing
       sense of spaciousness in an otherwise fairly densely built-up area. For these
       reasons, the appeal site and the terrace contribute positively to the character and
       appearance of the area.
6.     Although the proposed front boundary hedges and fences would be low, the
       proposed dwelling would have a substantially smaller front garden than the
       existing terraced dwellings. Furthermore, it would be apparent that the dwelling
       would be positioned very close to both side boundaries of the plot and would
       significantly reduce the open space on the western side of the site. Even if the
       density of development is acceptable, the proposed dwelling would consequently
       appear an awkward and incongruous presence in its plot to the detriment of the
       spacious feel of the appeal site.
7.     Although the approved terrace is also close to the western boundary, the appeal
       site is noticeably wider where the terrace is located and, furthermore, the gap
       between the side of the eastern terraced dwelling and the boundary of its plot
       ensures that the terrace does not sit awkwardly within the site.
8.     Furthermore, Dovedale consists of semi-detached and terraced dwellings with no
       detached dwellings in the street. The proposed dwelling would be in the vicinity of
       the detached dwellings in The Larches to the east of the site, however the
       dwellings in the Larches form a deliberately designed group. The dwellings in
       Amberley Green, including 9 and 27 Amberley Green, are similarly designed as
       part of a coherent group of detached dwellings. By contrast, the proposed dwelling
       would be situated in isolation from other detached dwellings and thus would sit
       uncomfortably with the distinct groups of dwellings in the area.
9.     In this way I agree with the Council that the position of the single dwelling in this
       location will look awkward and detract from the established character of the area.
       In addition, the loss of the section of open space where the dwelling is proposed
       would unacceptably erode the importance and contribution of this space as a
       whole, to the detriment of the character and appearance of the area.
10. For these reasons, the proposed detached dwelling would cause harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. The proposal would therefore conflict with
    EHDP policy DES4 of the East Herts District Plan October 2018 (EHDP), insofar
    as it requires development to reflect and promote local distinctiveness and to
    respect or improve upon the character of the site and surrounding area.
11. I note the age of the EHDP, however policy DES4 largely aligns with the national
    decision-making policies in section 14 of the Framework, which seeks to achieve
    well-designed places. I therefore attribute great weight to EHDP policy DES4 and
    the conflict with it.
Other Matters
12. The appellant has highlighted the Council’s pre-application response. I have noted
    this correspondence and that the advice made without prejudice to any future
    planning application, which would be determined on its own merits. I have also
    determined the appeal on its merits in the same way following consideration of all
    the information and my assessment at the site visit.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008167


13. My attention has been drawn to previous appeals at 2 Astonbury Lane, Aston2,
    Captains Wood Road, Great Totham3, and 10 Swindon Close, Seven Kings4. All
    three appeals were assessed against the provisions of the superseded
    Framework. Notwithstanding this, the Aston appeal sets out the housing land
    supply position of the Council, which is not disputed by the Council, while the
    Great Totham and Seven Kings appeals have regard to the weight ascribed to the
    provision of new housing. I shall turn to these matters in the planning balance
    below.
14. The Aston appeal also discusses the progress of the emerging local plan at the
    time of that appeal, however neither the Decision Notice nor the officer’s report in
    this appeal refer to the emerging local plan.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
15. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. For
    development within settlements, such as the appeal proposal, Policy S4 of the
    Framework states that development proposals should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
16. Paragraph 2 of Policy S4 lists circumstances where the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse impacts.
    Criterion C of paragraph 2 is where a proposal would fail to comply with one of the
    national decision-making policies which state that development proposals should
    be refused in specific circumstances.
17. The appellant asserts that the Council currently has a housing land supply of
    between 3.4-3.7 years, and the Council does not dispute this. There is, therefore,
    a significant shortfall in housing land. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that
    substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will
    contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community.
18. Although the scheme is for four dwellings, three are already being provided as part
    of the previous approval. The provision of one additional unit as part of this
    scheme would only make a small but worthwhile difference to the existing supply.
    Economic advantages would also arise from the construction and occupation of a
    new house, although some of these would be temporary and limited by the scale
    of the scheme. The additional dwelling would be located in a fairly sustainable
    location where future occupants would have access to services and facilities
    without the need to rely on the private vehicle. A biodiversity net gain could be
    secured as part of the scheme. Taken together and having regard to the lack of a
    five-year housing land supply, these benefits, because an additional dwelling
    would result, should be attributed substantial weight.
19. However, paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the Framework requires development
    proposals to respond to their context, including the character and features of their
    site and its setting, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. The
    paragraph further states that this should not preclude change where appropriate,
2
  Appeal ref. APP/J1915/W/25/3367102
3
  Appeal ref. APP/X1545/W/24/3348669
4
  Appeal ref. APP/W5780/W/21/3266612


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008167


       especially where an increased density is justified in accordance with Policies L2
       (Making effective use of land) and L3 (Achieving appropriate densities).
20. For the reasons given above the proposal, through its awkward appearance and
    the reduction in the spaciousness of the site, would fail to respond to its context,
    character and features of the site and its setting. As such, the proposal would not
    integrate with or enhance its surroundings. I am therefore not satisfied that the
    additional unit would constitute an effective use of land, even if the land is
    underutilised, or that the increase in density would be justified. This adverse effect
    is a matter of considerable importance to be taken into account in the planning
    balance.
21. The proposal would therefore fail to comply with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the
    Framework. Paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 states that development proposals should
    be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy
    DP3. In the circumstances of this case, I conclude that the benefits of the scheme
    would not outweigh the harm that would be caused to the character and
    appearance of the area, in particular because there is no clear justification for the
    conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3. Consequently, I am satisfied when having
    regard to paragraph 2.c. of Policy S4 of the Framework that the benefits of the
    scheme would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
22. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan
    and that material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided
    other than in accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

D Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
