Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 19 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008960
2 Leslie Road, Handsworth, Birmingham B20 3NU
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Donald Johnson against the decision of Birmingham City Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/07056/PA.
•   The advertisement proposed is a LED Advertising Board.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters and Main Issue
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issue in
   the appeal or the procedure and regulations under which it falls to be determined.
   Since their cases would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without
   further consultation with the main parties.
4. The above mentioned regulations set out that powers thereunder shall be exercised
   in the interests of amenity and public safety, taking into account the provisions of
   the development plan so far as they are material. The Council has no objections to
   the scheme on public safety, and I have no reason to disagree. I have therefore
   focussed on the main issue, which is the effect of the proposal on amenity.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal site comprises a single-storey, flat-roofed commercial building
   positioned at the end of a predominantly residential street and adjacent to a small
   parade of shops. The wider area contains a mixture of residential, retail and
   commercial uses, including a larger shopping parade with flats above on the
   opposite side of the road. The proposed advertisement would be mounted on the
   roof of the building and, due to its position and orientation, would be highly visible
   when approaching from the east of Wellington Road, a classified highway subject
   to consistently high volumes of traffic.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008960


6. The proposal would extend almost the full width of the host building. Positioned
   above the roofline, it would introduce a substantial and prominent form of
   advertising at a height broadly equivalent to a first-floor elevation. While the area
   contains a range of commercial activity, advertisements are generally limited to
   fascia signage at ground-floor level and of appropriate scale. By reason of its size,
   height and siting, the proposal would introduce an unduly prominent and
   incongruous addition that would compete visually with the surrounding buildings,
   including nearby residential properties, to the detriment of the character and
   appearance of the area.
7. Whilst illumination levels have not been contested by the Council, the
   advertisement board would be internally illuminated and capable of attracting
   attention from a wider area. It would emphasise the prominence of an elevated
   advertising structure, increasing its visual presence within the street scene and
   exacerbating the harm identified above.
8. Consequently, the proposed advertisement would have a harmful effect on the
   amenity of the area. I have taken into account Policy PG3 of the Birmingham
   Development Plan, 2017 and Policy DM7 of the Development Management in
   Birmingham, Development Plan Document, 2021 which, amongst other things,
   seek to protect visual amenity and so are material in this case. Given I have
   concluded that the proposal would harm amenity, the proposal would not satisfy the
   aims of these policies.
Other Matter
9. I note the appellant’s frustration in relation to the processing of the planning
   application. However, this has little bearing on my decision which is based on the
   planning merits of the appeal proposals and the regulations under which the appeal
   is considered. Any further concerns in this regard should be directed to the Council.
Conclusion and Recommendation
10. For the reasons given above, the proposed advertisement would cause harm to the
    visual amenity of the area, contrary to the aforementioned regulations. I therefore
    recommend that the appeal is dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
11. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
