Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 June 2026
by C Evans MTCP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008176
Sycamore Farm, Well Bank Lane, Over Peover, Cheshire East WA16 8UN
 • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
   against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 • The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Dawson against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
 • The application Ref is 25/2744/FUL.
 • The development proposed is 1) Demolition of existing buildings and 2) Erection of a replacement
   house with associated works to include a comprehensive landscape scheme.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for 1) Demolition of
       existing buildings and 2) Erection of a replacement house with associated works to
       include a comprehensive landscape scheme at Sycamore Farm, Well Bank Lane,
       Over Peover, Cheshire East WA16 8UN in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref 25/2744/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2.     A revised site plan was submitted as part of the appeal, which includes additional
       structures within ownership of the appellant to correct an error to accord with
       evidence. The Council has had sight of this and has confirmed that it would not
       have changed the decision to refuse planning permission, as these structures had
       been considered in the assessment of the case. On this basis, no procedural
       unfairness will have occurred, and I have based my decision on the drawing
       referenced Location plan (drawing ref: M3684-PA-201-V4).
3.     Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
       appeal relates, a revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Both parties have had an
       opportunity to comment on the revised Framework.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
       •   Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt;
       •   Whether the proposal would be consistent with development plan policies
           regarding replacement buildings outside of settlement boundaries; and
       •   whether there are other material considerations that indicate a decision should
           be made other than in accordance with the development plan should any policy
           conflict be identified in respect of the other issues.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008176


Reasons
Inappropriate development
5.     The appeal site consists of a vacant dwelling, which has been boarded up, a
       greenhouse and a barn made of blockwork and metal sheeting. There are also
       wooden buildings, one of which is an old stable block. All are in a state of
       disrepair. These are all sited in close proximity to each other and appear as one
       group of buildings. Surrounding uses are agricultural fields. A Public Right of Way
       (PRoW) runs along the access track from Well Bank Lane and along one side of
       the site boundary.
6.     The appellant contends that the proposed meets the exception in Policy GB 7 (1)
       (e) of the Framework, redevelopment of previously developed land, which would
       not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt. Both parties appear
       to agree that the site represents previously developed land. The Council considers
       that due to the significant increase in floorspace, volume and ridge height
       compared to the existing situation, the proposal would cause substantial harm to
       the openness of the Green Belt.
7.     The appellant has drawn my attention to a previous appeal decision for a
       replacement dwelling on this site (Ref: APP/R0660/W/24/3348007). The Inspector
       concluded that, when considered as a whole, there would be a moderate loss of
       visual openness and a small increase in spatial openness when compared to the
       existing situation. Following this decision, the appellant has made changes to the
       proposed dwelling, including to reduce the size and height of the dwelling and to
       the overall design.
8.     The Council estimates that the proposed dwelling would have a ridge height of
       around 7.77 metres, compared to the existing dwelling at 5.86 metres. It would
       also have a significantly larger footprint at 441m² compared to the existing dwelling
       at 118m². The appellant did not contest these estimates. The proposed increased
       scale and height would have a greater visual impact on openness than that of the
       existing dwelling, including when considering the other existing structures.
9.     The proposed dwelling would be sited further from the PRoW than the existing
       dwelling. However, it would still be visible against the backdrop of mature trees
       from various viewpoints. The land where the existing dwelling is sited could be re-
       landscaped and include some screening for the proposed dwelling, which could be
       secured by a condition.
10. The outbuildings are agricultural in nature and therefore have a different impact on
    the character of the area and are screened to some extent by the vegetation.
    However, their scale and mass still have some impact on openness, particularly
    the barn as this is larger in scale. Their removal would be beneficial for spatial
    openness.
11. On the whole, the proposal would result in a moderate loss of visual openness. On
    this basis, I have found that the proposed development would result in moderate
    harm to the openness of the Green Belt. The proposal therefore meets the
    exception in Policy GB 7 (1) (e) of the Framework.
12. For the reasons highlighted above, I conclude that the proposed development
    would not be inappropriate in the Green Belt. It would not conflict with Cheshire


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008176


       East Local Plan Strategy 2010-2030 (adopted July 2017) (CELPS) Policy PG3
       insofar as the proposed development is not inappropriate development in the
       Green Belt.
Development plan policy
13. Cheshire East Local Plan Site Allocations and Development Policies Document
    (adopted December 2022) (SADPD) Policy RUR13 provides criteria for
    replacement buildings outside of settlement boundaries, including for assessing
    whether a proposal would be materially larger. Matters including height, bulk, form,
    siting, design, floorspace and footprint should be taken into account. The effect on
    the character and appearance of the area is also a consideration. The Council has
    not raised concerns in this regard and based on the information before me; I see
    no reason to take a different view.
14. The Council estimates that the proposed dwelling would have an increased
    floorspace of 199% and increased footprint of 274% compared to the existing
    dwelling. The maximum ridge height of the proposed dwelling would be 1.91m
    higher and the maximum eaves height 2.12m higher than the existing dwelling.
    The appellant has not disputed these figures. On this basis, the proposed dwelling
    would be considerably larger than the one it would replace.
15. To conclude, the proposed development would not be consistent with development
    plan policies regarding replacement buildings outside of settlement boundaries. It
    would conflict with SADPD Policy RUR13, which, amongst other things, requires
    replacement buildings to not be materially larger than the one they replace.
16. The proposed development would not conflict with CELPS policies SD1 and SD2,
    which, amongst other things, require development to be well-designed and
    contribute positively to an area’s character.
Other Material Considerations and Planning Balance
17. The proposed development would be contrary to development plan policy arising
    from the increased scale. However, no material harm to the character and
    appearance of the area has been identified by the Council, arising from the
    proposed increased scale. The development plan policy also does not reflect the
    revised wording of Policy GB 7 (1) (e) of the Framework, and as a result, the
    proposed dwelling would not be inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
    Given these matters, I have attached only very limited weight to the policy conflict.
18. A fallback scheme has been submitted by the appellant for extensions and
    alterations to the existing house, which could be undertaken through permitted
    development rights. A lawful certificate of development has been provided to
    demonstrate this.
19. Both parties are in agreement that this alternative scheme is a valid fallback
    position with a realistic prospect of being implemented. Based on the information
    before me, I have no reason to take a different view. The proposed dwelling would
    not occupy the same footprint as the existing dwelling. On this basis, it would be
    possible for both dwellings to occupy the site. This could be managed by a
    condition requiring demolition of all buildings on site following commencement of
    development of the approved scheme.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008176


20. If implemented, the fallback scheme would result in the existing dwelling becoming
    larger and bulkier due to the extensions. There would be no change to the height
    of the dwelling. The scheme also includes the addition of a detached garage and
    leisure annex. Other existing structures on the site would also be retained. With
    these included, the proposed development would have a 24% reduction in volume,
    11% reduction in floor area and 34% reduction in footprint than that of the fallback
    scheme.
21. Whilst the fallback scheme would include more single-storey structures, the
    combination of all of the existing structures and the fallback scheme covers a
    larger part of the site than that of the proposed dwelling. The curtilage of the
    existing dwelling could be returned to non-residential use through a planning
    condition requiring an approved landscape scheme to deliver this. The fallback
    scheme would, therefore, have a greater impact on visual openness than the
    proposed development, particularly when viewed from the PRoW. This attracts
    moderate weight in the planning balance.
22. I have already found above that the proposed development would improve spatial
    openness compared to the existing buildings and layout of the site. As the fallback
    scheme would retain these and add mass, it would not improve spatial openness.
    This is a different finding to the previous appeal on the site, however, the
    development proposed has been amended to be smaller in height and mass.
23. The appellant has submitted a Unilateral Undertaking (UU) to secure the proposed
    development as a self-build dwelling. I have not been provided with evidence
    regarding the demand or delivery of this type of housing. Nevertheless, the
    Framework supports this and so this attracts moderate weight in favour of the
    proposal. This UU is necessary to make the development acceptable in planning
    terms as it has not been demonstrated that the statutory biodiversity net gain
    requirements could be delivered. The UU would secure the dwelling as a self-build
    and so is exempt.
24. The proposed development would deliver various other benefits including
    improvements to the housing stock and strengthening ecological networks.
    However, these could also be delivered via the fallback scheme and so carry little
    weight.
25. A landscaping scheme has been submitted as part of the evidence by the
    appellant. It would soften the effect of the proposed development on the landscape
    and openness of the Green Belt. Although it would take some time to establish, it
    carries limited weight in the balance.
Conditions
26. Both main parties have provided a list of suggested conditions that they consider
    to be appropriate. Where the conditions sought to address the same matter, I have
    combined them. I have also amended wording to reflect advice in the Framework
    and Planning Practice Guidance and to improve precision and enforceability.
27. I have imposed a condition for the standard time limit for legislative reasons. For
    certainty, I have included a condition specifying the approved plans. Details of
    external materials are necessary to achieve a satisfactory appearance. Details of
    ground and finished floor levels are required to ensure that the proposal has an
    acceptable visual impact.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008176


28. Details of drainage proposals are needed to ensure that appropriate provision is
    put in place to serve the development. This is necessary as a pre-commencement
    condition to ensure that a satisfactory scheme is designed at the outset.
29. To protect and mitigate the loss of habitats and species and enhance biodiversity,
    conditions regarding a barn owl mitigation strategy, a bat licence, nesting bird
    survey, lighting strategy and biodiversity are required. The barn owl mitigation
    strategy condition is required as a pre-commencement to ensure necessary
    mitigation is installed at the appropriate time.
30. Conditions relating to tree protection during construction and landscaping are
    required for legislative reasons and in the interests of securing an appropriate
    appearance.
31. The proposed dwelling would be sited on a different part of the site to the existing
    dwelling. There are also existing buildings on the site. A condition is necessary to
    secure their demolition and restore the land, to avoid harm to the Green Belt.
32. The condition securing electric vehicle infrastructure is necessary to meet
    Cheshire East Council parking standards. A condition regarding contamination is
    required to ensure the development would not create undue risk.
33. I have imposed conditions removing specific permitted development rights to
    protect the openness of the Green Belt. This is supported by SADPD Policy
    RUR13 supporting text.
34. The Council has suggested a condition related to imported soils. However, in the
    absence of any substantive evidence that soils need to be imported, that any soil
    imported would be contrary to Developing Land Within Cheshire East Council: A
    Guide to Submitting Planning Applications: Land Contamination, or that the site is
    already contaminated, I do not find such a condition to be reasonable or necessary
    in this instance.
Conclusion
35. The proposed development would not be inappropriate in the Green Belt. There is
    a degree of conflict with SADPD Policy RUR13, however, it is inconsistent with the
    Framework and therefore, this conflict attracts very limited weight. The benefits of
    approving this proposal substantially outweigh any adverse effects.
36. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan but material
    considerations indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with it. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.



C Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008176


Schedule of conditions

1) The development hereby approved shall commence within three years of the date
   of this permission.
2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with drawing
   nos:
          •    M3684-PA-201-V4 Site Location Plan July 2025
          •    23128-P1001 Proposed Floor Plans May 2025
          •    23128-P2001 Proposed Elevations May 2025
          •    23128-P3001 Proposed Garage Pland & Elevations May 2025
          •    M3684-PA-203-V3 Site Landscape Layout 05.2025
          •    M3684-PA-204-V3 Wider Estate Landscape Layout 06.2025
3) The materials to be used shall be in strict accordance with those specified in the
   application unless different materials are first agreed in writing with the Local
   Planning Authority. Development shall be carried out in accordance with the
   approved details.
4) Prior to the commencement of development hereby approved, details of the
   existing ground levels, proposed ground levels and the level of the proposed floor
   slabs shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for approval in writing.
   Details which receive the written approval of the Local Planning Authority shall be
   implemented in full, unless alternative details are otherwise approved in writing by
   the Local Planning Authority.
5) Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved, an updated
   detailed surface water drainage scheme shall be submitted to and approved in
   writing by the Local Planning Authority. The updated surface water drainage
   scheme shall include:
         a) Provision of detailed design, including all proposed pipe diameters/gradients,
         proposed FFLs, provision of hydraulic modelling with 15-10080 minute Storm
         Durations and a 10% urban creep allowance for impermeable area;
         b) Implementation of SuDS as the primary method of the management of
         surface water;
         c) Provision of full management and maintenance schedule for the surface water
         drainage scheme to cover the lifetime of the development, including contact
         details of the responsible party.

     The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details. The
     surface water drainage scheme shall be managed and maintained thereafter in
     accordance with the approved details.

6) Prior to the commencement of the development hereby approved, including any
   works of demolition, a barn owl mitigation strategy, based on the measures set out
   in the Mitigation, Compensation, and Enhancement Measures section of the
   Updated Barn Owl Check (Gritstone Ecology, 2025), shall be submitted to and
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. This shall include a timescale
   for the implementation of the barn owl nesting provision, with at least one barn owl
   box installed 30 days or more prior to the commencement of development. The


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008176


     barn owl mitigation strategy shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
     details and shall be managed and maintained thereafter.
7) No development or works of site preparation shall commence until all trees that are
   to be retained within or adjacent to the site have been enclosed with temporary
   protective fencing in accordance with BS:5837:2012 “Trees in relation to design,
   demolition and construction - Recommendations”. The fencing shall be retained
   throughout the period of construction and no activity prohibited by BS: 5837:2012
   shall take place within such protective fencing during the construction period.
8) No development above ground level shall take place until a scheme for the
   restoration of the land, following the demolition of all existing buildings, has been
   submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The dwelling
   hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the existing buildings have been
   demolished and the land restored in accordance with the approved details.
9) No development above ground level shall take place until a strategy for the
   incorporation of features to enhance the biodiversity value of the proposed
   development has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
   Authority. The submitted strategy shall include proposals for the provision of
   features for nesting birds including house sparrow. Where bird boxes are proposed
   to be installed to any dwelling these should be installed prior to the first occupation
   of that dwelling. The strategy shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
   details and shall be managed and maintained thereafter.
10) Demolition works impacting the former farmhouse shall not take place until an
    appropriate bat licence has been obtained. Upon receipt of site registration from
    Natural England, works shall proceed strictly in accordance with the approved
    mitigation, which should be based on the proposed measures outlined in section 6
    and 7 of the Bat Presence - Absence Survey (Gritstone Ecology, 2025) and
    amended as necessary based on any correspondence with Natural England. Such
    approved mitigation will be implemented in full and maintained thereafter.
11) Prior to first occupation of the dwelling, the developer shall provide electric vehicle
    infrastructure to the following specification: A single Mode 3 compliant electric
    vehicle charging point for the property with off road parking. The charging point
    shall be independently wired to a 30A spur to enable minimum 7kW Fast charging
    or the best available given the electrical infrastructure. Should the infrastructure not
    be available, written confirmation of such from the electrical supplier shall be
    submitted to the Local Planning Authority prior to discharge. Where there is
    insufficient infrastructure, Mode 2 compliant charging may be deemed acceptable
    subject to the previous being submitted. The infrastructure shall be managed and
    be maintained thereafter.
12) Notwithstanding the details shown on M3684-PA-203-V3 Site Landscape Layout
    05.2025 and M3684-PA-204-V3 Wider Estate Landscape Layout 06.2025, prior to
    occupation of the development hereby approved, a scheme for the landscaping of
    the site shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
    Authority. The landscaping scheme shall include details of hard landscaping,
    planting plans, written specifications (including cultivation and other operations
    associated with tree, shrub, hedge or grass establishment), schedules of plants
    noting species, plant sizes, the proposed numbers and densities and an
    implementation programme.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008176


13) The approved landscaping scheme shall be completed in accordance with the
    following:
         a) All hard and soft landscaping works shall be completed in full accordance with
         the approved scheme, within the first planting season following completion of the
         development hereby approved, or in accordance with a programme agreed with
         the Local Planning Authority.
         b) All trees, shrubs and hedge plants supplied shall comply with the
         requirements of British Standard 3936, Specification for Nursery Stock. All pre -
         planting site preparation, planting and post -planting maintenance works shall be
         carried out in accordance with the requirements of British Standard 4428(1989)
         Code of Practice for General Landscape Operations (excluding hard surfaces).
         c) All new tree plantings shall be positioned in accordance with the requirements
         of Table A.1 of BS5837:2012 Trees in Relation to Design, Demolition and
         Construction: Recommendations.
         d) Any trees, shrubs or hedges planted in accordance with this condition which
         are removed, die, become severely damaged or become seriously diseased
         within five years of planting shall be replaced within the next planting season by
         trees, shrubs or hedging plants of similar size and species to those originally
         required to be planted.
14) Prior to the installation of lighting fixtures, a detailed lighting strategy shall be
    submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The strategy
    shall provide details of the chosen luminaires, their locations and any mitigating
    features such as dimmers, PIR sensors and timers. Dependent on the scale of
    proposed lighting, a lux contour plan may be required to demonstrate acceptable
    levels of lightspill to any sensitive ecological zones/features. Guidelines can be
    found in Guidance Note 08/23 - Bats and Artificial Lighting at Night (BCT and ILP,
    2023). The detailed lighting strategy shall be carried out in accordance with the
    approved details and shall be managed and maintained thereafter.
15) No stripping, demolition works or vegetation clearance shall take place between 1st
    March and 31st August inclusive, unless preceded by a nesting bird survey
    undertaken by a competent ecologist no more than 48 hours prior to clearance. If
    nesting birds are present, an appropriate exclusion zone will be implemented and
    monitored until the chicks have fledged. No works shall be undertaken within
    exclusion zones whilst nesting birds are present.
16) If, during the course of development, contamination not previously identified is
    found, no further works shall be undertaken in the affected area and confirmation of
    this shall be reported to the Local Planning Authority. Prior to any further works
    being carried out in the identified area, a further assessment shall be made and
    appropriate remediation implemented in accordance with a scheme submitted to
    and agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
17) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
    Permitted Development) Order 2015 (as amended) (or any order revoking or re-
    enacting that order), no development (as defined by Section 55 of the Town and
    Country Planning Act 1990) as may otherwise be permitted by virtue of Class(es) A
    - E of Part 1 Schedule 2 of the Order shall be undertaken.
18) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
    Permitted Development) Order 2015 (as amended) (or any Order revising revoking

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6008176


     and re-enacting that Order with or without modification), no new fences, gates,
     walls or other means of enclosure, other than those specifically identified on the
     approved plans, shall be erected without the prior written approval of the Local
     Planning Authority.

End of schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
