Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by H Smith BSc (Hons) MSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008318
Mollen Farm, Edgarley Road, Edgarley, Glastonbury, Somerset BA6 8LB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Hui Yang against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 2024/2311/FUL.
•    The development proposed is erection of class E commercial units comprising light industrial, offices,
     drink and food outlet and recreation.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of class E
       commercial units comprising light industrial, offices, drink and food outlet and
       recreation at Mollens Farm, Edgarley Road, Edgarley, Glastonbury, Somerset BA6
       8LB in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 2024/2311/FUL, subject
       to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     During the application stage the proposed scheme was revised and new plans
       were submitted. The Council consulted on the revised plans and made their
       decision. I have therefore determined my decision based on the revised plans.
3.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published in
       August 2026 after the Council made its decision. I have had regard to the revised
       Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would be in a suitable location;
           •    the effect of the proposal upon the character and appearance of the area,
                having particular regard to the effect upon the setting and significance of St
                Michaels Church Tower, Grade I listed, and the Glastonbury Tor Scheduled
                Ancient Monument.
Reasons
Suitability of Location
5.     The appeal site is a gently sloping grassy field that is partially enclosed with
       mature dense mixed hedgerow and trees on the site’s boundaries. It sits adjacent



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008318


       to the existing buildings at Mollen Farm and is near to the substantial campus of
       Millfield Junior School.
6.     Core Policy 1 (CP1) of the Mendip District Local Plan 2006-2029 Part 1: Strategy
       and Policies (adopted 2014) (Local Plan) states that development in the open
       countryside will be strictly controlled but may exceptionally be permitted in line with
       the provisions set out in Core Policy 4: Sustaining Rural Communities. Core Policy
       1 also states that any proposed development outside the development limits, will
       be strictly controlled and will only be permitted where it benefits economic activity
       or extends the range of facilities available to the local communities.
7.     Criteria 4 of Core Policy 4 (CP4) of the Local Plan makes clear that rural
       settlements and the wider rural area will be sustained by supporting proposals for
       development of the rural economy as set out in Core Policy 3, which, a) deliver
       modest clusters of flexible premises able to meet the needs of the rural economy
       in the Primary Villages identified in Core Policy 1, or b) enable the establishment,
       expansion and diversification of business in a manner and of a scale which is
       appropriate to the location and constraints upon it, or c) involve the conversion of
       existing buildings for an economic use as considered under Development Policy
       22.
8.     Core Policy 3 (CP3) of the Local Plan establishes that proposals for economic
       development will be supported where they accord with the Spatial Strategy defined
       in Core Policy 1 and, in rural areas, the principles set out in Core Policy 4.
9.     The proposal comprises two buildings containing a total of six units. One building
       would accommodate four units, while the other would contain two units. The two-
       unit building would include a food and drink outlet. The four-unit building would
       accommodate light industrial uses together with a fitness and recreation centre.
10. As such, the proposal would provide accommodation for a range of businesses, as
    well as a fitness and recreation centre and a food and drink facility. The proposal
    would therefore contribute to local employment opportunities, generate economic
    activity and investment, and broaden the range of services and facilities available
    to the local community. This would help to support the vitality and sustainability of
    the rural area.
11. The proposal would be located in a rural area outside the development boundary.
    However, it relates to a small-scale employment use that would contribute to
    supporting business growth in a rural location. Consequently, I am satisfied that it
    would make a positive contribution to the local economy. Accordingly, I find that
    the proposal accords with Policies CP3 and CP4 of the Local Plan, which seeks to
    support business development and growth in rural areas. It therefore results in no
    conflict with Policy CP1.
Character and Appearance, Heritage Assets
12. The appeal site is within the setting of the Glastonbury Tor and St Michael’s
    Church Tower. The site is also within the extents of a special landscape feature,
    designated as the special landscape Glastonbury Tor.
13. Glastonbury Tor is a site with multiple phases of occupation, adaptation and
    meaning to people from the past and the present. Evidence of fifth/sixth century
    activity at the summit of the tor has been uncovered during archaeological


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008318


       excavations. St Michael’s Church Tower sits on top of the tor and dates from
       around the late 13th century. It forms a dominant feature of the Somerset
       landscape.
14. St Michaels Church Tower is a Grade I listed building, and the Tower, monastic
    remains, and other settlement remains on Glastonbury Tor are a Scheduled
    Ancient Monument (SAM). Special regard has been paid to the national
    importance of the SAM, and also as required by Section 66(1) of the Planning
    (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to the desirability of
    preserving a listed building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which it possesses.
15. The significance and special interest of these heritage assets is derived, in part,
    from their age, relevance to the historic evolution and rural history of Glastonbury,
    and their dominant appearance in the Somerset landscape. This significance and
    special interest are further underpinned by the spaciousness and openness of their
    rural setting.
16. The site comprises an undeveloped field that contributes to the setting of the
    Tower and Glastonbury Tor. The proposal would consist of two separate buildings
    located within the far eastern corner of the site, where the land slopes gradually
    towards the eastern boundary.
17. I observed that the proposal’s Dutch barn-style form, featuring a curved roof
    structure and an uncomplicated building design, would reflect agricultural buildings
    found within the surrounding rural area. Furthermore, the arrangement of a lower
    single-storey element to the front and a taller two-storey element to the rear would
    reduce the perceived scale of the development and help integrate it appropriately
    with its surroundings. As a result, the overall height, massing and scale of the
    buildings would sit comfortably within the existing landscape and would not appear
    as incongruous or visually dominant features.
18. The site’s topography would also assist in limiting the visibility of the proposed
    development. As the land falls towards the eastern boundary, where the buildings
    would be positioned, the proposal would sit at a lower level than much of the
    surrounding land. This would reduce its apparent height and prominence when
    viewed from outside the site, ensuring that it remains visually contained within its
    immediate setting.
19. During my site visit I observed that existing vegetation makes a significant
    contribution to screening the site. Mature hedgerows and trees along the site’s
    boundaries restrict views from the surrounding roads and neighbouring school
    grounds. In many locations, this vegetation either prevents views altogether or
    filters them, allowing only partial and intermittent glimpses of the appeal site. The
    retention of this established planting, together with the introduction of additional
    landscaping around the proposed buildings, would further soften the appearance
    of the proposal and strengthen its integration into the surrounding landscape.
20. The proposed car parking area would be located along the southern edge of the
    site. Views of this area would be largely screened by the proposed buildings and
    existing boundary vegetation. Consequently, the visual impact of the car park
    would be minimal. Whilst some adverse visual effects would arise from the
    proposed access driveway and areas of hardstanding, these elements would be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008318


       softened by the proposed landscaping and planting, which could be secured by a
       planning condition.
21. Although views of the proposal would be possible from the Glastonbury Tor and
    the St Michaels Church Tower, they would be experienced at a relatively long
    distance and within the context of existing built development, including the
    neighbouring school buildings and associated staff car park. The proposal would
    therefore be viewed against an established built backdrop rather than as an
    isolated feature within the countryside. Views from the nearby roads would
    generally be more limited due to the intervening landform and mature boundary
    vegetation. Similarly, any views from neighbouring properties would be filtered by
    existing planting and softened by the proposed landscaping.
22. The combination of the site’s topography, existing vegetation, proposed
    landscaping, building design and its relationship to the surrounding development,
    would ensure that visual effects remain limited and localised.
23. The proposal would result in a change to the area, but the scale of the change and
    its spatial relationship to the town, and to the Tor and the Tower, would neither
    erode their imposing dominance nor detract from the cultural and spiritual
    importance and experiences that they give to the area. The proposal would
    thereby have a neutral impact upon the settings of the Tor and upon that of the
    Tower and its special interest.
24. For the reasons above, the proposal would not significantly harm the character
    and appearance of the area and would have no effect on the significance of and
    settings of St Michaels Church Tower and the Glastonbury Tor. The proposal
    would therefore accord with Policies CP1, CP4, DP1, DP4 and DP7 of the Local
    Plan and the associated provisions within the Framework. These policies, amongst
    other things, seek to ensure development preserves the significance and setting of
    heritage assets, and responds positively to local identity and distinctiveness. Policy
    DP4 seeks to ensure that development within the setting of special landscape
    features has regard to their specific qualities.
Other Matters
25. The appeal site falls within the water catchment flowing into the Somerset Levels
    and Moors Ramsar site, designated for its rare aquatic invertebrates, which is
    currently in an unfavourable condition. Natural England concurs that the proposal
    would not result in an increase in net phosphate outputs in the area as the
    employees would likely originate from within the Ramsar catchment. It is therefore
    unlikely that the proposed development would pose a risk to the designated
    features of the SPA and Ramsar, and a Habitats Regulations Assessment in this
    instance is not required.
26. In addition to the main issues, local residents raise concerns, including traffic
    problems and impact on biodiversity. I have given careful consideration to these
    matters but based on the information provided, and the Council’s suggested
    conditions, they would not constitute reasons to dismiss the appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008318


Conditions
27. The Council has suggested conditions which I have considered, making
    amendments where necessary in the interests of clarity and consistency, and to
    ensure compliance with the tests contained in the Planning Practice Guidance.
28. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have imposed a condition
    specifying the relevant drawings and to require the development to be carried out
    in accordance with them as this provides certainty.
29. A condition relating to hours of construction is necessary to safeguard the
    amenities of adjoining occupiers. A condition relating to hard and soft landscaping
    is imposed to ensure the satisfactory appearance of the development.
30. A pre-commencement condition relating to existing and proposed levels is
    imposed to clarify the finished ground levels of the development.
31. Pre-commencement conditions relating to a Construction Environmental
    Management Plan and PEA survey validation are required to ensure the protection
    of biodiversity. Additionally, an external lighting condition is also necessary.
32. Conditions relating to materials to be used is necessary to ensure the satisfactory
    appearance of the development.
33. In the interests of highway safety, a condition is imposed relating to vehicular
    access, parking and turning areas. I have also imposed conditions relating to a
    travel plan and electric vehicle charging provision to support sustainable transport
    objectives.
34. I have imposed a condition to ensure adequate surface water drainage for the site,
    and to avoid flooding. This is worded as a pre-commencement condition so that
    the approved scheme is implemented in accordance with the agreed details.
35. A condition relating to ventilation and extraction has been imposed in the interests
    of controlling odours and excessive noise.
Conclusion
36. I have found no conflict with the relevant development plan policies and thus there
    is no conflict with the development plan as a whole. The proposal constitutes a
    sustainable form of development within the meaning of the Framework.
37. For the reasons set out above, I therefore conclude that the appeal is allowed.

H Smith
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008318


                                           Schedule of Conditions
1.) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
    of this decision.

2.) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
    following drawings: 1885/04b, 1885/pr22, 1885/pr21b.

3.) Noise emissions from the site during the development, i.e. the demolition, clearance
    and redevelopment of the site, shall not occur outside of the following hours:

    Monday to Friday 08.00 – 18.00
    Saturdays 08.00 – 13.00
    At all other times, including Sundays, Bank and Public Holidays, there shall be no
    such noise generating activities.

4.) No occupation shall commence until a hard and soft landscape scheme has been
    submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The scheme
    shall include the following details:
       a. Size, species and positions for new trees and plants;
       b. Details of boundary treatments, including any walls, bunds, and/or fences;
       c. Surfacing materials (including parking, turning, roadways, drives, patios and
            paths);
       d. Any retained planting; and
       e. A detailed programme of implementation.

    Any trees or plants indicated on the approved scheme which, within a period of five
    years from the date of planting, die, are removed or become seriously damaged or
    diseased shall be replaced during the next planting season either with the same
    tree/plant as has previously been approved, or with other trees or plants of a
    species and size that have first been approved in writing by the Local Planning
    Authority. The development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the
    approved details.

5.) No development shall commence until details of the existing and proposed ground
    levels have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
    Authority. The development shall thereafter be undertaken in accordance with the
    approved details.

6.) No development shall take place (including site clearance, vegetation removal,
    ground works or the construction of access, parking or services) until a Construction
    Environmental Management Plan (Biodiversity (“CEMP:B”) has been submitted to
    and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved CEMP:B
    shall be adhered to and implemented throughout the construction period.

    The CEMP:B shall include the following:

         a. Identification of biodiversity protection zones, including retained boundary
            habitats and adjacent vegetation, with details of protective fencing and
            exclusion areas to be maintained throughout construction;
         b. Details of working methods to avoid harm to protected and notable species,
            including:

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         6
Appeal Decision 6008318


                 i. Reptiles: either maintenance of grassland within the works area at a
                    height of less than 10cm, or a staged vegetation clearance
                    methodology (to include an initial cut to 150mm, followed by a second
                    and final cut to ground level, with a suitable interval between cuts);
                ii. Nesting birds: avoidance of vegetation clearance during the nesting
                    season (March to August inclusive) unless a pre-commencement
                    check by a suitably qualified ecologist confirms the absence of active
                    nests, or protective buffers are implemented;
               iii. Hedgehog and badger: provision of escape routes from any trenches
                    or excavations left open overnight, and daily inspection of such
                    features prior to works commencing.
         c. Measures to protect retained habitats from damage during construction,
            including avoidance of storage of materials, plant or spoil within protected
            areas;
         d. Measures to prevent pollution and sediment run-off during construction,
            including appropriate storage of fuels and use of dust suppression where
            necessary;
         e. Details of any temporary lighting during construction, demonstrating how light
            spill will be minimised to avoid impacts on adjacent habitats;
         f. The timing and supervision of sensitive works, including where ecological
            supervision is required;
         g. Details of site briefings/toolbox talks to contractors on ecological protection
            measures.
         The development shall thereafter be carried out strictly in accordance with the
         approved details.

7.) If development has not commenced within two years of the PEA walkover survey
    date (25 November 2024), or if there has been a material change in the proposals
    or site conditions, an updated ecological walkover appraisal shall be submitted to
    and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority prior to commencement.
    The update shall confirm whether the mitigation measures set out in the original
    PEA remain adequate or identify any additional measures required. Any approved
    measures shall thereafter be implemented in full.

8.) No external lighting shall be erected or provided on the site until a “lighting design
    for bats and dark skies” has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
    Planning Authority. The design shall demonstrate, through technical specification
    and layout, that lighting has been minimised and designed to avoid light spill and
    intrusion, so that it will not disturb or prevent bats from using their territory or having
    access to their resting places, and will protect the intrinsic dark character of the rural
    landscape. All external lighting shall thereafter be installed in accordance with the
    approved details and maintained as such.

9.) No construction of the roof of the development shall commence until a sample of all
    external roofing materials to be used have been left on site and have been
    submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The samples
    shall be kept on site for reference until the development is completed. The
    development shall thereafter be undertaken in accordance with the approved
    details.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008318


10.) No construction of the external walls of the development shall commence until a
   sample panel of all external walling materials to be used has been erected on site,
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority, and kept on site for reference
   until the development is completed. The development shall be undertaken in
   accordance with the approved details.

11.) Prior to any occupation a Measures-Only Travel Plan in line with the Somerset
   Council Travel Plan Guidance (2011) shall be implemented in accordance with
   details which have first been approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

12.) Prior to the construction of any part of the development above damp-proof course
   level a scheme showing full details of the number and location of charging points for
   plug-in and other ultra-low emission vehicles in safe, accessible and convenient
   locations within the development, along with a timetable for their provision, shall be
   submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. These details
   should be in accordance with the Somerset Parking Strategy and the Somerset
   County Council Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy. Thereafter the development
   shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details and timetable.

13.) No occupation shall commence until the access, parking and turning areas have
   been constructed in accordance with details shown on the approved plans. The
   vehicular access, parking and turning shall thereafter be kept clear of obstruction
   and shall not be used other than for the access and parking of vehicles in
   connection with the development hereby permitted.

14.) No development shall commence until a surface water drainage scheme for the
   site, based on sustainable drainage principles and an assessment of the
   hydrological and hydrogeological context of the development, has been submitted to
   and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The scheme shall include a
   programme of phasing, implementation and maintenance for the lifetime of the
   development and subsequently be implemented in accordance with these approved
   details.

15.) The use hereby permitted shall not commence until a detailed scheme for the
   ventilation and extraction of fumes/cooking smells has been submitted to and
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The scheme shall specify the
   precise details of the flue extraction equipment to be used, including: the stack
   height; the design and position of all ductwork and filters; the noise/power levels of
   the fan(s); the number, type and attenuation characteristics of any silencers; details
   of anti-vibration mounts and jointing arrangements in the ductwork; the number of
   air changes per hour, and the efflux velocity. The scheme shall be installed in
   accordance with the approved details prior to the commencement of the use and
   thereafter maintained as such.


                                           ***End of Conditions***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         8
