Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008154
Pavement outside No 608 Holloway Road, London N19 3PB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant full planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/3485/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the installation of a Street Hub 3 unit.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal is related to an advertisement consent appeal which is subject to
       another decision that has been assessed and issued separately.
3.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
       amendments against the December 2024 version. Although there have been
       significant amendments made, the changes relevant to this appeal are not
       substantive or determinative to the outcome of my decision. I have therefore not
       gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues of the appeal are:
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance
                of the surrounding area, including whether it would preserve or enhance the
                character or appearance of the Mercers Road/Tavistock Terrace
                Conservation Area (CA); and
           •    The effect of the proposed development on public safety.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal site relates to a section of pavement outside 608 Holloway Road,
       currently occupied by an existing telephone kiosk. I understand that there were two
       telephone kiosks situated at the appeal site but one has since been removed. The
       site is in a prominent location where retail properties line this side of the road and



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008154


       form a local shopping area. The CA is located opposite the site, on the opposite
       side of the carriageway and further to the south.
6.     The proposed development seeks consent for the proposed installation of a Street
       Hub 3 unit. The existing telephone kiosk would be replaced by the Street Hub
       which would provide free public Wi-Fi, free UK calls, USB charging, wayfinding
       assistance, an emergency services button, plus a range of other digital services for
       those in the vicinity. It would be around 2.9 metres high with a width of 1.2 metres
       and depth of 35cm which would make it taller and wider than the existing
       telephone kiosk. As set out, advertisement consent was sought for the display of
       advertising on the integrated digital screens and was subject to a separate
       decision.
7.     Opposite the site and further south lies the boundary of the CA which is clearly
       visible to and from the appeal site and the proposed development would be read
       against the backdrop of the CA. Given the relationship that exists, I find that the
       appeal site falls within the setting of the CA and development at this site could
       alter how the CA is experienced and thus needs to be carefully considered.
8.     I have a duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (PLBCAA) to pay special attention to the desirability
       of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA. I have also had
       regard to Policy HE5 of the Framework which explains that assessments of the
       potential effects of development proposals on the significance of heritage assets
       (including through effects on their setting) should identify whether proposals would
       be likely to: a. have a positive effect, which is where the significance of a heritage
       asset would be enhanced, or better revealed; or b. have no effect on the
       significance of a heritage asset; or c. result in harm to the significance of a
       heritage asset, either from work affecting the asset itself or from development
       within its setting. This policy explains that the degree of harm should be identified.
       Policy HE6 of the Framework explains that when considering the potential effect of
       a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
       substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation (and the more
       important the asset, the greater the weight should be). This is irrespective of
       whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm,
       or total loss of its significance.
9.     Policy HE9 of the Framework specifically covers CAs explaining that development
       proposals within or affecting the significance of CAs should: a. retain and conserve
       buildings and other features which make a positive contribution to the character or
       appearance of the CA where possible; and b. consider the area’s special
       architectural or historic interest (as identified as part of the designation of the CA)
       in the design of development.
10. The CA Design Guidelines, 2007 (CADG) explains that the character of this area
    comprises largely commercial frontages along Holloway Road and predominantly
    residential side streets. The area includes an attractive range of Victorian
    buildings, mostly developed during the 1850s and 1860s and the relatively few
    buildings that have been built subsequently have generally added to the character
    of the area.
11. The CADG explains that the Council will pay particular attention to design matters
    when considering planning applications, including its own proposals for


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008154


       development, to ensure that the character of the area is retained. Efforts will be
       concentrated on controlling inappropriate changes / additions to the public face of
       existing buildings and ensuring that where development does take place it
       enhances the character of the area and makes a positive contribution to the street
       scene.
12. At my site visit, I noted that the experience of the CA on the opposite side of the
    road is a positive one where there is a terrace of residential houses with decorative
    features of a Victorian character. This contributes positively to the character and
    appearance of the area. From the appeal side of the road, the buildings are clearly
    visible and can be fully appreciated.
13. The stretch of pavement already accommodates a large amount of street furniture,
    including street signs, tree pits, a post box and cycle loops. The proposed Hub
    would be of a solid dark design, taller, wider and more monolithic than that of the
    existing telephone kiosk and thus would be more noticeable. It would have a
    greater presence in the street scene, reading as a visually isolated piece of street
    furniture which would unacceptably add to visual clutter. The proposed Street Hub
    by virtue of its height, width, siting and prominent overall location would
    significantly alter the character of the street. It would unacceptably draw the eye to
    the detriment of the overall character of the area and the quality and experience of
    the CA opposite.
14. The appellant contends that, as the proposal involves upgrading an existing piece
    of street furniture, it would not introduce additional clutter into the street scene. As
    set out above, the proposed development differs from the existing kiosk in terms of
    its size, design and overall form. As a result, it would appear dominant, intrusive
    and visually distracting, creating a level of visual clutter that is materially greater
    than that of the existing structure.
15. Whilst there are examples of BT Hubs and similar development that have been
    granted planning permission in the borough and across the UK including planning
    appeals, this does not set a blanket position for the proposed development as
    each application is assessed on its own site-specific context and merits. The bus
    shelters nearby are of different function and design to the appeal before me and
    have a different form and relationship with the street scene. I do not find them to
    be directly comparable. Any comparable digital displays would have been the
    subject of a separate assessment under the advertisement consent appeal.
16. I understand that it is the appellant’s intention to remove a further telephone kiosk
    located outside 338-340 Hornsey Road as part of the proposals although I have
    limited detail on how this would be achieved given its location outside of the red
    line boundary. Despite this, its removal would not be sufficient to overcome the
    harm I have identified as the proposed development would still be an obtrusive
    and detracting addition in this specific location.
17. For the above reasons, the proposed development would unacceptably harm the
    character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would fail to preserve the
    character or appearance of the CA which would result in harm to the significance
    of the heritage asset. Given the scale and prominence of the proposals, the extent
    of harm would be at the higher end of the spectrum.
18. Policy HE4 of the Framework explains that any harm to, or loss of, the significance
    of a designated heritage asset (including from development within its setting)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008154


       should have a clear and convincing justification. Policy HE6 explains that any harm
       to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and
       weight. It goes on to explain that where a development proposal would harm the
       significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
       significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
       proposal.
19. The benefits associated with the scheme include the removal of the existing
    telephone kiosk and the provision of a communications kiosk providing Wi-Fi
    access, free phone calls to landlines and charities, wayfinding, public and
    community messaging, environmental monitoring, and access to public and
    emergency services.
20. My attention has been drawn to the Code of Practice for Wireless Network
    Development in England, 2022 and the London Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2050,
    2014 which amongst other matters, sets out the importance of connectivity.
    Chapter 9 of the Framework also relates to supporting high-quality
    communications where the objective is to support the expansion and upgrading of
    telecommunications infrastructure, in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation
    of equipment and respect important environmental safeguards. Policy CO1 of the
    Framework explains that in considering proposals for the expansion or upgrading
    of electronic telecommunications networks, substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of maintaining or improving network coverage, capacity, reliability and
    resilience. The Framework also supports emergency services telecommunications
    infrastructure. On this basis, I attach substantial weight to the benefits of the
    scheme.
21. The proposed development would result in a high level of harm to the significance
    of the CA. In accordance with the Framework, this harm is afforded substantial
    weight. Whilst the benefits of the proposal also attract substantial weight, the
    magnitude of those benefits taking into account the nature and scale of the
    proposals is not sufficient to outweigh the identified heritage harm, to which
    considerable importance and weight must be given. The harm is not therefore
    justified having regard to Policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework. Consequently,
    the planning balance weighs against the proposal.
22. Within the context of my statutory duties in the PLBCAA, I conclude that the
    proposed development would unacceptably harm the character and appearance of
    the surrounding area. It would fail to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA. This would be contrary to Policies D3, D4, HC1 and T2 of
    the London Plan, 2021 and Policies PLAN1, DH1, DH2, T4 and ST3 of the
    Islington's Local Plan Strategic and Development Management Policies, 2023.
    Such policies together, amongst other matters, explain that all forms of
    development are required to be of a high quality and make a positive contribution
    to local character, legibility and distinctiveness, based upon an up-to-date
    understanding and evaluation of the defining characteristics of an area. For the
    same reasons, the proposed development would also be contrary to the guidance
    contained within Islington's Urban Design Guide Supplementary Planning
    Document, 2017.
23. I am aware of other policies the appellant refers to which provide support for digital
    connectivity infrastructure, but the proposed development would still be contrary to
    the above-mentioned policies which I must consider. I have reviewed the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008154


       application of the policies set out on the decision notice and find them to be
       relevant in the particular circumstances of this case. This is because amongst
       other matters, they relate to design, public realm and heritage.
24. The Council cite Policy DH6 of the Islington's Local Plan Strategic and
    Development Management Policies, 2023 within the first reason for refusal relating
    to character and appearance matters. However, Policy DH6 relates to
    advertisements which has been assessed separately as part of the advertisement
    consent appeal. I have therefore omitted reference to this.
Public safety
25. The proposed Street Hub would be located within quite a wide pavement and at
    my site visit, I noted that there was adequate movement available around the
    existing telephone kiosk. I recognise that the proposals would have an increased
    width compared with the existing telephone kiosk. However, the difference is such
    where it would not unacceptably obstruct pedestrian flows even taking into account
    the busy nature of the street. There would be little difference to that which currently
    exists. An adequate pavement width would also remain having regard Transport
    for London Streetscape Guidance which requires 2 metres of unobstructed
    footway.
26. The location of the Hub would be in close proximity to the junction of Alexander
    Road which gives access onto this part of Holloway Road. I acknowledge the
    concerns raised by the Council relating to sightlines. However, on exiting
    Alexander Road, drivers would be primarily concerned with vehicles approaching
    from the right in the opposite direction to the proposed Street Hub. Whilst
    pedestrian movements would occur from the direction of the Street Hub, there
    would be little difference to that which currently exists and there would be sufficient
    separation distance where pedestrians and vehicles would be able to see one
    another in advance as to avoid any conflict. The Council refer to distraction to
    drivers which could cause a hazard, but I find this element to relate more to the
    advertisement consent which has been subject to a separate assessment. The
    Hub itself without any advertisements would not in my view, cause unacceptable
    distractions given its nature and what already exists at the site. I am satisfied on
    this basis that the proposed development would not unacceptably harm public
    safety. A lack of harm in this respect would not however overcome the other harm
    that I have identified.
27. For the above reasons, I conclude on this issue that the proposed development
    would not unacceptably harm public safety. It would therefore accord with Policies
    T2 and T4 of the London Plan, 2021 and Policies T1, T2 and T4 of the Islington's
    Local Plan Strategic and Development Management Policies, 2023. Such policies,
    together amongst other matters, explain that development proposals should reflect
    and be integrated with current and planned transport access, capacity and
    connectivity.
28. The Council cite Policy DH6 of the Islington's Local Plan Strategic and
    Development Management Policies, 2023 within their second reason for refusal
    relating to public safety. However, Policy DH6 relates to advertisements which has
    been assessed separately as part of the advertisement consent appeal. I have
    therefore omitted reference to this.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008154


Planning Balance and Conclusion
29. Policy S3 of the Framework explains that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4 sets
    out that development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Whilst I have found a lack of harm in relation to public safety, I have found that the
    proposed development would unacceptably harm the character and appearance of
    the surrounding area. It would fail to preserve the character or appearance of the
    CA. Considering my findings above, the benefits of the proposed development
    would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects identified, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
30. Bringing everything together, the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan when considered as a whole. There are no material
    considerations, either individually or in combination including the provisions of the
    Framework, that would outweigh the identified harm and associated plan conflict. I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
