Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by S Sharp BSc(Hons) BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008491
Flat 1, 9 Chestnut Avenue, Bournemouth BH6 3SP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Haynes against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole
     Council.
•    The application reference is P/26/00457/FUL.
•    The development proposed is construction of a terrace at roof level.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for construction of a
      terrace at roof level at Flat 1, 9 Chestnut Avenue, Bournemouth BH6 3SP in
      accordance with the terms of the application, reference P/26/00457/FUL, subject
      to the following conditions:
     1)        The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
               the date of this decision.
     2)        The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
               drawing no 9CA/002 - Plans and elevations.
     3)        No part of the roof terrace hereby permitted shall be used until the obscure
               glazed screens detailed on approved drawing 9CA/002 have been erected.
               The glazing shall conform with or exceed Pilkington Texture Glass Privacy
               Level 3 (or an equivalent level in any replacement standard). The obscure
               glazed screens shall thereafter be retained for the lifetime of the
               development.
Preliminary Matter
2. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
   appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
   consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework. References hereafter are to
   the August 2026 version.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues are the effect of the development on:
           •    the character and appearance of the host dwelling and the area; and,
           •    the living conditions of occupiers of 11, Chestnut Avenue in relation to
                privacy and noise and disturbance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008491


Reasons
Character and appearance
4. The area surrounding and including the appeal site is characterised by early
   twentieth century properties. This grid of streets, including Chestnut Avenue,
   Fisherman’s Avenue, Pine Avenue, Grand Avenue, Pinecliffe Avenue and Southern
   Road have some unifying characteristics which provide a sense of place. These
   include street trees and large gabled bay windows projecting from front elevations.
5. However, properties in the area, including on Chestnut Avenue, have had additions
   and alterations to their roofs and upper storeys. External upper storey terraces
   appear within public views, examples being prominent at Nos 15 and 45 Grand
   Avenue. The appeal property also has a roof terrace clearly visible to the rear from
   Broom Lane. No terraces appear to currently project from side elevations.
   Nevertheless, views of side elevations are often characterised by the prominence
   of additions to the front or rear elevations. No 15 Grand Avenue’s rear roof terrace
   is a case in point, close to the appeal site.
6. The proposed development would be visible from both Chestnut Avenue and
   Broom Lane, albeit the extent of views from these two streets would be limited
   because of the siting on the side elevation and the proximity of 11, Chestnut
   Avenue. This means that views of the proposal would be obstructed by Nos 9 and
   11 as one walks towards Southbourne Grove or Pine Avenue respectively. Where it
   would be visible, such as from Chestnut Avenue directly in front of the appeal
   property’s driveway, the proposed development would appear as a lightweight,
   upper floor, minor addition to the property and the streetscene in general. Other
   existing additions and alterations would be more noticeable.
7. The proposed development would not appear contrived, or an incongruous feature
   in this context and would not detract from the character and design of the host
   building or the prevailing character and appearance of the area. There would be no
   harm in respect of these matters.
8. I therefore find accordance with policy CS41 of the Bournemouth Core Strategy
   (2012) (CS). This advises, amongst other things, that developments should respect
   the site and their surroundings. It adds that developments which would be
   detrimental to the character of any part of the CS area should not be permitted.
Living conditions
9. There is an existing dormer window set within the roof slope of the appeal property,
   facing No 11. The window serves a kitchen area to the flat on the uppermost floor. I
   was able to access this room during my site visit and establish that views are
   afforded from it down into part of No 11’s rear garden and the glazing on the side
   elevation of this neighbouring property. I noted that this glazing appears to be two
   windows with a wide dividing transom. The glazing appears to be clear. I was
   unable to see the interior due to reflections on the glass during my daytime visit.
   This would likely change at nighttime if the interior of No 11 was illuminated from
   within. However, I understand from the evidence before me that the glazing serves
   non-habitable spaces.
10. The proposed terrace would sit alongside an existing dormer window. In the
    absence of obscure glazed screens, views would be afforded down into No 11


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008491


     through its windows. A glazed screen of 1200mm in height is proposed on the
     terrace’s long side facing No 11. I note from the annotation on the plans before me
     that the screen would be frosted i.e. obscure glazed. This obscuration would
     prevent overlooking if users of the terrace were sitting down but standing adults
     would be able to lean on the top of the screen and look down into No 11. They
     would also be able to look past the ends of the higher end screen proposed for the
     terrace into No 11’s rear garden.
11. The extent of the views from the terrace over the screen would be little different to
    the views currently afforded through the kitchen area window. However, the
    characteristics of the use of the kitchen area and terrace would be different. It is
    probable, given the small area of the terrace, that it would be mainly used for
    occupiers sitting and conversing rather than, say, as a space for parties.
    Furthermore, given the views are limited in extent and interest, people would be
    unlikely to linger leaning over the screen looking out. In contrast, the window
    adjoining the kitchen space is to the rear of a sink and worksurface. It is more likely
    that occupiers will stand facing this window and, whilst undertaking kitchen chores,
    occasionally look out of it.
12. In the context of the above and that only non-habitable interior spaces and a small
    portion of the garden would be overlooked, I find no harm to the occupiers of No
    11’s living conditions.
13. Turning to the matter of noise and disturbance, the area between the buildings at
    Nos 9 and 11 is used as a passageway by No 9. The main door to the three flats at
    No 9 is accessed via this passage and such use will currently generate some noise
    as occupiers and visitors come and go. The main sources of noise when standing
    in this passage are from vehicles and pedestrians passing by, along Chestnut
    Avenue, and the background hum of the busier thoroughfare of Southbourne
    Grove. The walls of Nos 9 and 11 do result in noise echoing.
14. The use of the terrace would generate additional noise on this side of the property.
    This would result from people going in and out of the doors from the flat as well as
    from conversation. The playing of music outdoors would be a possibility resulting
    from the terrace’s use. The proposed screens would provide some noise
    attenuation but the elevated position and lower height of the screen facing No 11
    would mean that noise emanating from use of the terrace would be audible beyond
    the appeal site.
15. However, some attenuation would be provided by the proposed screens in
    combination with the external envelope of No 11. I am also mindful of the existing
    noise levels emanating from Chestnut Avenue and beyond, as well as from No 9’s
    garden and existing roof terrace. I have also already found that the small extent of
    the proposed terrace would limit its use. In this context, the noise and disturbance
    that would result from its use would not be harmful to the interior living conditions of
    occupiers of No 11. I reach the same conclusions in respect of the effect on No
    11’s garden, especially given that the existing roof terrace is nearer to this receptor
    and much larger in area.
16. In conclusion, assessing the matters of privacy and noise and disturbance, I find
    accordance with policy CS41 of the CS. This advises, amongst other things, that
    developments which, by virtue of their design would be detrimental to amenity,
    should not be permitted. The policy seeks to ensure that a high standard of amenity


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008491


     is maintained for future occupiers, which this proposed development would
     achieve.
Other Matters
17. An interested party has commented that the proposed development will
    overshadow their property. The spaces that could be affected are those served by
    the glazing on No 11’s side elevation. These are understood to be non-habitable
    spaces. The glazing faces north with the existing appeal property already in close
    proximity. In this context, the addition of the terrace and its associated screens
    would have a negligible, unharmful effect on the light levels afforded to the
    occupiers of No 11. The proposed development would accord with policy CS41 of
    the CS in relation to this matter.
18. In reaching my findings against the development plan policies with regards to
    character and appearance, I have had regard to the Council’s document
    Residential extensions: a design guide for householders (2008) (RDG). It is not part
    of the development plan and is not cited in the Council’s reasons for refusal but
    was referenced in their officer’s report.
19. I have also had regard to the provisions of the Framework, specifically policies L2
    and DP3 in relation to the matters of character and appearance, finding that there is
    consistency between policy CS41 of the CS and these policies. Similarly, I have
    had regard to policy P3 of the Framework in reaching my findings in relation to the
    effect of the development on living conditions. Policy CS41 of the CS has
    consistency with policy P3 in this instance in relation to this matter.
20. The rear of the appeal site adjoins the Southbourne Grove Conservation Area (CA).
    Policy HE4 of the Framework advises that any harm to, or loss of, the significance
    of a designated heritage asset (including from development within its setting)
    should have a clear and convincing justification. The significance of this area is
    largely derived from the historical and aesthetic qualities of Southbourne Grove
    itself. The setting of the grid of streets, including Chestnut Avenue, is also
    important. Having had regard to policy HE4 in relation to this matter, I find that, due
    to the limited scale and positioning of the proposed development in relation to the
    designation, there would be no harm to the CA’s significance.
Conditions
21. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that the
    development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans, for the avoidance of
    doubt and in the interests of certainty.
22. I have also explained in my decision that it is necessary in the interests of the living
    conditions of occupiers of No 11 to secure the obscure glazing of the proposed
    screens. This is to prevent a loss of privacy from when occupiers of the proposed
    terrace are in a seated position. I have imposed a condition accordingly.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

S Sharp
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
