Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008437
Chy Trygh, Road From Coast Road to Penwinnick Road, Towan Cross, Mount
Hawke, Cornwall, TR4 8BN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Simon Smith against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/02049.
•    The application sought planning permission for the construction of a dwelling without complying with
     a condition attached to planning permission Ref PA20/03304, dated 10 August 2020.
•    The condition in dispute is No. 3 which states that: The occupation of the dwelling shall be limited to
     a person solely or mainly employed, or last employed, in the business known as The Victory Inn,
     Towan Cross, or a widow or widower of such a person, or any resident dependants.
•    The reason given for the condition is: To ensure that the development is kept available for meeting
     the need to accommodate a worker in the business on a site where residential development would
     not normally be permitted, and in accordance with policy 7 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic
     Policies 2018 - 2030, paragraph 79 of the National Planning Policy Framework 2019 and Policy 5 of
     the St Agnes Neighbourhood Development Plan.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the construction of a
       dwelling at Chy Trygh, Road From Coast Road to Penwinnick Road, Towan Cross,
       Mount Hawke, Cornwall, TR4 8BN in accordance with the application Ref
       PA25/02049 without compliance with condition No. 3 previously imposed on
       planning permission Ref PA20/03304 dated 10 August 2020, subject to the
       following conditions:
       1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following plans:
                • Existing 1710-PL-00-03 received 17/04/20
                • Proposed 1710-PL-00-04 site plan received 17/04/20
                • Proposed 1710-PL-02-01 elevations received 17/04/20
                • Proposed 1710-PL-0101 floor received 17/04/20
                • Proposed 1710-PL-0202 Mixed received 17/04/20
                • Block Plan 1710-PL-00-01 received 17/04/20
                • Submitted Plan 1710-PL-00-02 site survey received 17/04/20

       2) The existing caravan as shown on drawing no’s 1710-PL-00-03 and
          1710-PL-00 02 shall be removed from site once the replacement dwelling unit
          hereby approved is available for occupation, and no other caravan/s shall
          subsequently be placed on the land outlined in red or blue on the approved
          plans.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008437




       3) The dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied otherwise than by a
          person as his or her Only or Principal Home. For the avoidance of doubt the
          dwelling shall not be occupied as a second home or holiday letting
          accommodation. The Occupant will supply to the local planning authority
          (within 14 days of the local planning authority's written request to do so) such
          information as the Authority may reasonably require in order to determine
          whether this condition is being complied with.

Main Issue
2.     The main issue is whether the stated condition is necessary having regard to the
       Council’s spatial strategy.
Reasons
3.     The original planning permission was granted having had regard to the needs of a
       rural business, despite the fact that the Council considered that the proposal
       conflicted with the spatial strategy set out within the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic
       Policies 2010 – 2030 (the LP).
4.     As such, it is appropriate for me to consider the development against the locational
       policies within the LP. Policy 3 notes that, outside of the main towns, development
       will be permitted if it accords with certain criteria. The third bullet point of Policy
       3(3) supports infill schemes that fill a gap in an otherwise continuous built frontage
       and that do not extend the settlement into the open countryside. Moreover,
       paragraph 1.68 of the LP notes that, in such circumstances, the settlement should
       have a form and shape and clearly definable boundaries rather than being a low
       density straggle of buildings. The paragraph continues by stating that such
       settlements should be in reasonable proximity to a larger village or town which
       contains a greater range of services and facilities.
5.     While not forming part of the evidence before me, I am also well aware of the
       Council’s Chief Planning Officers Advice Note on Infilling and Rounding Off,
       December 2017 (the CPOAN). In relation to infilling, this guidance reflects much of
       the content of the LP, but also adds that such schemes should not diminish large
       gaps that are important to the setting of the settlement.
6.     In this instance, the appeal site is located within Towan Cross. There are road
       signs at either end of the village which provide an impression of entering and
       exiting a settlement as one passes through along the primary road. The settlement
       is quite interesting in that it appears to be formed of multiple groups of buildings
       with gaps in between. The appeal site forms part of one of those clusters, which
       also includes the adjacent public house known as The Victory Inn. It therefore
       does not represent a low density straggle of buildings. Furthermore, there are
       larger settlements within reasonable proximity, including Mount Hawke and
       St Agnes. In essence, I am satisfied that Towan Cross can be considered to be a
       settlement for the purposes of Policy 3. I am equally satisfied that the appeal site is
       located within that settlement.
7.     Having visited the site, and looked at aerial photography, it seems clear to me that
       the appeal site is well contained and that it is well related to other buildings
       immediately to the north and south. Moreover, the provision of the dwelling has not
       extended the settlement into the open countryside and has not eroded any of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008437


         important landscape gaps that do exist in Towan Cross. I do acknowledge that the
         site is set back from the road and so it does not form part of a continuous frontage.
         However, despite this, it is clear to me that it can be considered to be an infill site
         and so it accords with the overall thrust of the policy and the CPOAN guidance.
8.       I am aware that an Inspector did allow a previous appeal on the site wherein it was
         concluded that a condition was necessary to tie the occupancy of the proposed
         dwelling in that instance to the public house1. However, that appeal was
         considered against a previous development plan and so the Inspector’s findings in
         that case are not a determinative feature of this appeal before me. Moreover, the
         Inspector noted that the proposal at that time would ‘sit comfortably among a
         number of buildings that already provide context for a massing of development
         near the public house, and within a plot that does not contribute significantly to
         local character, or that of the surrounding open countryside. Furthermore, as a
         result of the surrounding buildings, the appeal proposal would not visibly extend
         development into the countryside’. I agree with that assessment in relation to this
         appeal which clearly aligns with my conclusion that the site is an infill plot when
         considered against the current development plan.
9.       As a result of these considerations, I conclude that the development accords with
         LP Policy 3 when considered as a whole. As such, the disputed occupancy
         condition is not necessary. The development also accords with the relevant
         aspects of LP Policies 1 and 2 and Policy C1 of the Climate Emergency
         Development Plan Document, which together, seek to direct development to
         sustainable locations. Given the compliance with Policy 3, LP Policy 7 is not of
         relevance to this appeal given as it concerns proposals within the open
         countryside.
Other Matters
10. The impact of removing the disputed occupancy condition on the vitality of the
    public house is also a material consideration. In this instance, there is no
    substantive evidence before me that would lead me to conclude that the business
    would be negatively affected if this appeal was allowed. I note that the appellant
    has stated that the public house includes some accommodation. It also appears to
    me that employees would have many different options in terms of places to live in
    the wider area. Indeed, it is notable that there is a bus stop outside of the public
    house which appears to offer relatively frequent services to surrounding
    settlements, including St Agnes and Truro. As such, I can see no reason why
    employees would need to live immediately next to the public house and I am
    satisfied that removing the occupancy condition would not harm the business.
11. The appeal site is close to the boundaries of the Mingoose Conservation Area and
    the St. Agnes Mining District of the World Heritage Site. However, removal of the
    disputed condition would not alter the external appearance of the building, and so
    the significance of these designated heritage assets would not be affected.
12. The Council has directed my attention towards another appeal decision which
    related to a site in Trematon near Saltash. However, as the Inspector in that case
    concluded that the proposal did not accord with LP Policy 3, it is not directly
    comparable to the scheme before me.


1
    Appeal ref: APP/D0840/W/16/3145276


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6008437


13. I note that the glossary of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
    Framework) sets out that the definition of a settlement does not include hamlets or
    scattered groups of houses. The cluster of buildings in the immediate area of the
    appeal site, including the public house, could be considered to be a hamlet when
    considered in isolation. However, that cluster clearly forms part of a larger
    settlement with other clusters of buildings, including to the east. As such, it is much
    more akin to a small village than a hamlet and I am satisfied that there is no
    conflict with the policies in the Framework.
Conditions
14. I have imposed a condition to identify the relevant plans in the interests of
    certainty. A further condition is necessary in order to prevent any static caravans
    on the site or wider landholding in accordance with the original permission. A final
    condition is necessary to restrict occupancy of the dwelling to a principal residence
    in order to accord with Policy 5 of the St Agnes Parish Neighbourhood
    Development Plan 2018 – 2030.
15. A condition to identify the usual timescales for planning permissions is not
    necessary given that the development has already been completed.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed and I
    vary the planning permission by deleting the disputed condition.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
