Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by N Duff BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008977
90 Park Road, Wigan WN6 7AQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ryan Farrington against the decision of Wigan Metropolitan Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is A/25/099638/FULL.
•    The development proposed is Change of use from dwelling (Class C3) to a 6-bedroom, 6-person
     house in multiple occupation (Class C4) together with installation of rear dormer, 2 rooflights to front
     and associated external alterations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal site is within an area covered by an Article 4(1) Direction (A4D) for the
       removal of permitted development rights for the change of use from Use Class C3
       dwelling houses to C4 Small Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs), on a borough
       wide basis, which came into effect on 31st August 2025.
3.     The new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the
       Council and appellant were invited to make further comments. This decision
       reflects the latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues of the appeal are:
           •    The effect of the development on mixed and balanced communities and the
                character of the area;
           •    The effect of the development on the living conditions of neighbouring
                occupiers with particular regard to noise and disturbance and parking
                provision; and

           •    Whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living
                conditions for future occupiers with regard to noise, odour, privacy and
                outlook.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008977


Reasons
Mixed and balanced communities and character
5.     The appeal site is a mid-terrace property and it lies within a residential area
       located off Park Road which and has several terraced streets leading off it. Based
       on the information before me, HMOs are located at Nos. 88 and 94 Park Road.
       The area has an established residential character with residential terraced streets
       leading off Park Road near to the appeal site. Planning permission is sought for
       the change of use from a 3 bedroom property to a 6 bedroomed property which
       has taken place, together with alterations including the installation of a rear dormer
       and rooflights.
6.     The Houses in Multiple Occupation Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)
       states that in order to help ensure mixed and balanced communities and to ensure
       that the development does not have an unacceptable adverse impact on amenity
       and quality of life, the Council will apply three measures: a concentration
       threshold; restricting the sandwiching of properties and restricting three adjacent
       HMOs.
7.     The Council is satisfied that the proposal would not exceed the 10% concentration
       threshold and that the proposal would not result in three adjacent HMOs.
8.     However, due to the location of the proposal, it would result in the sandwiching of
       No. 92 Park Road (No. 92) which is a non-HMO property. Due to No.92 being a
       mid-terraced property, it would not fall into the circumstances where ‘sandwiching’
       may be seen as acceptable in terms of the SPD.
9.     The area is residential in character and HMOs can add to the housing mix within
       such areas. Although the proposal would not exceed the 10% threshold as set out
       in the SPD, the appeal property, together with HMOs at Nos. 88 and 94
       contributes to a noticeable concentration of HMOs within this section of Park
       Road. As a result, there is a relatively high concentration of HMOs in the
       immediate locality therefore the proposal does not contribute positively to a
       balance and mix of housing.
10. The A4D report sets out the main concerns with HMOs in the Borough, which
    includes negative changes to the character of the area and cohesion and
    resilience of the local community. Due to the nature of HMOs with a greater
    number of individuals living independently, each likely to maintain different
    schedules, the intensity of the use of the property would increase. I consider that
    the intensification of the residential use, particularly given the concentration of
    other HMOs around the appeal site, together with the sandwiching of No.92,
    further increases the risk of adverse effects occurring, undermining the established
    character of the area.
11. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would have an adverse effect on
    mixed and balanced communities and the character of the area, the proposal
    would be contrary to Policies CP6 and CP10 and of the Wigan Local Plan Core
    Strategy (CS) and JP-P1 and JP-S1 of the Places for Everyone Joint Development
    Plan (JDP) insofar as they relate to this main issue which, in combination, seek to
    ensure social benefits, provision for an appropriate mix of house types and that
    development respects the character and identity of the locality.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008977


12. The proposal would also conflict with the planning requirements section of the
    SPD which seeks to promote mixed and balanced communities, retain local
    character and maintain a mix of house types and tenures. The SPD states that
    planning permission will not normally be granted for the development of HMOs that
    lead to the ‘sandwiching’ of residential properties.
Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
13. Policy CP17 of the Wigan Local Plan Core Strategy (CS) seeks to ensure that new
    development is planned and designed so that it does not have an unacceptable
    adverse impact on amenity and quality of life. The appeal site is a mid-terraced
    property, and therefore, neighbouring properties could be vulnerable to noise and
    disturbance resulting from the intensification of use.
14. Given that the proposal is for 6 individuals living independently, I consider that the
    intensity of the use of the property is likely to be greater due to the number of
    comings and goings at a range of times, than would be expected from a single
    household in a three-bedroom dwelling. This additional activity is likely to cause
    noise and disturbance to residents of neighbouring properties, particularly at times
    of the day where the road is quieter.
15. Having regard to the external space to the rear of the property, this area is modest
    nevertheless provides a usable amenity space and due to the age and style of
    housing is very close to the external spaces of neighbouring properties. I consider
    that due to this relationship, it is not unreasonable to assume that the increased
    intensity of the use of the space by 6 independent residents, would result in
    additional noise and disturbance from the use of a garden area. However, I
    consider that a management plan could help to ensure that tenants adhere to
    certain guidelines, regarding noise generation from external living spaces such as
    by restricting outdoor gatherings.
16. Regarding a condition requiring acoustic mitigation in accordance with building
    regulations, I do accept that acoustic mitigation measures could be retrofitted
    which would go some way to reducing noise from within the property.
17. However, I have limited substantive evidence before me to demonstrate how
    effective such measures would be regarding the noise and disturbance generated
    by increased activity at the property due to comings and goings, especially as
    many of these would be determined by factors such as work, education and
    lifestyle.
18. Therefore, due to the greater intensity of the use, particularly when experienced in
    combination with other nearby HMOs, the development is likely to contribute to a
    cumulative harmful effect on the living conditions of neighbouring residents,
    especially those residing at No. 92, by way of noise and disturbance.
19. Having regard to car parking provision, due to the site’s location it does not benefit
    from off-street car parking provision and the area to the front of the site has a
    single yellow line parking restriction which continues along the same side of Park
    Road for a considerable length near to the appeal site. There are however several
    side streets where parking is unrestricted within a short distance of the appeal site.
    Due to the character of the area with many residential terraced streets, the
    occupants of many of the properties along Park Road, including nearby HMOs,
    and surrounding streets rely upon on-street car parking. The evidence before me

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008977


       indicates that on-street parking demand is high due to limited provision of off-street
       parking, which is apparent particularly along Park Road.
20. The proposal includes provision for cycle parking and I note the site’s proximity to
    services and public transport which may reduce the reliance on private vehicles. I
    also note that the Council’s highway advisor did not raise objections to the
    proposal on highway capacity or safety grounds, and that the officer report reflects
    this.
21. However, there is no certainty that residents of the proposed development would
    not own private vehicles. Given the absence of dedicated parking provision and
    the intensity of the proposed use from the number of individuals proposed to live
    independently within the property, I consider it likely that the development would
    increase demand for on-street parking above what would be generated from a
    single household. As a result, neighbouring residents may be required to park
    further from their homes and there could be greater competition for spaces. I
    consider that this would lead to inconvenience and frustration for neighbouring
    residents and would have a harmful effect on their living conditions.
22. I have considered the suggested condition to secure a property management plan
    which would include rules regarding parking. However, I have no substantive
    evidence to demonstrate the effectiveness of such a plan in relation to car parking,
    and what the alternatives would be for car owners. Therefore, the imposition of
    such a condition would not overcome my concerns in this case.
23. In addition, HMO licensing provides further control over such properties and
    having regard to matters such as anti-social behaviour, crime and serious
    nuisance and noise, I recognise that there are regulations through means outside
    of planning. However, this does not necessarily mean that the development is
    acceptable in planning terms, the planning system has wider responsibilities for
    ensuring that proposals provide a good living environment for neighbouring
    residents.
24. For the above reasons, I conclude that the development would have an adverse
    effect on living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with particular regard to noise
    and disturbance and parking provision. There would be conflict with Policies CP7
    and CP17 of the CS, Policies JP-P1 and JP-C8 of the JDP and Policy A1S of the
    Wigan Replacement Unitary Development Plan (UDP) insofar as they relate to this
    main issue, which seek to ensure that there is the provision of appropriate parking
    for cars without detriment to residential amenity and that new development does
    not have an adverse impact on amenity and quality of life.
Living conditions of future occupiers
25. With regard to the external space at the appeal property, unlike the effect on
    neighbouring residents this was not reflected in the reasons for refusal in relation
    to future occupiers. However, in this regard the standard of accommodation has
    been raised as a concern by the Council in its officer report, and the main parties
    have addressed it in their evidence. The SPD states that provision for outdoor
    space should be made in addition to space for drying clothes, refuse, recycling and
    cycle storage. Based on the evidence before me, although the yard is an L-shape
    there is space allocated for these functions together with some bench seating. The
    area is restricted in size; however, the SPD does acknowledge that HMOs are
    often created near to town centres where outdoor space may be limited. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008977


       space is also overlooked from within the property, which is a requirement of the
       SPD. Therefore, I am satisfied that the yard would provide sufficient outdoor
       amenity space for up to 6 residents.
26. The SPD states that the location of bedrooms in relation to communal living space
    should be given careful consideration to ensure that residents have privacy and
    are not subject to unacceptable noise from communal areas. Having regard to the
    living conditions of bedroom 2, the door to this bedroom is immediately located off
    the kitchen to the rear of the property. Although the bedroom is large, it is
    accessed from the only internal communal living area and is adjacent to the back
    door leading to the garden. Due to this, the occupant of this room is likely to
    experience some noise and disturbance from internal and external communal
    spaces. However, I am satisfied that extraction within the kitchen could reduce
    odours from cooking to an acceptable level.
27. Having regard to a condition requiring acoustic mitigation I consider that acoustic
    mitigation measures could be retrofitted subject to an approved scheme of works
    and would not be unreasonable to secure by condition. Therefore, I consider that
    this would serve to minimise noise and reduce the harm identified to bedroom 2
    regarding noise and disturbance from internal living areas.
28. Regarding a condition to secure a property management plan I consider that this
    mechanism could manage the conduct of tenants particularly regarding the
    external area and help to ensure that significant levels of noise and disturbance do
    not harm the living conditions of the occupant of bedroom 2.
29. Bedroom 2 has two windows, one facing directly onto the proposed seating area of
    the garden and the other onto the narrow passageway into the garden at close
    proximity Therefore, the occupant could feel obligated to either close curtains or
    blinds to make their accommodation feel more private which could affect outlook.
    However, due to the functional and modest nature of the outdoor space, I consider
    that its use is likely to be more irregular than internal communal spaces, for these
    reasons, whilst this could affect privacy to some degree, I do not consider this
    matter to be significantly harmful to the living conditions of the future occupant of
    bedroom 2.
30. The Council has raised the matter of the outlook of bedroom 2 onto the proposed
    bin area; however, this would be at an oblique angle and therefore would not be a
    level of harm to cause unacceptable living conditions. I consider that overall,
    subject to appropriate mitigation and management, the effect of the proposal on
    the living conditions of the occupant of bedroom 2 would not be significant.
31. Turning to bedroom 4, this would be located above the communal kitchen/dining
    area, it is not uncommon in residential situations for bedrooms to be located above
    kitchens or living areas, and in the original arrangement of the property this
    bedroom was above the dining room. Due to the more intensive use of the
    communal space than there would likely be in a traditional C3 use, there could be
    noise generated from the use below and some odours from cooking. However, the
    SPD sets out guidance regarding internal layouts of HMOs, which indicates that
    communal living areas above bedrooms can have negative impacts on amenity.
    However, I have limited substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that the
    arrangement with a bedroom above a living area would cause an unacceptable



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008977


       level of harm to the living conditions of future occupiers of bedroom 4 by way of
       noise or odours.
32. For the above reasons I conclude that the proposal would not have a harmful
    effect on the living conditions of future occupiers with regard to, noise, odour,
    privacy and outlook. Therefore, the proposal would accord with Policy CP17 of the
    CS and Policy JP-P1 of the JDP only insofar as they relate to this main issue,
    which among other things seek to ensure that development does not have an
    unacceptable adverse impact on amenity and quality of life and requires
    developments to be comfortable and inviting indoor environments offering a high
    level of amenity.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
33. The A4D removes permitted development rights but this does not mean that small
    HMOs should not be granted planning permission. The appellant’s appeal
    statement says that the property’s acquisition was commenced by the appellant in
    December 2024 with a very clear intention to use it as a small HMO under
    permitted development rights. It also corrects dates set out in the application forms
    and initial planning statement, and states that the conversion did not begin until 1st
    August 2025.
34. The A4D came into effect on 31st August 2025. The appellant’s evidence states
    that, as a consequence, the appellant was caught by surprise and that the appeal
    proposal is the regularisation of a small HMO project conceived and substantially
    implemented under the previous national regime. However, there is no substantive
    evidence to demonstrate that the change of use had taken place by the date the
    A4D came into effect.
35. Having regard to the situation prior to the A4D coming into effect, I recognise that
    the proposal would not have required planning consent. Notwithstanding this, I
    have assessed the case on its merits, and the situation prior to the A4D does not
    overcome the concerns raised in the main issues, it limits the weight I can attribute
    this in the planning balance.
36. I note that the Council has not raised any objections to the proposal regarding the
    design of the external alterations to the building. Based on the design and
    materials used I have no reason to disagree. However, this is a neutral matter in
    the planning balance.
37. The proposed development would provide a small HMO which can widen
    accommodation choice for residents, including affordability, which are recognised
    benefits of the development, however, I have not been provided with substantive
    evidence to demonstrate that there is an evidenced need for the type of
    accommodation and as this is for one small HMO this benefit attracts only modest
    weight.
38. The site is located with convenient access to services, shops and wider public
    transport options. In addition, the site would provide cycle storage, to encourage
    alternative modes of transport, which weighs in favour of the development.
39. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008977


       outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
       making policies in this Framework.
40. The development would add housing accommodation choice to the area, in a
    sustainable location and there are undoubted benefits accruing from the scheme,
    including that it would provide an acceptable standard of accommodation for future
    occupiers. In addition, the appellant has stated that the proposal would make
    effective use of land. Policy L2 of the Framework states that substantial weight
    should be given to the benefits where a proposal would create additional
    floorspace within settlements by using the airspace above existing residential
    premises, which the proposal does through the introduction of the dormer and
    rooflights.
41. However, due to the adverse effects of the development on mixed and balanced
    communities, the character of the area and the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers, there would be conflict with Policies P3 and DP3 of the Framework
    which between them require developments to be appropriate for their location
    taking into account the likely effects (including cumulative effects) on living
    conditions, to respond to their context including character, and support healthy,
    mixed, vibrant and integrated communities. Therefore, I consider that these
    adverse effects of the scheme would be such that harm and related local and
    national policy conflicts would substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposal.
42. As a consequence, the scheme would conflict with the development plan and the
    material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. For the reasons given above
    the appeal should be dismissed.

N Duff
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
