Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 June 2026
by L J O'Brien BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008242
5 Bank Chambers, Penn Hill Avenue, Poole, BH14 9NB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Antepli against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole
     Council.
•    The application Ref is P/25/02136/FUL.
•    The development proposed is erection of an extraction flue (retrospective).

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by Mr Antepli against Bournemouth
      Christchurch and Poole Council in relation to the appeal. This application is the
      subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.    The description of development refers to the proposal as retrospective. The
      submitted plans appear to be an accurate reflection of the extraction unit which
      has been installed on site and I have determined the appeal on this basis.
4.    The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was updated in August
      2026, during the consideration of this appeal. Insofar as is directly relevant to the
      appeal, there are no substantive changes and no parties have been prejudiced as
      a result.
Main Issue
5.    The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the development on the living
      conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties with particular regard to
      noise, odour and outlook.
Reasons
6.    The appeal property is a three-storey, mid-terraced building. The ground floor of
      the building is occupied by a restaurant/food outlet (Antepli) with residential
      properties above. The building is within the local shopping centre and is
      surrounded by other similar buildings with commercial uses at ground floor level
      and residential above. The rear of the property opens onto an access lane.
7.    The development before me relates to an existing extraction flue to the rear of the
      property. The extraction flue is a large, bulky and visually prominent addition with a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008242


         highly functional and utilitarian character and appearance. The flue sits within an
         elevated and exposed position on the flat roof of the rear extension of the appeal
         property and this siting contributes to its visual prominence.
8.       The arrangement of properties to the rear is such that there are limited separation
         distances between the flue and nearby residential properties. Consequently, the
         installation is clearly visible from several neighbouring dwellings and has a
         detrimental impact on the outlook from these properties; appearing as a visually
         intrusive and conspicuous feature. In my view, the flue appears as an overbearing
         structure which dominates the outlook, occupying a disproportionate visual
         presence, when viewed from nearby properties.
9.       I accept that the existence of plant equipment in locations such as this is
         commonplace and, indeed, note that a previous flue was installed at the property.
         However, the extraction flue currently in situ is comparatively large and sited in an
         overtly visible position so as to cause it to appear visually obtrusive when viewed
         from neighbouring residential properties to the extent that it impedes the outlook
         from these properties and has a detrimental impact in this regard.
10. The appellant has included several possible means of screening the flue along
    with indications of other properties where such screening has been implemented.
    However, the other examples differ from the current proposal and do not provide
    direct like for like comparisons. Whilst the screening options would, in my view,
    offer some visual relief, the flue covering itself would be a bulky addition to the rear
    of the property and the flue would likely remain partially visible. Moreover, the
    evidence before me in respect of the longevity of the measures and the potential
    implications of such screening on the efficiency of the flue is limited. As such, I am
    not satisfied that the screening methods would be sufficient to mitigate the harm I
    have identified.
11. The evidence before me includes a Noise Impact Assessment1 (NIA) and a
    Kitchen Odour Assessment2 (KOA). The NIA assessed the background noise
    levels and took measurements of the existing installed plant. The NIA concludes
    that the resulting emissions from the plant running on a worst case scenario show
    no conflict with ‘low impact’ criteria and give a strong indication that complaint and
    impact on the local amenity is unlikely during operational hours. The Council and
    the Council’s Environmental Health Team (EHT) have not disputed these
    conclusions.
12. I note that a limited number of representations submitted refer to an on-going
    noise nuisance. These representations pre-date the NIA and also refer to noise
    created by other extraction units and premises within the area. At the time of my
    site visit the extraction system appeared to be in operation and, though I accept
    that my own observations relate only to a snapshot in time, I did not note any
    unacceptably loud or nuisance noise emitted from the plant equipment. This
    supports the findings of the NIA. On the basis of this evidence, I consider that the
    flue does not present concerns in respect of the noise implications for nearby
    residents.
13. The vast majority of the representations received passed comment on an intrusive
    and excessive odour emitted from the premises. Due to the design of the

1
    Industrial Noise Impact Assessment Kitchen Extract System by impact acoustics dated September 2025
2
    Kitchen Odour Assessment by NoiseAir acoustics & air quality dated 28th January 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6008242


        extraction system the discharge point sits close to nearby neighbouring properties.
        The KOA identifies the development as presenting a “very high” odour risk due to
        the nature of the operation and the location of the site and the extraction
        equipment. The KOA identifies that with the levels of mitigation provided, the
        extraction system should provide a very high level of odour control. However, the
        KOA itself stresses that the conclusions and recommendations contained in the
        report are based upon information provided by others and upon the assumption
        that all relevant information has been provided by those parties and that such
        information is accurate. The Council’s EHT raises concerns that the KOA is based
        on such assumptions; for example, the KOA is based on intended performance
        parameters within the kitchen rather than on actual system performance.
14. I accept that, in theory, the evidence suggests that the odour emitted by the
    extraction flue should not be excessive or cause issues to those living nearby.
    However, the evidence before me contains a significant amount of information to
    suggest otherwise. The retrospective nature of the appeal is such that information
    regarding the current effects of the development can be assessed as a part of the
    evidence which forms the basis of any planning decision. This information includes
    observations from those living nearby with regular and repeated experiences of the
    real world implications of the extraction flue. The Council’s EHT have also
    expressed concern regarding whether the KOA was robust and is an accurate
    reflection of the situation on the ground. This information raises significant doubt
    over the findings set out within the KOA. Indeed, though this represents only a
    small window of time, my own observations on site support the notion that a strong
    odour of cooking smells can be detected.
15. The extraction flue is large and emissions are discharged from a flue that
    terminates only around 4.7 metres above ground level, in extremely close
    proximity to outdoor areas and windows serving the upper floor residential
    properties. The odour risks associated with the nature and intensity of the use are
    equally high. I consider that repeated odours associated with the extraction flue
    are highly likely to be such that they would cause unacceptable harm to the living
    conditions of neighbouring residents.
16. I note the appellant’s contention that the type of fuel used in the kitchen is posing a
    challenge in respect of the effective dispersal of odours. Nevertheless, the KOA
    appears to take this into account and this type of fuel should not, therefore, be
    incompatible with the extraction system. Indeed, the extraction system installed
    must be fit for purpose.
17. On the basis of the combined evidence before me and particularly given the KOA’s
    own findings that the odour risk posed is very high, I cannot be satisfied that the
    extraction flue does not cause discernible and unacceptable harm to the living
    conditions of nearby residents in respect of odour.
18. As previously noted, I acknowledge that a previous flue was approved3 and
    operational at the premises and the current system is intended as an upgrade to
    this. However, the information before me suggests that the previous flue was
    significantly smaller and of a different design to that which is currently in situ. The
    previous application also dates from 2012 and was made within a different policy,
    and potentially built environment, context. Furthermore, irrespective of any

3
    APP/12/01353/C


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008242


      operational changes which followed, at the time of its approval, it was considered
      that the previous flue would provide effective extraction for the business operating
      from the site. The business which was in operation at the time of this permission
      was of a different nature to that which currently operates.
19. For the reasons set out above I consider that the extraction flue causes
    unacceptable harm to the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring
    properties with particular regard to odour and outlook. As such, the proposal
    conflicts with Policies PP23 and PP27 of the Poole Local Plan, November 2018
    (LP). Amongst other things, these policies state that proposals that add vitality and
    viability to Poole’s main evening / night time economy centres will be permitted,
    provided that the development will not, either individually or cumulatively, harm the
    character of the area or residential amenity in terms of noise, light and other
    emissions. Policy PP27 also includes a requirement for development to be
    compatible with surrounding uses in respect of whether the development is
    overbearing or oppressive.
Other Matters
20. I note that other policy considerations, such as the National Planning Policy
    Framework, promote the creation of conditions in which businesses can invest,
    expand and adapt. I also accept that alternative schemes would likely be more
    complicated and potentially costly. Nevertheless, the development plan must be
    considered as a whole and compliance with some policies is not sufficient to
    overcome the conflict with others.
21. I accept that the role of the EHT and the licensing regime overlaps somewhat and
    that some matters could be addressed through this regime. However, it would not
    be appropriate, to my mind, to grant planning permission where it is unclear that
    such issues could be effectively resolved or in instances where harm has been
    identified. Other powers, such as Abatement Notices, are tools within the Council’s
    portfolio and are not in place to serve as replacements for full and proper
    consideration of development schemes at the planning stage where issues can be
    avoided or mitigated before they become problematic. The retrospective nature of
    the appeal scheme does not justify the sole use of other mechanisms in lieu of
    ensuring the scheme is appropriate in the first instance.
22. I have noted other issues raised; however, as this proposal is to be dismissed for
    other reasons and the other concerns expressed do not have a direct bearing on
    the main issue, it is not necessary for these to be explored further as part of this
    appeal.
23. I have given careful regard to all of the above considerations. However, none are
    sufficient to dissuade me from the conclusions I have reached above.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons set out above, the development is contrary to the development
    plan. There are no material considerations that indicate that permission should be
    granted. Therefore, taking all other matters raised into account, the appeal is
    dismissed.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008242



L J O'Brien INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
