Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by A Chan Markovitz BA (Hons)
Decision by T Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008638
35 Hodson Crescent, Bromley, Orpington BR5 4BS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mrs Ilona Crudu against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Bromley.
•   The application Ref is 26/00907/NOT.
•   The development proposed is “Single storey rear extension”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended (the
   GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
   subject to limitations and conditions.
4. Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior approval is
   required for development which exceeds the limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is
   allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph A.4(3) provides that the local
   planning authority may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
   development does not comply – or that the developer has provided insufficient
   information to enable the authority to establish whether the proposed development
   complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such
   permitted development.
5. Paragraph A.4(7) to Part 1 requires the local planning authority to assess the
   impact of the proposed development on the amenity of all adjoining premises,
   taking into account any representations received. The Council refused the
   application as they considered that the proposed development would not comply
   with Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph A.4(7) of the GPDO by
   unacceptably impacting the amenity of adjoining premises.
6. The Council has drawn my attention to the development plan policies it considers to
   be relevant to this appeal. However, prior approval is a different procedure to a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008638


     planning application, and the GPDO does not require decision-makers to have
     regard to, or make decisions in accordance with, the development plan.
7. There is no dispute between the parties that the proposed single development
   would comply with all other limitations and conditions set out in paragraphs A.1,
   A.2, A.3 and A.4 of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO. From the evidence
   before me, I see no reason to disagree.
Main Issue
8. The main issue is whether the proposed development complies with the relevant
   condition in paragraph A.4(7) regarding the effect of the proposed development on
   the amenity of 33 Hodson Crescent and 37 Hodson Crescent, with particular regard
   to outlook.
Reasons for the Recommendation
9. The host dwelling is a two-storey semi-detached house typical of development in
   the surrounding area, the street scene of which generally comprises of semi-
   detached houses and short terraces with long rear gardens. The rear elevations of
   the host dwelling and neighbouring dwellings face uphill towards an undeveloped
   field.
10. The neighbouring property to the east, No. 33 Hodson Crescent, adjoins and is
    similar in appearance to the appeal building. One of its ground floor rear facing
    windows is located close to the shared stepped timber boundary fence, which
    extends to a height comparable with the window. There are numerous outbuildings
    positioned along the eastern boundary of No. 33’s rear garden, extending from the
    rear elevation to the rear boundary of the garden. As a result of the height of the
    boundary fence and the presence of these outbuildings, the occupants of No. 33
    have a restricted outlook from their ground floor rear windows.
11. The proposed development would extend across the width of the host dwelling,
    with its side wall located close to the ground floor rear facing window at No. 33.
    Although the appellant has submitted that the appeal scheme has a lesser depth
    and height than the previously refused scheme, I find that its side wall would still
    extend significantly above both the window and the existing boundary fence at this
    part of the garden. Taken cumulatively, the proposal's siting and scale would cause
    it to appear as a dominant feature in views from No. 33's ground floor rear window,
    further restricting the occupants' already limited outlook and creating an enclosing
    and overbearing effect.
12. The neighbouring property to the west, No. 37, is an end-terrace house. There is a
    large side gap between the host dwelling and No. 37, and therefore the occupants
    of No. 37 appear to have a relatively unrestricted view from their ground floor rear
    windows.
13. Whilst the proposed development would extend above the shared boundary fence,
    it would not extend beyond the host dwelling’s west side elevation and would not
    reduce the side gap between the properties. Although the proposed development
    would extend above the shared boundary fence, it would not project beyond the
    host dwelling's western side elevation and would not reduce the separation
    between the properties. Consequently, the proposal would not appear prominent in
    views from No. 37's ground floor rear windows and would not obstruct the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008638


     occupants' outlook. Whilst the proposal would not therefore harm the living
     conditions of the occupants of No. 37, its siting and scale would nevertheless harm
     those of the occupants of No. 33, particularly with regard to outlook.
14. For these reasons, the development would not comply with the condition in Article
    3, Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph A.4(7) of the GPDO, and would harm the
    amenity of No 33, with particular regard to outlook.
Other Matter
15. The appellant has submitted examples of single-storey rear extensions that have
    been granted prior approval in the area, however I do not have the full details of
    those cases and cannot be certain that they represent a direct parallel with this
    appeal. Nevertheless, in this case I find that the proposal’s excessive height and
    proximity to No 33’s window would comprise a visually intrusive structure that
    would considerably restrict the outlook of the occupants of No 33 and unacceptably
    impact their amenity.
Conclusion and Recommendation
16. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

A Chan Markovitz
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
17. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

T Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
