Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by K William MTCP (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008885
34 Vincent Gardens, London NW2 7RP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Ruhullah Reja against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
     of Brent.
•    The application Ref is 25/3240.
•    The development proposed is for the retention of existing rear balcony and associated alterations;
     alterations to rooflights and rear door.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for an award of costs was made by Mr Ruhullah Reja against the
       Council of the London Borough of Brent. That application is the subject of a
       separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026. I am satisfied that the policy approach relevant to this appeal has
       not fundamentally changed and that no party has been prejudiced by its
       publication. I have had regard to the current version of the Framework in reaching
       my decision.
4.     The appeal scheme seeks retrospective permission for the development, and I
       was able to view the works which have already been undertaken in situ at my site
       visit. I have therefore based my decision on my observations and the submitted
       plans. I am aware that an enforcement notice has been served, the merits of that
       notice do not fall to be determined as part of this appeal.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the host building and the area; and the effect of the proposal on the living
       conditions of the occupiers of nearby properties with particular regard to privacy.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     The appeal site comprises 34 Vincent Gardens, a semi-detached dwellinghouse
       within an established suburban residential area. The surrounding area is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008885


       characterised by residential properties that have undergone a variety of alterations
       and extensions, including loft conversions, dormers, rooflights and rear additions.
7.     Planning permission was granted in 2021 for a range of works, including Juliet
       balconies at first-floor level and within a dormer window. This was proposed to be
       replicated at No 36. The current appeal relates to the retention of a full walk-out
       balcony at second-floor level together with associated alterations. Whilst the
       previous permission is a material consideration, a Juliet balcony differs materially
       from a projecting balcony in terms of its physical form, appearance, use and
       potential effects on neighbouring residents’ living conditions. The as-built rear
       elevation results in a markedly more complex and visually assertive composition
       than that originally approved.
8.     In particular, the balcony occupies a prominent position at upper floor level and
       extends across a substantial proportion of the rear of the host building above a
       rear extension. Although constructed from transparent materials, the balcony
       remains readily perceptible due to its width, continuous balustrade and elevated
       and projected position beyond the existing roof plane. Rather than appearing as a
       lightweight ancillary feature, it introduces a strong horizontal element that draws
       attention to the upper part of the building. Whereas the approved scheme retained
       a clear hierarchy between the various elements of the building, the addition of the
       balcony creates a more dominant and visually intrusive feature at upper-floor level.
       The removal of the original eaves to facilitate level access further weakens the
       legibility of the original roof form.
9.     The resulting composition appears layered and visually cluttered, with the balcony,
       balustrades, extensive glazing and enlarged roof form competing for attention.
       This diminishes the architectural coherence of the dwelling. It therefore sits
       somewhat uneasily against the otherwise conventional suburban form of the
       surrounding dwellings. Whilst the proposal is not visible from the street, the
       resultant form and complexity would be highly visible when viewed from
       neighbouring properties and gardens.
10. In contrast to the prevailing pattern of development, external domestic activity
    would occur at an elevated level rather than within ground-floor gardens, and the
    presence of furniture, domestic paraphernalia and associated activity on this
    relatively large platform would draw further attention to the development. Taken
    together, the appeal proposal would be in marked contrast to the prevailing
    character of the area, would not reflect the form of the host dwelling or the
    architecture of the wider area, and would appear incongruous.
11. The relevant parts of the Residential Extensions & Alterations Supplementary
    Planning Document (SPD) (January 2025) do not indicate that balconies are
    unacceptable in principle, nor do they contain detailed design criteria relating to
    architectural appearance, materials, scale, massing, visual dominance or impact
    on character. However, the support in the SPD for balconies relates to higher-
    density areas and locations identified for housing growth. In any event, whilst the
    proposed balcony would provide an additional area of private outdoor space, the
    property already benefits from a generous rear garden that is readily accessible
    and capable of serving that purpose.
12. Notwithstanding the above, I conclude that the proposal would be harmful to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area. It would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008885


       therefore conflict with Policy DMP1 of the Brent Local Plan 2019-2041 (the Local
       Plan), which seeks to ensure that development is of an appropriate siting, layout,
       scale, type, materials, detailing and design and complements the locality.
Living conditions
13. The immediate area is characterised by a degree of inter-visibility between upper-
    floor windows and rear gardens. The properties are served by long and relatively
    spacious gardens and, whilst views across adjoining plots are possible, they
    generally occur over substantial distances.
14. However, unlike views obtained from within a habitable room or from a Juliet
    balcony, the appeal balcony provides an external platform from which occupants
    can move around, pause and direct their attention across a wider field of view. As
    a result, it affords greater opportunities for overlooking and enables views to be
    obtained from a range of positions and angles that would not ordinarily be
    available through a window or Juliet balcony alone.
15. As such, during my site visit, although the garden and dwelling at No 32 Vincent
    Gardens were partly screened by existing vegetation, I was able to see directly
    into the garden of No 36 Vincent Gardens, including areas close to the dwelling, as
    well as towards its rear-facing windows. I could also see towards properties on
    Randall Avenue, although views of some garden areas were partially filtered by
    planting and outbuildings. Whilst views deep into rooms were not possible and
    were largely confined to areas immediately adjacent to upper and lower windows,
    the unenclosed balcony nevertheless provides greater opportunities to view the
    surrounding properties and gardens than would typically be available from the
    upper-floor window or Juliet balcony.
16. Furthermore, because occupants using the balcony would themselves be readily
    visible to neighbouring residents, those using nearby gardens and rooms would be
    likely to experience a greater perception of overlooking and surveillance. This
    increased awareness of being observed would arise from the use of an elevated
    external platform that is very different from the predominant built form of the host
    dwelling and neighbouring properties, and which projects beyond the established
    roof form.
17. I understand that the occupiers of No 32 support the proposal. Whilst No 36 is
    currently in the same ownership as the appeal property, there is nothing before me
    to demonstrate that this arrangement would continue in perpetuity. Planning
    permissions run with the land rather than the individual applicant. Accordingly,
    neither the support expressed by the occupiers of No 32 nor the current ownership
    position of No 36 is determinative of the appeal outcome.
18. The enjoyment of a reasonable degree of privacy is an important aspect of a
    person's living conditions and wellbeing. Although the surrounding area exhibits
    some degree of inter-visibility, residents can reasonably expect a level of privacy
    that enables them to use their homes and gardens without feeling subject to undue
    observation. Whilst I have had regard to the separation distances between the
    balcony and surrounding properties, neighbouring occupiers would nevertheless
    be likely to feel less comfortable using their gardens and rear rooms as a
    consequence of the elevated position of the balcony and the increased perception
    of overlooking and surveillance. This would lead to a harmful reduction in the level
    of privacy enjoyed to occupiers on both Randall Avenue and Vincent Gardens.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008885


19. For these reasons, I conclude that the balcony would result in an unacceptable
    loss of privacy for neighbouring occupiers. The proposal would therefore conflict
    with Policy DMP1 of the Brent Local Plan 2019-2041 and the Residential
    Extensions & Alterations SPD (2025), which seek, amongst other things, to
    safeguard residential amenity.
Other considerations
20. The Council's suggested conditions are put forward without prejudice to its case
    for dismissal of the appeal. In those circumstances, the submission of suggested
    conditions is not inherently inconsistent with its position that planning permission
    should be refused. Accordingly, I have considered whether the suggested
    conditions would be necessary, relevant, precise and reasonable.
21. The use of planning conditions, including additional privacy screens, increased
    balustrade heights, planting or other mitigation measures would include a material
    change to the appearance of the balcony. However, no detailed proposals have
    been submitted and therefore their effectiveness, appearance and practicality
    cannot be properly assessed. Nevertheless, a substantial or increased height
    privacy screen at this elevated position could itself appear visually intrusive and
    result in additional harm to the character and appearance of the area.
    Furthermore, screening to the sides of the balcony would not address views
    available from the front of the platform.
22. No information has been provided regarding the nature of any planting, including
    species, extent, maintenance requirements or its long-term effectiveness in
    providing privacy. Having regard to these uncertainties, and my findings in respect
    of the proposal's effect on character and appearance, I am not satisfied that
    planning conditions would provide an appropriate or reasonable means of
    overcoming the harm.
23. I have had regard to the appellant's submissions regarding the benefits of the
    proposal, including the provision of additional outdoor amenity space and greater
    flexibility in the use of the property. These are positive aspects of the development
    and would provide some benefit to the occupiers of the property. However, little
    substantive evidence has been provided regarding any particular current or future
    accommodation needs, and the benefits arising from additional flexibility are
    therefore limited and private in nature.
24. I note that the proposal would comply with a number of policies relating to housing
    standards. However, these are matters that development would ordinarily be
    expected to satisfy and therefore weigh neither in favour of nor against the
    proposal.
Other Matters
25. The appellant notes that no objections were received in relation to the earlier
    permission for Juliet balconies. However, the planning application and appeal
    attracted both objections and expressions of support. In any event, the presence
    or absence of representations does not determine whether planning harm arises.
26. I appreciate the appellant’s desire for the planning appeal to have been
    determined before the expiry of the compliance period specified in the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008885


       enforcement notice. However, I am not bound by the timescales set out in the
       notice.
Planning Balance
27. I have carefully considered all other matters raised by the appellant. Whilst the
    proposal would provide some benefits, these would be limited. Taken individually
    and collectively, those benefits do not outweigh the significant harm I have
    identified to the character and appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding
    area, and to neighbouring living conditions.
Conclusion
28. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    I therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.


K Williams
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
