Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by P Barton BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008804
Overs Farm, Church Lane start of to Haughton Farm junction, Tasley, Bridgnorth,
Shropshire WV16 4RF
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Tranter against the decision of Shropshire Council.
    The application Ref is 25/04206/FUL.
    The development proposed is described as “Siting of five Wigwam cabins for holiday use on a parcel
     of land at Overs Farm, Haughton, Bridgnorth. The proposal also includes the use of an existing
     timber cabin as a reception/office facility, the provision of parking spaces within the existing yard
     area and a private treatment plant for foul drainage”.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
      published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given the opportunity to
      comment, and the comments received have been taken into account in the
      determination of the appeal.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue is whether the site would be in a suitable location for the proposed
      development, having regard to the spatial strategy in the development plan, and
      accessibility to services and facilities.
Reasons
4.    Policy CS1 of the Shropshire Local Development Framework: Adopted Core
      Strategy (March 2011) (CS) sets out that in rural areas, development will be
      located predominantly in community hubs and community clusters, and outside
      these settlements they will primarily be for, amongst other things, economic
      diversification. CS Policy CS5 lists criteria for suitable development in the
      countryside, of which one relates to sustainable rural tourism and leisure and
      recreation proposals, which require a countryside location. This is subject to
      compliance with CS Policy CS16, which in turn includes visitor accommodation in
      accessible locations served by a range of services and facilities, and stipulates
      that proposals be close to or within settlements, or an established and viable
      tourism enterprise where accommodation is required. This policy context provides
      a distinction between development that supports or diversifies existing rural
      enterprises and new standalone commercial uses.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008804


5.    Located in the countryside, the proposed cabins would be positioned on a parcel
      of land that contains fruit trees and is mainly enclosed by high vegetation. Adjacent
      to this, and also within the appeal site, is a track accessed off the adjoining
      highway, leading to an existing area of hardstanding where a number of modest
      structures are positioned, including an existing timber cabin that would be used as
      an office/reception. To the immediate west is Overs Farm, a detached 2-storey
      dwelling, and surrounding the appeal site are predominantly open fields.
6.    There is no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that Haughton and
      Tasley are settlements and there is very limited information in terms of local public
      transport services. Bridgnorth appears to be the closest settlement with a range of
      services and facilities, which is a noticeable distance from the site. Therefore, I
      have found that the site is neither close to nor within a settlement.
7.    Moreover, access to Bridgenorth is via a narrow country lane with no footpaths or
      street lighting, and not an attractive environment for all but experienced walkers
      and cyclists, particularly in the dark and during poor weather conditions.
      Consequently, visitors to the proposed development would be heavily reliant on
      private cars. Although rural areas are unlikely to have the same level of public
      transport as urban areas, this does not give reason to locate development within
      locations that are inherently inaccessible by means other than private car.
8.    I understand that until 2000, the site was run as a pig farm, by previous owners,
      and the area not within the appeal site or the farmhouse now consists of woodland
      and a grassland field. The appellants state that they are keen to develop a tourism
      enterprise at Overs Farm. Based on the evidence before me there is no
      established and viable tourism enterprise on the site.
9.    Although the appellants identify that the intention is to become part of a franchise,
      which has a significant number of locations across Britain, there is nothing before
      me preventing the proposed holiday accommodation from not operating under the
      franchise. Taking all the factors into account, including the nature of the franchise
      business model, I am not persuaded that the proposal relates to an established
      and viable tourism enterprise.
10. Whilst it is argued that a rural setting is necessary for this type of proposal and
    visitors could use the adjoining woodland, there is no compelling case before me
    that the proposal is required in this particular location. I appreciate the appellants
    wish to operate the holiday accommodation from the site to assist in securing the
    woodland’s long-term future. However, this does not negate the development
    plan’s locational requirement to be close to or within a settlement with access to a
    range of services and facilities.
11. For the reasons given, the site would not be in a suitable location for the proposed
    development, having regard to the spatial strategy in the development plan, and
    accessibility to services and facilities, and contrary to CS Policies CS1, CS5 and
    CS16. I have also found conflict with CS Policies CS6 and CS13, as well as Policy
    MD11 of the Shropshire Council Site Allocations and Management of Development
    (SAMDev) Plan (17 December 2015) (SAMDev Plan). Together, these policies,
    amongst other things, support green tourism, and seek an accessible environment,
    where opportunities for walking, cycling and use of public transport can be
    maximised and the need for car-based travel can be reduced, as well as
    compliance with CS Policies CS5 and CS16.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008804


12. The reason for refusal includes SAMDev Plan Policies MD2 and MD7a, which
    relate to sustainable design and housing developments in the countryside. I have
    found these policies, as well as whether the proposed structures would conform
    with the legal definition of a caravan, not to be determinative in the consideration
    of this main issue.
Planning Balance
13. The appeal site would not be in a suitable location for the proposed development,
    having regard to the spatial strategy in the development plan, and accessibility to
    services and facilities. I have found that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan as a whole.
14. As a result of the site’s location outside of a settlement, policy S5 of the
    Framework is relevant. It lists certain forms of development that should be
    approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    in the Framework. If development proposals do not fall within one of the categories
    set out in policy S5, they should only be approved in exceptional circumstances,
    where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse
    effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to promoting
    sustainable patterns of movement.
15. Paragraph 2 of Annex A of the Framework states that development plan policies
    should not be given reduced weight simply because they were adopted prior to the
    publication of the Framework. The spatial strategy set out in CS Policies CS1,
    CS5, CS6, CS13 and CS16 and SAMDev Plan Policiy MD11 is consistent with the
    Framework’s aim in locating development where it can support sustainable
    patterns of development, particularly policy TR3. Despite the requirement for a
    rural location, there is no compelling argument that the nature of the development
    would make it impractical to limit the need to travel, particularly by private car, and
    offer a genuine choice of transport modes. Moreover, there are no details before
    me that opportunities exist to improve walking, wheeling, cycling and public
    transport, and enhance the connectivity of the area. Consequently, due to a lack of
    genuinely sustainable travel choices, I afford very substantial weight to this
    conflict.
16. A lack of harm or policy compliance in respect of the effect of the proposal on the
    character and appearance of the area, as well as the highway, would have a
    neutral effect which neither weigh for nor against the proposal.
17. On the other side of the balance, there would be benefits associated with the
    development. In line with Policy E2(1) of the Framework, substantial weight is
    given to the economic benefits, which would include the period of construction and
    the accommodation’s occupation by visitors. Further benefits would be in the form
    of the appellants’ ambition to create a legacy to help secure the woodland’s long-
    term future and enable visitors to access this land. Moreover, Policy E4(1)(b) and
    (c) supports the diversification of land-based businesses as well as rural leisure
    and tourism. However, as there is no cogent case as to why the proposal needs to
    be located where it is not well served by public transport, policy E4(2) offers
    minimal support, even though the proposal would utilise an existing structure.
18. I recognise that the accommodation would be for those who wish to experience a
    countryside location. For the purposes of my assessment, accepting that S5(1)(b)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008804


       applies, and a location outside a settlement is necessary, balancing all
       considerations and having regard to the scale of the proposal, the benefits would
       be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the
       national decision-making policies in the Framework.
19. For completeness and applying S5(4), the benefits would not substantially
    outweigh the adverse effects, and exceptional circumstances have not been
    demonstrated.
20. Therefore, in either scenario, the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development set out in policy S5 of the Framework does not apply.
Conclusion
21. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

P Barton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
