Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by N Praine BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6008486
Flat 2, 349 Hackney Road, London E2 8PR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Samantha Woolfe against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
     of Tower Hamlets.
•    The application Ref is PA/25/01372.
•    The development proposed is described as the replacement of sash windows to Flat 2 (three at front
     of flat and one at rear).
Appeal B Ref: 6008490
Flat 2, 349 Hackney Road, London E2 8PR
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Samantha Woolfe against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
     of Tower Hamlets.
•    The application Ref is PA/25/01373.
•    The works proposed are described as the replacement of sash windows to Flat 2 (three at front of flat
     and one at rear).

Decisions
1.     The appeals are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     There are two appeals on this site. They relate to the planning application and
       listed building consent for the same scheme. To avoid duplication, I have dealt
       with them together, except where otherwise indicated.
3.     As the proposal relates to a listed building and conservation area, I have had
       special regard to sections 16, 66 and 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended) (“the Act”).
4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026
       (the Framework) prior to the determination of this appeal. The main parties have
       been given an opportunity to comment on changes relevant to their respective
       positions. I have taken their views into account in reaching my decision and I am
       satisfied that no party has been prejudiced as a result.
5.     As set out on the application form, development has started and is now complete.
       However, my assessment of the proposal is based on the plans before the Council
       at the time of the planning application. I shall refer to the proposed development in
       the future tense throughout my decision, although certain aspects may already be
       completed. I will also refer to the former now removed windows as ‘existing’ for the
       purposes of consistency given the works do not currently benefit from planning
       permission.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008486 and 6008490


Main Issue
6.       The main issue is whether the proposal would:
             •    preserve the Grade II listed building, 337-353, Hackney Road1 (“the Listed
                  Building”) and any of the features of special architectural or historic interest
                  that it possesses; and
             •    preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the Hackney Road
                  Conservation Area (“the Conservation Area”).
Reasons
Special interest and significance
7.       The Listed Building is a circa nineteenth century, three-storey building with further
         basement and roof levels. Materials broadly comprise stock brick, slate roofing,
         and timber sash windows with traditional glazing. The significance of the Listed
         Building, in so far as it relates to the appeals before me, is largely derived from its
         age, form, historic fabric and architectural detailing. The Listed Building is
         therefore an important survival of a nineteenth-century building.
8.       The Listed Building also lies within a Conservation Area. The Hackney Road
         Conservation Area Character Appraisal (“the Appraisal”) suggests that the
         Hackney Road is likely to follow an important prehistoric routeway which at one
         time would have been used for the driving of livestock from Essex to Smithfield
         Market. The existing character and appearance is varied along the road, but the
         Appraisal confirms that buildings are mainly 19th century with cohesive groups of
         terraced dwellings featuring within this street scene.
9.       As far as it relates to these appeals, the appearance of the historic townscape and
         the character of the terraces is an essential component of the significance of this
         part of the Conservation Area. The Listed Building is an important element of the
         streetscape as it sits in a prominent location along the Hackney Road. This marks
         its quality both on its own and for the wider contribution it makes to the character
         of the Conservation Area.
Effect of the proposal
10. The appeal proposal relates to Flat 2, 349 Hackney Road (“Flat 2”) which sits
    within the first floor of the Listed Building. The works are for the replacement of
    windows to this flat only. The existing sash windows, three to the front and one to
    the rear, would be removed and replaced with painted timber frame double glazed
    units. None of the other existing windows within the Listed Building would be
    altered by the proposed works.
11. Heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource and there is limited evidence before
    me regarding the condition of the existing windows, such as their frames, fittings,
    ironmongery and glazing. Consequently, it has not been adequately demonstrated
    that repair and retention of the existing fabric has been robustly explored before
    replacement was pursued.
12. Turning to the proposed windows, it has not been clearly shown that the proposed
    double glazing would be of an appropriate depth when compared to the existing

1
    Historic England List Entry Number and Name: 1065175 and 337-353, Hackney Road E2.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6008486 and 6008490


         glazing. In addition, while the documented evidence does not identify a colour for
         the spacer, any increase in depth would be emphasised further by a dark spacer2.
         It has also not been clearly shown, in the documented evidence before me, that
         reflections from the double glazing would be identical to that of the existing
         glazing.
13. Although the glazing bars would broadly reflect the proportions of the existing
    windows, significant elements of the proposed frames, including the stiles, meeting
    rails, top rails and introduction of horns, would be noticeably wider and bulkier than
    the existing windows. These increases would diminish the delicacy and refinement
    of the existing sash window design and would detract from the way the Listed
    Building is experienced.
14. While neither the Listed Building entry nor the Appraisal refers specifically to
    window dimensions for this Grade II listed building, this does not mean the
    windows are less important. Proposals must preserve the special interest as a
    whole. In this case, the existing windows form a key component of that
    significance and are referred to in the list description.
15. Taken together, the changes to the glazing and frame dimensions would fail to
    respect the proportions and appearance of the existing windows at Flat 2. When
    viewed in the context of the wider Listed Building the works would harmfully
    contrast with the other retained windows. This would be harmful to the significance
    of the Listed Building and the same harm would also be experienced when viewed
    within the Conservation Area. Indeed, the Appraisal identifies the loss of original
    features such as windows as a threat to the Conservation Area. This harm
    undermines the cohesive appearance of this terrace and the important contribution
    it makes to both the character and appearance of the Conservation Area.
Public benefits and heritage balance
16. The Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the conservation
    of designated heritage assets. It further states that any harm to the significance of
    a designated heritage asset should have clear and convincing justification. The
    proposal would result in harm, albeit at the lower end of the scale given the
    modest nature of the works. Nevertheless, this is of considerable importance and
    weight. In such circumstances, the public benefits of the scheme should be
    weighed against the identified harm.
17. The proposed works could improve energy efficiency, for example reducing heat
    loss. I appreciate that enabling energy efficiency would be an important public
    benefit and substantial weight should be given to the benefits of improving the
    energy efficiency of existing buildings. However, evidence showing energy
    efficiency gains from the proposed works has not been submitted. Even if it had, I
    have not been provided with clear and convincing evidence that other, less
    harmful, energy-efficiency measures have been considered and discounted before
    arriving at the current proposal. This, therefore, reduces the value of this public
    benefit and I therefore ascribe it limited positive weight.
18. Economic benefits would also be realised as part of the proposed works, however,
    given the scale of the works, I ascribe this limited positive weight.


2
    At the time of my site visit the unauthorised spacing bars were black.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             3
Appeal Decision 6008486 and 6008490


19. The public benefits either alone or in combination would be insufficient to outweigh
    the substantial weight attached to the heritage harm identified. Accordingly, the
    proposal would fail to preserve the Listed Building, and any of the features of
    special architectural or historic interest that it possesses, and it would fail to
    preserve or enhance both the character and the appearance of the Conservation
    Area.
20. This would not satisfy the requirements of the Act, the Framework, and it would
    conflict with the relevant provisions of Policies S.DH1 and S.DH3 of the Tower
    Hamlets Local Plan 2020 and Policy HC1 of the London Plan 2021. These,
    amongst other things, seek to preserve heritage assets.
Other Matters
21. I note that applications3 for the replacement of front and rear windows with slimline
    double-glazed windows at 365 Hackney Road were approved by the Council. In
    this case the glazing would be slimline with white spacers. Additionally, it has not
    been robustly demonstrated that these replacement window frames at No 365
    have the same level of variance over those they replaced when compared to the
    current appeal scheme. On this basis I do not consider this other site to be directly
    comparable to the appeal proposal before me.
22. My attention is also drawn to 345 Hackney Road4 for the replacement of a window,
    also approved by the Council. This case incorporates vacuum-type glazing which
    the Council’s Delegated Planning Decision Report identifies as acceptable given
    the width between glazing panels would be 0.1mm. There is limited evidence
    before me to suggest the proposed works before me are identical to this scheme
    at No 345. In addition, it has not been clearly shown that the previous windows
    and works allowed to No 345 have the same level of variance in detail to the
    current appeal before me. This therefore does not change my overall findings.
23. The proposed works could reduce noise from the adjacent road. However,
    evidence demonstrating whether current noise levels are adverse or what noise
    reduction would be achieved has not been provided. Even if it had, I have not been
    given clear and convincing evidence that other, less harmful, noise-reduction
    measures have been considered and discounted. I therefore ascribe this limited
    positive weight.
24. It is not clear what state of repair the previous windows were in, so any
    improvements in operation of the windows, or their safety, is particularly difficult to
    ascribe positive weight to. Any gains in this respect, therefore, carry limited weight.
Conclusion
25. The harm to the heritage assets would not be outweighed by the public benefits in
     both appeals. I also consider that there are no material considerations of such
     weight to lead me to the conclusion that Appeal A should be decided other than in
     accordance with the development plan and relevant national policies. For the
     above reasons, and having regard to all matters raised, I conclude that both
     appeals should be dismissed.

N Praine INSPECTOR
3
    Refs: PA/25/00883/NC and Ref: PA/25/00937/NC.
4
    Ref: PA/24/00166/NC.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
