 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 7 August 2026
 by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6008374
 71 Upwell Road, March PE15 9EB
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a
     refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Mills against the decision of Fenland District Council.
 •   The application reference is F/YR25/0996/F.
 •   The development proposed is described as on the Council’s Decision Notice as ‘Erect part
     single-storey/part first-floor side extension, a single-storey rear extension and a 1.8m high
     (max) boundary wall to existing dwelling, involving the demolition of existing conservatory
     and car port, and installation of render to original building and removal of chimney.’

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the part single-storey/part first-floor
   side extension.
2. The appeal is allowed insofar as it relates to the single-storey rear extension and a
   1.8m high (max) boundary wall to existing dwelling, installation of render to
   approved/existing components, the demolition of existing conservatory, and
   removal of chimney; and planning permission is granted for a single-storey rear
   extension and a 1.8m high (max) boundary wall to existing dwelling, installation of
   render to approved/existing components, demolition of existing conservatory, and
   removal of chimney at 71 Upwell Road, March PE15 9EB in accordance with
   application Ref: F/YR25/0996/F and the following conditions:
     1) The approved scheme shall take place no later than three (3) years from the
        date of this decision;
     2) The approved scheme shall be undertaken in accordance with approved plans:
         •    ‘Planning Drawing 2,’ Drawing No: 7222/PL02A; Dated Sept 2025;
         •    ‘Planning Drawing 1,’ Drawing No: 7222/PL01B; Dated Sept 2025;
Preliminary Matter
3. I have taken the description of the development from the Council’s Decision Notice
   as this more accurately describes the individual elements requiring planning
   consent.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the existing building
   and the character and appearance of the locality.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            1
 Appeal Decision: 6008374


Reasons
5. The appeal site fronts Upwell Road to the North with the footprint of the building
   having an inverted L-Shape. The component running north to south is two storeys
   tall with pitched roof with gable fronting the street, whereas the component running
   east to west is a single storey element with pitched roof fronting Upwell Road, with
   a small extension to form a carport, and a small conservatory extension to the rear
   of the dwelling. Whilst it is unclear whether the dwelling was built as part of the
   residential estate of the adjacent Cavalry Drive, the building is seen within this
   context where there are very similar designed dwellings and materials as part of
   this speculative housing estate with functionally designed single and two storey
   dwellings, pitched roof forms with concrete tiles and buff brick with small single
   storey garage which allow gaps at first floor level. Dwellings are typically detached,
   setback from the street with vegetated front gardens with gaps in between and
   around dwellings which adds a positive vegetated and spacious element to the
   character and appearance of the area.
6. Along Upwell Road, to the opposite side of the appeal site is a terrace of Victorian
   properties, and more mid-late twentieth century dwellings that maintain functional
   designs, predominantly detached and setback from the street with an emphasis on
   spaces in and around dwellings where there are also views to the countryside
   beyond. A walking path also adjoins the eastern boundary of the appeal site.
   These are some of the elements which contribute to local character and
   distinctiveness. Unfortunately, some of the front gardens have been hardscaped to
   allow for vehicular parking which is a negative aspect of the character, however
   open front gardens and the dominance of gaps, vegetation and spaces in and
   around buildings assists in reinforcing the positive qualities of the locality.
7. In undertaking extensions and alterations to existing dwellings, the Fenland Local
   Plan (LP) Policy LP16 is a design led policy that seeks development achieve a
   number of design principles such as making a positive contribution to the
   surrounding character and identity of a locality, in terms of design, siting, and scale
   amongst others.
8. Given the positive influence towards character and appearance of functional
   designs and visual gaps in and around dwellings, the proposed first floor extension
   would be equal in height and in-line with the two storey component, and would fill
   much of the gap at first floor level between the appeal dwelling and the side
   boundary. The extension introduces a large amount of visual massing, an
   elongated ridge and bulk which overcomplicates the quite simple and functional
   form by removing a positive influence of the visual gap and giving an almost
   complete two storey wall of built form from the appeal dwelling to the boundary.
   The resulting scheme would mean that the proposed extension would have a
   domineering presence to the existing building and would change the hierarchy of
   the building so that the extension would become the new front façade, and the
   existing two storey element would be subservient to the proposed extension.
9. Whilst I appreciate explanations from the Appellant with regards to the design
   intentions, and the changes that have been made to accommodate a past refusal,
   the proposed scheme would not provide a satisfactory architectural approach for
   this particular site. I also acknowledge that similar examples of extensions may



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
    Appeal Decision: 6008374


       have been constructed1 but the extensions or existing site context are not
       analogous. The approval of this nearby scheme illustrates that the Council are not
       against extensions in principle but are taking a site-specific approach to the
       application.
10. In conclusion of this matter, the resultant design and architectural approach would
    remove positive aspects of character and local distinctiveness and would be
    detrimental to the character of the host building and the character and appearance
    of the locality. As such the proposal would be made contrary to LP Policy LP16 as
    described previously.
Other matters
11. I note that the reason for refusal on the Decision Notice is a second component of
    the scheme involving character whereby the Council have concerns over the render
    that is to be applied to the existing dwelling. The reasoning for the render is to
    enable a more homogenous appearance as parts of the dwelling are different
    coloured brick as well as blockwork. Whilst I agree that brick is a dominant material
    in the local area, and that render is typically applied as a feature or with other
    design characteristics like quoins; this is not to say that any new form of
    development or material would be detrimental to the character of the area. There
    are proposed to be large elements of render, but also horizontal cladding and
    brickwork which does provide contrast and articulation and seeks to break up large
    expanses of render. That said, whilst there would be some change to the
    appearance of the dwelling via the application of different finishes, I do not find this
    to be adversely detrimental to the character and appearance of the area and would
    be in general compliance with LP Policy LP16.
12. The Council in their Officer Report detailed an assessment of the rear extension
    which involves the demolition of the existing conservatory and a deeper single
    storey extension which is seen as acceptable. Additionally, the Officer Report also
    sees the removal of the chimney and proposed boundary wall as acceptable. I have
    no reason to dispute the decision of the Council with regards to these proposals
    which are considered appropriate and in accordance with the Development Plan.
Conclusion and Conditions
13. For these reasons, and having considered all matters raised in evidence and from
    what I saw during my site visit, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed and
    planning permission granted insofar as it relates to elements described in
    Paragraph 2 above, subject to the conditions as detailed in this letter.
14. As the rear extension and boundary wall are both physically and functionally
    severable, I consider a split decision would be a logical outcome. The proposed
    demolition of the single storey carport and formation of an extended garage also
    appeared to be appropriate, however the roof form is not severable from the
    proposed 1st floor extension, and therefore could not be included within this split
    decision.
15. I refer to the approved conditions in accordance with the Planning Practice
    Guidance (PPG). Conditions 1 and 2 are standard conditions which set the standard
    time limit and approved plans which are necessary for the avoidance of doubt and in

1
    Council Planning Ref: F/YR21/1453/F, 58 Upwell Road


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  3
 Appeal Decision: 6008374


    the interests of proper planning. A condition regarding matching materials would not
    be required given that materials are specified on the approved plans.

J Somers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
