Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026
by Alexander O’Doherty LLB (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008736
The Parsonage House, 90 High Street, Watchfield, Swindon SN6 8SW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mark Fenna against Vale of White Horse District Council.
•    The application Ref is P26/V0142/HH.
•    The development proposed is described on the application form as, “Proposed modifications and
     extensions to Parsonage House, Watchfield, SN6 8SW”.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for proposed modifications and
      extensions, including rear part single and part two-storey extension, glazed garden
      link extension and conversion of existing outbuilding to home office and garden
      room is refused.
Preliminary Matters
2.    Although 2 applicants are named on the application form, only one is named on
      the appeal form. As the appeal has proceeded in the name of that one person
      only, this has been reflected in the banner heading, above.
3.    Differing to the description of development in the banner heading above, the
      Council's acknowledgement letter (dated 27 February 2026) accurately describes
      the development as shown on the supporting plans as, "Proposed modifications
      and extensions, including rear part single and part two-storey extension, glazed
      garden link extension and conversion of existing outbuilding to home office and
      garden room". I have used this description in my consideration of the appeal and
      in my decision since it best describes the proposed development in precise and
      concise terms.
4.    Since the appeal responds to the Council not having determined the application,
      there is no decision notice. Nonetheless, they have stated it would have been
      refused. The reasons for which have informed the main issue in this appeal.
5.    The appellant’s Final Comments included new evidence in the form of factual
      statements and several photographs. The Council was provided with an
      opportunity to comment on this new evidence. The Council submitted
      representations in this regard. The appellant was offered an opportunity to
      comment on the Council’s response to the appellant’s Final Comments. The
      appellant submitted representations in this regard.
6.    The Council’s response to the appellant’s Final Comments included a footnote
      referencing the Bat Surveys for Professional Ecologists: Good Practice Guidelines

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008736


         (Good Practice Guidelines), a copy of a single Figure found in the Good Practice
         Guidelines, and a 15 mm crevice-depth criterion for bats which appears to be
         derived from that Figure.
7.       The appellant contends that this material has been submitted in breach of
         paragraph 9.5.7.1 of the relevant Procedural Guide1. However, that paragraph
         relates to comments at the 7-week stage. That paragraph does not state that it is
         applicable to the submission of comments after the 7-week stage. Of greater
         relevance is paragraph 12.1.6 of the Procedural Guide, which provides that for
         appeals against non-determination by the Local Planning Authority, further appeal
         submissions during the timetable may be deemed acceptable by the appointed
         Inspector at their discretion.
8.       The footnote only provides the source for the Good Practice Guidelines referred to,
         and the Figure and the depth criterion merely draw out specific details from those
         guidelines. None of these matters are technical evidence in the sense of
         qualitative or quantitative data relating to the appeal site. The Figure illustrates the
         point being made, which relates directly to the arguments made in appellant’s Final
         Comments. The Council’s response as a whole is confined to the points raised in
         the appellant’s Final Comments. Moreover, I note that the appellant referred to the
         Good Practice Guidelines in their Final Comments, meaning that it did not
         constitute a new, previously unseen document from the appellant’s perspective.
         Taking all of the above into account, and applying the procedural discretion
         inherent in non-determination appeals (referred to above), the whole of the
         Council’s response has been admitted as part of the appeal process.
9.       Paragraph 9.5.7.1 of the Procedural Guide provides that, amongst other things,
         comments at the 7-week stage may not introduce new material or technical
         evidence. It follows that even if the Council had referred to the Good Practice
         Guidelines, the Figure, and the crevice-depth criterion in their statement of case at
         the 5-week stage, the appellant would ordinarily have been barred from
         introducing new evidence in response to it. The offer to the appellant to respond to
         the Council’s response to the appellant’s Final Comments was made on the same
         basis. Therefore, the fact that these items appeared later in the appeals process
         when they potentially could have appeared earlier has not prejudiced the
         appellant’s ability to respond, nor their standing in terms of equality of arms.
10. In any event, in the appellant’s response to the Council’s response to the
    appellant’s Final Comments, the appellant did in fact provide representations in
    relation to the footnote, the Figure, and the crevice-depth criterion. As the
    appellant has had a fair opportunity to comment on all these matters (including any
    perceived shift(s) / pivot(s) in the Council’s arguments), no prejudice to their
    interests has occurred. Taking account of the points made at paragraph 2.9 of the
    appellant’s response to the Council’s response to the appellant’s Final Comments,
    I have not reduced the weight to be given to this material. I have taken full account
    of all of the evidence and arguments submitted as part of this appeal.
11. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
    August 2026. Having regard to the main issue in this appeal as set out below, the
    Framework does not raise any new matters which are determinative to the
    outcome of this appeal.

1
    Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England. For appeals relating to applications dated on or before 31 March 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6008736


Main Issue
12. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on protected species.
Reasons
13. The appeal site comprises The Parsonage House, a well-proportioned early
    Georgian-era detached dwelling of solid-wall lime-plaster construction set within a
    large garden. Also present on site is a single-storey detached “T”-shaped
    outbuilding, a detached double garage, and a shed.
14. Reference has been made to Circular 06/2005 (the Circular), a Government
    circular on biodiversity and geological conservation. The Circular provides that,
    amongst other things, it is essential that the presence or otherwise of protected
    species, and the extent that they may be affected by the proposed development, is
    established before the planning permission is granted, otherwise all relevant
    material considerations may not have been addressed in making the decision. The
    Circular also provides that, bearing in mind the delay and cost that may be
    involved, developers should not be required to undertake surveys for protected
    species unless there is a reasonable likelihood of the species being present and
    affected by the development.
15. Ecology is a specialist area of expertise. The only professional opinion I have
    before me from a qualified ecologist is that submitted by the Council. That does
    not mean that their opinion is to be accepted without question. It does mean that
    when making a judgement based on the balance of probabilities, given their
    acknowledged area of expertise, a sufficient amount of corroborative evidence
    must be provided to rebut their conclusions. I have had regard to Morge v
    Hampshire CC2 and the appellant’s commentary on this case in reaching my
    findings.
16. Both parties have relied on photographs to support their case. The Council’s
    photographs were taken by a lay person. Whether or not this amounts to ‘lay
    evidence’, the photographs were assessed by a Senior Ecology Officer (SEO).
    The Council’s resulting opinion is the opinion of a qualified professional based on
    the available evidence. Conversely, the appellant has not provided any
    assessment of photographs made by an appropriately-qualified person.
17. The appellant has mentioned that approximately 11 months of continuous
    occupation and intensive refurbishment works (including comprehensive,
    prolonged, and intensive internal inspection) has taken place. Few specific details
    (such as records / dated photographs of refurbishment works and / or ongoing
    inspections across this 11-month period, for example) have been provided to
    corroborative this.
18. Nor has evidence been provided to show that those persons who undertook the
    surveys / internal observations are qualified with respect to recognising the
    presence of protected species, or in ecology in general. Hence, the appellant’s
    statements as to the presence or absence of protected species on site are not
    informed by the judgement of a professional qualified in the relevant field.
    Whereas the Council’s conclusions arise from the application of professional
    judgement from a person qualified in ecology.

2
    [2011] UKSC 2


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008736


19. The SEO has referenced Government standing advice on bats and development,
    which provides guidance on the circumstances where a survey may be required.
    Whilst this guidance is advisory, as it has been produced by Natural England – the
    Government’s adviser for the natural environment in England – it is a material
    planning consideration.
20. The SEO has stated that, in their professional experience, historic structures are
    often particularly likely to provide features suitable for roosting bats, with external
    features typically including lifted, broken or missing roof coverings, lifted lead
    flashing, damage to roof woodwork, gaps between roof woodwork and walling, and
    holes in walls. Given their expertise in this area, I attach substantial weight to
    these statements.
21. In assessing the site photographs taken by the Council’s Case Officer, the SEO
    identified localised lifted slates to the western main roof pitch and on the
    outbuilding as potentially providing features suitable for roosting bats. As the
    proposed development would not affect the main roof pitch on the western side,
    this aspect of the Council’s concerns is not discussed further.
22. With respect to the outbuilding, despite the concerns raised by the Council, few
    details have been provided by the appellant to illustrate whether or not the lifted
    slates on the outbuilding provide suitable habitat for bats. Mention has been made
    of the outbuilding being in continuous daily use, but the extent to which this might
    affect any use of the outbuilding by bats has not been quantified by a person
    qualified in ecology. Overall, sufficient evidence has not been provided to rebut the
    Council’s assessment that there is a reasonable likelihood of bats utilising the
    outbuilding, due to the presence of localised lifted slates. The proposed
    development would involve re-roofing part of the outbuilding to accommodate a
    glazed link and 2 new rooflights. Sufficient corroborative evidence has not been
    provided to demonstrate that these works would not affect any bats.
23. In assessing the site photographs taken by the Council’s Case Officer, the SEO
    identified stonework holes and deteriorated inbuilt timberwork in the single storey
    stone lean-to extension as potentially providing features suitable for bats. As
    mentioned above, the professional experience of the SEO indicates that holes in
    walls are external features which are likely to provide features suitable for use by
    bats.
24. At the site visit I observed holes on the upper-most portion of the southern
    elevation of the lean-to. The appellant has stated that the holes referred to are
    weathered pointing, but no substantive evidence has been provided to corroborate
    this statement. Sufficient evidence has not been provided to rebut the Council’s
    assessment that there is a reasonable likelihood of bats utilising the holes
    identified. As the proposed development would remove this existing lean-to, it
    would affect any bats utilising the holes within the lean-to.
25. The SEO referred to other features which could potentially be suitable for use by
    bats. As, based on the above-mentioned features, I have found that there is a
    reasonable likelihood of bats being present and affected by the proposed
    development, it is not necessary to discuss those other features any further detail.
26. A positive observation of badger activity on site (including a sett), would provide
    certainty that badgers are active on site. However, the relevant test in the Circular
    does not set the evidential threshold so high. The Circular only requires that there

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008736


      is a reasonable likelihood of a species being present and affected by the
      development.
27. The Government’s standing advice for badgers states that a survey is required if
    there is suitable habitat for sett building or foraging. In this regard, due to the
    landscape context of the site in June 2024, in the SEO’s professional opinion, the
    site likely supported reasonably extensive sett-building habitat for badger,
    particularly along the western and northern boundary. Furthermore, lightly-
    managed vegetation cover and other features providing cover were still evident on
    the eastern boundary during the Council’s Case Officer’s visit in May 2026.
28. I note that the garden is in regular recreational use, resulting in ongoing human
    disturbance. Extensive vegetation clearance has also occurred. Even so, the
    SEO’s professional opinion is that although the likelihood of any badger setts on
    site being active has likely been diminished by these changes, a sett could still
    reasonably be present on site in a less heavily used part of the site, especially if
    there was a history of presence before the clearance.
29. The photographs submitted by the appellant do not provide a comprehensive
    coverage of the garden. Indeed, substantial parts of the garden (including formerly
    densely-vegetated boundaries) are not covered by these photographs. Although
    the appellant has pointed out that no sign of badger setts has been found, no
    evidence has been submitted by a person qualified in ecology to corroborate this.
    Taking account of the landscape context described above, and whilst I note that
    various works have been undertaken in the garden (including the completion of a
    kitchen garden), the submitted evidence does not demonstrate that a badger sett
    is not reasonably likely to be present in a less heavily-used part of site.
30. The Council have calculated that, due to the size of the site and that badger setts
    can extend underground laterally for up to 30 metres from their entrance holes, the
    foundations for the proposed construction work could cause impacts on a sett on
    most parts of the site boundaries. It follows that, based on the evidence before me,
    there is a reasonable likelihood of badgers being present and affected by the
    proposed development.
31. The Circular provides that, amongst other things, the need to ensure ecological
    surveys are carried out should only be left to coverage under planning conditions
    in exceptional circumstances. No exceptional circumstances have been put
    forward. The provisions of the Council’s suggested Construction Method
    Statement condition (suggested condition No 4) necessarily relate to precautions
    to be taken during the construction phase, and require a much less robust site
    assessment for protected species than the survey work which would otherwise
    take place prior to that phase. Considering this, and noting that exceptional
    circumstances do not exist, it has not been demonstrated that suggested condition
    No 4 would overcome the harm identified.
32. I therefore find that it has not been demonstrated that the proposed development
    would not have an adverse impact on protected species. It would conflict with Core
    Policy 46 of the Local Plan 2031 Part 1: Strategic Sites and Policies (adopted
    2016) (Local Plan) which provides that, amongst other things, development likely
    to result in the loss, deterioration or harm to habitats or species of importance to
    biodiversity or of importance for geological conservation interests, either directly or
    indirectly, will not be permitted.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008736


Other Matters
33. The reasonable likelihood threshold under consideration in this appeal, as set out
    in the Circular, explicitly relates to protected species, not trees (protected or
    otherwise). The site-specific facts relating to bats / badgers are not the same as
    those relating to trees. The fact that the Council’s Forestry consultee determined
    that missing tree information could be dealt with either by pre-determination
    submission or by pre-commencement condition is not directly relevant to the
    assessment of evidence relating to protected species.
34. I have had regard to the appellant’s analysis of the Council’s Case Officer's
    written acknowledgement of 9 April 2026. Whilst the Case Officer broached the
    question of whether some conditions could be pre-commencement conditions,
    much of the evidence and argumentation submitted as part of this appeal was not
    available to the Case Officer. As such, the written acknowledgement is not a factor
    capable of altering my findings on the main issue above. The fact that the Case
    Officer did not inspect the loft at The Parsonage House is of little consequence to
    the outcome of this appeal, given that my findings on the main issue above are
    based on all of the available evidence, including my own observations of the loft
    (which I viewed at the site visit).
Other Considerations and Planning Balance
35. The proposed development would provide additional accommodation and a re-
    ordering of internal spaces at The Parsonage House. The functionality of the
    existing access to the site would also be improved. The benefits in these respects
    would be mainly private in nature. They would not be sufficient to outweigh the
    significant weight given to the conflict with Core Policy 46 of the Local Plan
    identified on the main issue above. None of the relevant material considerations
    indicate that this appeal should be decided otherwise than in accordance with the
    development plan.
Conclusion
36. For the reasons given above, having considered the development plan as a whole,
    the approach in the Framework, and all other relevant material considerations, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Alexander O’Doherty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
