Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026
by L Reid BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 03 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008739
Orchard View, Gallows Green Road, Great Easton, Essex CM6 3QS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Brett Simpson against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•    The application Ref is UTT/25/3095/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of 1no. self-build dwelling with landscaping and
     associated operational development.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Since the application was determined, the Uttlesford Local Plan 2021 – 2041
       March 2026 (the Local Plan) has been adopted and replaces the Uttlesford Local
       Plan January 2005. The Council has provided the relevant policies, and both main
       parties have had the opportunity to comment on the implications for this appeal. I
       am therefore satisfied that my consideration of the appeal against the policies in
       the new Local Plan has prejudiced no party.
3.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) and the 2024 and 2025 Housing Delivery Test results after the appeal
       was made. Both main parties have had the opportunity to make representations,
       and I have taken the comments received into account.
4.     On the appeal form it was stated that the appellant was the sole owner of the land,
       which differed from the ownership notice served with the planning application. The
       appellant has since corrected this, and notice of the appeal has been served. I am
       therefore satisfied that all interested parties have had the opportunity to comment.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
       •    Whether the appeal site is a suitable location for housing having regard to
            access to services and facilities and the spatial strategy; and,
       •    The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
Suitable location



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008739


6.     The appeal site is outside of a defined settlement boundary and is therefore within
       the open countryside for planning policy purposes. It is agreed by the main parties
       that the proposal would not meet any of the exceptions set out in Development
       Policy 1 of the Local Plan which relates to new dwellings in the countryside. Based
       on the evidence before me, I see no reason to reach a different view.
7.     Core Policy 3 of the Local Plan sets out the spatial strategy defining the settlement
       hierarchy. Development in the open countryside will not be permitted unless
       specifically supported by other relevant policies as set out in the Development
       Plan or national policy. I have not been advised of any other policies in the Local
       Plan which specifically support development of this type in this location.
8.     In terms of national policy, paragraph 1.e of Policy S5 of the Framework allows for
       the limited infilling within groups of houses. The appeal site comprises a roughly
       triangular parcel of grassland that forms part of the residential curtilage of Orchard
       View. Orchard View occupies a terminal position within the row of dwellings that
       make up this small hamlet. The proposal would not be isolated, given its closeness
       to Orchard View. Whilst another dwelling sits opposite the site, it is separated from
       the appeal site by the road and does not adjoin it.
9.     If developed, the proposed dwelling would adjoin built development on only one
       side. The appeal site's remaining side and rear boundaries border open
       countryside. Although the retained trees and boundary enclosures would provide a
       well-defined edge, the proposal would extend built form beyond the existing edge
       of the hamlet rather than being within it. As such, given the physical characteristics
       of the appeal site, the proposal cannot reasonably be described as infill
       development within a group of houses, even though it would be limited.
10. The proposal would therefore not meet paragraph 1.e of Policy S5 of the
    Framework and would therefore not provide support for the principle of
    development. Consequently, the proposal would not be supported by national
    policy in this regard and cannot be said to comply with Core Policy 3 of the Local
    Plan.
11. Regarding access to services and facilities, a farm shop is located 1 mile from the
    appeal site and stocks a range of food and convenience items, which could meet
    some of the day-to-day needs of future occupiers. Whilst the farm shop may be
    accessible by bicycle, this would be less practical during inclement weather.
    Furthermore, it is unclear whether a safe and convenient pedestrian route is
    available. Although the farm shop may offer a delivery service, this would address
    only one aspect of day-to-day living. Future occupiers would still need to travel
    elsewhere to access a wider range of essential services and facilities.
12. The nearest bus stops are over a 30-minute walk from the site, and it has not been
    demonstrated that these routes benefit from footways or street lighting. The
    distance and road conditions are likely to discourage walking, particularly after
    dark or for those travelling with children. As a result, future occupiers would be
    heavily reliant on private vehicles to access services and facilities.
13. Whilst limited sustainable transport options are characteristic of many rural areas,
    this does not justify further residential development in locations that are already
    heavily dependent on private vehicle travel, particularly where this housing may
    pre-date current local and national policy. Although the Highway Authority does not


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008739


       object, the assessment of whether the site is a sustainable location for
       development is ultimately a matter of planning judgement for the decision maker.
14. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal site is not a suitable
    location for housing having regard to access to services and facilities and the
    spatial strategy. The proposal would therefore harm the integrity of the Local Plan
    and would undermine the Council’s spatial strategy and ability to deliver a
    genuinely plan-led approach to development. Whilst this harm, taken on an
    individual basis, would be incrementally small, it would be ongoing and therefore
    significant.
15. Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with Development Policy 1 and Core
    Policy 3 of the Local Plan, the purposes of which are set out above. It would
    conflict with Core Policies 26, 27 and 28 of the Local Plan. These policies,
    amongst other things, require development to be located close to key services and
    facilities, where there is an appropriate level of public transport accessibility with
    sustainable modes of transport prioritised. It would also be contrary to Policy S5 of
    the Framework which states that only certain forms of development should be
    approved outside settlements.
Character and appearance
16. The appeal site marks the transition between the built form of the hamlet and the
    surrounding countryside. Although it contains an outbuilding, this occupies only a
    small part of the site. The remainder of the site is largely free from development.
    Consequently, the site retains a predominantly open character and provides a clear
    visual and physical break between the existing built form and the countryside
    beyond. This openness helps maintain the distinction between the hamlet and the
    surrounding open countryside, contributing to the spacious, semi-rural qualities that
    are characteristic of the locality. As a result, the site makes a positive contribution
    to the rural character and appearance of the area.
17. The proposal would create a separate dwelling with its own residential plot,
    resulting in the subdivision of the existing curtilage. The new dwelling, together with
    its associated garden area, boundary treatments, parking, lighting and domestic
    activity, would introduce a more urban character to the site. This would diminish the
    site's contribution to the spacious, semi-rural setting of the hamlet. As a result, the
    site would no longer read as part of the open transition to the countryside but as an
    extension of the built-up form of the hamlet. It would reduce the sense of separation
    between the built form of the hamlet and the surrounding countryside, creating a
    more continuous and consolidated pattern of development.
18. The proposed dwelling would adopt a more contemporary design than most of the
    houses in the hamlet. However, its pitched roof form reflects a common
    characteristic of local development, providing continuity with the surrounding built
    form. Furthermore, the use of timber cladding takes cues from Hyde Barn, which
    although a conversion, forms part of the wider street scene. Whilst the fenestration
    would differ from that of nearby dwellings, this would be consistent with the design
    approach.
19. The dwelling would project forward of Orchard View and Calmsden Cottage.
    However, given the absence of a consistent building line within the street scene,
    this would not appear awkward. Whilst a basement is proposed, its footprint would
    not be readily apparent in the completed development, and I have seen no

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008739


     substantive evidence to suggest that further justification is required. I therefore
     conclude that the design and layout of the proposal would not conflict with the cited
     provisions of the Design Code.
20. Whilst I have found the proposed design and layout to be acceptable, the principal
    issue lies not with the architectural merits of the dwelling but with the loss of this
    parcel of land that currently contributes to the rural character and appearance of
    the area. The development would introduce built form and associated urbanising
    influences into this presently open site. Consequently, the acceptability of the
    design and layout would not outweigh or overcome the harm identified to the
    character and appearance of the area.
21. Although the effects of the proposal would be largely localised, they would be
    perceptible. Nevertheless, given the existing housing within the hamlet and that the
    proposal would not encroach into the adjoining countryside, I conclude that the
    resulting harm to the character and appearance of the area would be moderate.
    Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with parts i. and ii. of Core Policy 52 of the
    Local Plan, which require development proposals to understand and enhance the
    surroundings and be locally informed. It would also conflict with paragraph 1 of
    Policy DP3 of the Framework which states that development proposals should
    respond to their context, so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings.
Other Matters
Heritage
22. There is some overlap between considerations, but character and appearance and
    heritage significance are separate considerations. Heritage harm concerns the
    significance of a specific heritage asset and its setting. Consequently, a proposal
    may cause harm to the character and appearance of an area without necessarily
    resulting in harm to heritage significance and vice versa.
23. Section 66(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires that special regard is had to the desirability
    of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which it possesses.
24. Calmsden Cottage1 is a Grade II listed building located to the east of the appeal
    site. Its significance is derived principally from its historic fabric, age, and
    architectural interest. Orchard View and its associated outbuildings are situated
    between the appeal site and Calmsden Cottage, limiting any visual or functional
    relationship between the two. Consequently, the appeal site makes a neutral
    contribution to the setting of the listed building. Given the intervening built form, the
    proposal would preserve the setting of Calmsden Cottage and would not result in
    harm to its significance. The Council also raised no concerns in respect of this
    matter.
25. There are also other Grade II listed buildings in the immediate area, including
    Hyde Farmhouse2, Hyde Cottage3 and the Barn4. The significance of these

1
  Historic England List Entry Number: 1112171
2
  Historic England List Entry Number: 1322611
3
  Historic England List Entry Number: 1112172
4
  Historic England List Entry Number: 1164969


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
Appeal Decision 6008739


       heritage assets is derived mostly from their historic fabric and architectural
       interest. Owing to the separation distance between these buildings and the appeal
       site, the site is not experienced as part of their setting. Consequently, the proposal
       would preserve the setting of these listed buildings and would result in no harm to
       their significance.
Other Council decisions
26. Each application must be determined on its own merits. The Inspector is not bound
    by previous decisions of the Council, particularly where those decisions pre-date
    the adoption of the current Local Plan and were made under a different policy
    context, which is a material change in circumstances. Furthermore, some of the
    decisions referenced were approved based on the overall planning balance, which
    is a matter of planning judgement that must be assessed in the context of the
    individual circumstances of each case. The weight to be afforded to relevant
    considerations is ultimately a matter for the decision maker. As such, these
    previous decisions carry only limited weight.
27. Any dissatisfaction with the way the Council has handled the application is a
    separate matter and is not relevant to the planning merits of the appeal.
Other considerations
28. The Council cannot currently demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable housing
    sites. With a supply of 4.77 years, paragraph j. of Policy S5 of the Framework is
    engaged. Whilst the proposal would meet an evidenced unmet need, the appeal
    site is not physically well-related to an existing settlement as it is located at the end
    of a hamlet, and it is separated from the more built-up areas by open countryside.
    This policy therefore would not provide support for the principle of development.
29. The proposal would provide a benefit through the delivery of an additional dwelling,
    contributing to housing supply and supporting the Government's objective of
    significantly boosting the supply of homes. However, given that only a single
    dwelling would be provided, this benefit attracts limited weight.
30. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute toward meeting the evidenced
    needs of a community, which includes homes needed for different groups assessed
    under Policy HO1. This includes accommodation for people wishing to build their
    own homes. The proposal is intended to be a self-build property, but there is no
    mechanism before me to secure the development as such. In addition, no detailed
    evidence has been provided in respect of the demand for, or supply of, self-build
    housing. Consequently, I attach limited weight to the provision of this type of
    accommodation.
31. Substantial weight should be given to the benefits of a development proposal
    where it would make better use of vacant and underutilised land as required by
    Policy L2 of the Framework. The extent of this benefit is tempered by my findings
    that the proposal would cause harm to the rural character and appearance of the
    area. As such, the benefits of reusing a previously developed site are therefore of
    limited weight.
32. There would be some temporary economic benefits, including employment and
    spending during construction. There would also be some longer-term economic


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008739


        benefits through associated spending, but given the scale of the proposal, those
        benefits would be limited.
33. Regarding the appeal decision at Land Eastfield Stables5, the Inspector in that case
    found that having undertaken the planning balance, the proposal did not result in
    any significant adverse impacts that would outweigh the scheme’s benefits and
    therefore allowed the appeal. As this assessment is a matter of planning
    judgement, the weight given to a particular factor in one case does not
    automatically apply to another. Whilst the Inspector in that case found the site
    would offer limited accessibility to services and facilities via sustainable modes of
    transport, reference is made to a consistent footway running along part of the road
    linking the site to a settlement and a bus stop was a short distance away. That is
    different to the appeal site before me. Therefore, I do not consider that case to be
    so similar as to bear direct comparison and is therefore of limited weight.
Interested parties
34. Two comments in support of the proposal were received at the planning application
    stage. Whilst the proposal would be within the existing boundary of Orchard View, it
    would still have a harmful effect for the reasons explained above.
Planning Balance
35. The appeal site does not represent a suitable location for housing when having
    regard to access to services and facilities and the spatial strategy. I have judged
    the magnitude of harm as significant. It would also cause moderate harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. As such, there would be conflict with
    Development Policy 1, Core Policies 3, 26, 27 and 28, and parts i. and ii. of Core
    Policy 52 of the Local Plan. It would therefore conflict with the development plan as
    a whole.
36. I have found that the proposal would not fall within any of the categories where
    certain forms of development should be approved outside of settlements.
    Consequently, as set out in paragraph 4. of Policy S5 of the Framework,
    development should only be approved in exceptional circumstances where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects, including
    to the character of the countryside and in relation to promoting sustainable patterns
    of movement.
37. It is recognised that the proposal would not generate a significant amount of
    movement. As such, paragraph 1.a of Policy TR3 of the Framework is not relevant.
    However, as set out at paragraph 15 of the Framework, the purpose of the planning
    system is to contribute to the achievement of sustainable development.
    Furthermore, the planning system should be genuinely plan-led. I have found that
    locationally, the proposal would run contrary to the spatial strategy by directing
    development to a location with poor accessibility to services and facilities and a
    heavy reliance on the car. This directly counters the objective of the Framework in
    achieving sustainable development and weighs heavily against the proposal.
38. Paragraph 3. of Policy DP3 states that development proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of this policy, or relevant
    aspects of the principles in paragraph 2 of the policy, or with any explicit design

5
    Appeal Ref: APP/C1570/W/25/3375597


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008739


     standards set out in the development plan. As I have found that the proposal would
     conflict with paragraph 1. of Policy DP3 and would not comply with the design
     standards set out at parts i. and ii. of Core Policy 52 of the Local Plan, the proposal
     should be refused on this basis. This weighs heavily against the proposal.
39. On the other hand, as described above, the proposal would deliver some limited
    benefits, particularly in light of the Council’s current housing land supply position.
    However, given the weight afforded to them, the benefits would not, either
    individually or collectively, substantially outweigh the adverse effects of the
    proposal.
Conclusion
40. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.



L Reid
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
