Appeal Decision
by Alice James BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008050
99 Allington Road, Newick, East Sussex BN8 4NH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Dalehurst Developments against the decision of Lewes District Council.
•   The application Ref is LW/25/0503.
•   The development proposed is erection of a single detached dwelling with associated parking
    provision.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. As part of the appeal the appellant has submitted a series of additional plans. I
   acknowledge that the Council did not have this information with the original
   planning application, but the information does not materially alter the proposal, and
   it was submitted with the appeal submission in a timely manner. Therefore, I am
   satisfied that no party, including the Council, would be prejudiced by my assessing
   the scheme with regard to the additional documents and I have taken them into
   account in determining this appeal.
Main Issue
3. The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
   surrounding area.
Reasons
4. The appeal site comprises of a parcel of land positioned between 99 and 101
   Allington Road, which originally formed part of the garden of 99 Allington Road.
   Although it has since been physically separated from it by a close boarded fence.
5. The properties on the south side of Allington Road are varied in architectural style
   but are generally spaced and orientated to allow views towards the countryside
   beyond the settlement. The properties closest to the appeal site on the south of the
   road generally have large, long rear gardens which provide a softened edge,
   creating a harmonious transition between built form and the countryside. The
   properties on the north side of the road have smaller plots which gives the
   appearance of a higher density residential development with urban views towards
   Newick. In this context, the properties on the north side of Allington Road have a
   more urban character and do not share the same open rural fringe character as
   those on the south side of the road.
6. The section of Allington Road which the appeal site is located is where the
   settlement pattern begins to recede into the countryside. Properties 101, 103 and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008050


     105 are large, detached properties which have long plots and have a staggered
     settlement pattern which provides views to the open countryside. In this context,
     the properties along this section of the road have a verdant rural fringe character.
7. There is a generous visual gap between 99 and 101 Allington Road, which allows
   for views towards the countryside and which creates a sense of openness and
   contributes to the rural fringe character of the area. This gap, although not formally
   protected or designated, has a positive impact on the character and appearance of
   the site and wider street scene.
8. The proposed development would create a two-storey detached dwelling between
   99 and 101 Allington Road. Due to its size relative to the narrow plot, particularly its
   width and its close relationship with neighbouring properties, the development
   would appear cramped within the street scene. This is irrespective of the precise
   separation distance between properties.
9. Although the dwelling has a reduced scale compared to some established
   properties, this does not overcome the constrained appearance created by the
   smaller plot size. The proposal would significantly reduce the gap between 99 and
   101 Allington Road, harming the openness and verdant character of the area. In
   addition, the increased density of development in this rural fringe location would
   disrupt the existing settlement pattern and result in an unsympathetic transition to
   the surrounding countryside, which would be incongruous.
10. My attention has been drawn to lapsed planning permission LW/22/0300 which was
    for the erection of a dwelling to form part of a terrace with 97 and 99 Allington
    Road. The lapsed permission is in a different location within the site and was of a
    different design to the appeal proposal. Importantly, it retained a greater gap
    between the site and 101 Allington Road. Therefore, the two proposals are not
    directly comparable. Furthermore, I acknowledge a representation of support for
    the proposed development which cites among other things preference for this
    proposed development over the lapsed permission LW/22/0300. These factors
    weigh neutrally in my decision. In any event, development proposals should be
    judged on individual merits and circumstances.
11. Reference has been made to a number of appeal decisions and planning
    applications. However, as I do not have the full details of each case before me, I
    cannot be certain of the individual circumstances or planning balance involved in
    those cases. From the limited information available,
    appeal APP/P1425/W/20/3253947 relates to the erection of two dwellings at 92
    Allington Road. I note that this site is on the north side of Allington Road, which has
    a more urban character to the south side and a different relationship to the
    surrounding countryside.
12. Application LW/23/0716 related to one dwelling at 89 Allington Road which is
    located further along Allington Road and seems to be located in a bigger gap than
    that of the appeal site. Applications LW/22/0812 and LW/24/0495 at 55 Allington
    Road would provide six dwellings in total. While these are also on the south side of
    the road, they are some distance from the appeal site, which lies within an area
    where gaps between dwellings are reduced but continue to provide views of the
    countryside. Thus, there are examples of reduced flank to flank distances between
    properties but the appeal site is associated with dwellings that recede into the
    countryside, where larger gaps make a significant contribution to the area's rural


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008050


     fringe character. Accordingly, I find that the cited decisions and applications are not
     directly comparable to the scheme before me. Given this, these examples do not
     add weight in favour of the development.
13. For these reasons, the proposed development would be harmful to the character
    and appearance of the surrounding area. It would conflict with Policy CP11 of the
    Lewes District Local Plan Part 1 (May 2016), Policies DM1, DM25 and DM30 of the
    Lewes District Local Plan Part 2 (February 2020), and Policy EN1 of the Newick
    Neighbourhood Plan. Together, and amongst other things, these policies seek to
    ensure that development is of a high standard of design and that its siting, layout,
    density and orientation respond sympathetically to the characteristics of the site, its
    relationship with the surrounding area and, where appropriate, views into, across
    and out of the site.
Other Matters
14. The proposal would provide an additional dwelling, in a sustainable location, which
    would represent an effective and efficient use of land and contribute to the supply
    of housing in the area. As a windfall site it could also be delivered relatively quickly
    and constructed to include solar panels and energy efficient glazing and provide
    acceptable living conditions for future occupiers. However, these benefits would be
    limited by virtue of the proposal only adding one additional dwelling to the housing
    supply in the area. Consequently, they would be insufficient to outweigh the harm I
    have identified.
15. Although acceptable access and parking can be achieved and the site is not within
    a conservation area, not effected by flooding and planting can improve ecology,
    these matters are neutral matters that attract limited positive weight.
Conclusion
16. In conclusion, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the
    material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. For the reasons given above the appeal should be
    dismissed.

     Alice James
     INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
