Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 August 2026
by Laura Bartle BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008915
Land North Of Claypole Equestrian, Doddington Lane, Claypole, Newark NG23
5AT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr T Price against the decision of South Kesteven District Council.
•    The application Ref is S25/1045.
•    The development proposed is use of the land for the siting of containers for self-storage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given
       an opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the
       appeal, and I have taken those comments received into account in reaching my
       decision. References to the Framework in my decision are to the August 2026
       version.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
         •     whether the proposal would represent an appropriate form of development in
               the countryside having regard to the development plan and national planning
               policy; and
         •     the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the site and
               surrounding area.
Reasons
Principle of development
4.     The appeal site lies outside the settlement boundary of Claypole and therefore lies
       within the countryside for planning policy purposes. Policy SP5 of the South
       Kesteven District Council Local Plan (SKLP) and Policy 2 of the Claypole
       Neighbourhood Plan (CNP) seek to direct development towards sustainable
       settlements and strictly control development within the countryside.
5.     The proposal would provide a self-storage facility comprising 50 shipping
       containers on land adjoining an established equestrian enterprise and storage

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008915


       building. I accept that the proposal would provide an additional income stream and
       would diversify an existing land-based rural business. The proposal would
       therefore attract some support from Policy E7 of the SKLP, which supports rural
       business development and diversification. It would provide an economic benefit
       with some potential for rural employment to be created.
6.     However, support under Policy E7 is not unqualified. It must also be read
       alongside the wider development plan strategy for the countryside at Policy SP5 of
       the SKLP which makes clear that development must demonstrate an essential
       need to be located outside of the existing built form of a settlement. Furthermore,
       Policy S5(1)(b) of the Framework supports development for rural businesses and
       services where a location outside settlements is shown to be necessary.
7.     The appeal site benefits from its proximity to the existing equestrian enterprise and
       storage building, is under common ownership and would enable the proposed
       development to be managed alongside the existing business. These
       considerations demonstrate that the proposal would be convenient and
       commercially advantageous to the landowner in this location.
8.     However, convenience and commercial advantage do not in themselves
       demonstrate necessity. Whilst the proposed use would be associated with the
       adjoining enterprise, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that the self-
       storage use is functionally dependent upon that business or that it requires a
       countryside location in order to operate effectively. Nor has substantive evidence
       been provided to demonstrate why the proposed use could not reasonably be
       accommodated within or adjoining a settlement, or on land specifically intended for
       employment uses. The examples of similar developments referred to by the
       appellant do not outweigh this conclusion, as each proposal must be assessed on
       its own merits and policy context.
9.     Whilst the appeal site may form part of the wider curtilage associated with
       adjoining developed land, it currently comprises an open area of land with no
       buildings and little visible evidence of previous development. In any event, the
       Framework makes clear that it should not be assumed that the whole curtilage of
       developed land should be developed. Consequently, even if some weight is
       afforded to the site's association with previously developed land, this does not
       overcome the failure to demonstrate that a countryside location is necessary.
10. Drawing these matters together, I find that the proposal would represent a form of
    diversification of an existing land-based enterprise, to which I attach moderate
    weight. Nevertheless, it has not been demonstrated that the proposed self-storage
    use requires a location outside a settlement. I am not persuaded that the proposal
    is an appropriate form of development in the countryside having regard to the
    development plan and national planning policy.
11. Consequently, the proposal conflicts with Policy SP5 of the SKLP and Policy 2 of
    the CNP. Whilst the proposal attracts some support under Policy E7 as a form of
    rural business diversification, that support is insufficient to outweigh the identified
    conflict with the countryside strategy. It would also conflict with Policy S5(1)(b) of
    the Framework because it has not been demonstrated that the proposed rural
    business requires a location outside a settlement.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008915


Character and appearance
12. The appeal site occupies an open parcel of land between the existing storage
    building and the adjoining equestrian enterprise. Whilst those uses influence the
    immediate context, the appeal site itself remains undeveloped and contributes to
    the rural character of the area.
13. The proposal would introduce 50 shipping containers arranged in rows together
    with the activity associated with a commercial self-storage operation. Existing
    boundary vegetation provides substantial screening and additional planting is
    proposed. I also acknowledge the appellant's evidence that the containers would
    sit below the surrounding hedgerows and that visibility from the wider area would
    be limited.
14. Policy 6 of the CNP seeks to protect important views within the parish. Having
    regard to the existing vegetation surrounding the appeal site, I find that the
    proposal would not materially affect the identified view from Doddington Lane.
    Consequently, I find no substantive conflict with Policy 6 of the CNP.
15. Nevertheless, the effect of the proposal is not solely a matter of visibility. The site
    is currently experienced as an open area of land within a rural setting. The
    introduction of a substantial concentration of shipping containers would
    permanently alter the character of that land and extend the commercial influence
    of the adjoining uses.
16. Whilst the visual effects would be localised and moderated by existing and
    proposed landscaping, the proposal would introduce a utilitarian form of
    development which would appear incongruous within its countryside setting. The
    number, arrangement and appearance of the containers would result in an erosion
    of the site's rural character.
17. I therefore conclude that the proposal would cause moderate harm to the
    character and appearance of the site and surrounding area. It would conflict with
    Policy DE1 of the SKLP insofar as it requires development proposals to respond
    positively to local character and distinctiveness and to make a positive contribution
    to the character of the area.
Conclusion
18. Having reached the conclusions above, the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan when read as a whole. There are no material considerations,
    including Policy S5 of the Framework, that indicate the decision should be made
    other than in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly, the appeal
    should be dismissed

Laura Bartle
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
