Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 July 2026
by M Cryan BA(Hons) DipTP MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026

Appeal Ref: 6008275
Telephone Box outside 71 Upper Street, London N1 0NY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant consent, agreement or approval to details required by a condition of a
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Pulkit Gupta of Ellora Estates Ltd against the decision of the Council of
     the London Borough of Islington.
•    The application reference P2025/2073/AOD sought approval of details pursuant to conditions Nos 4
     and 5 of a planning permission reference P2019/3524/FUL granted on 19 March 2020.
•    The application was refused by notice dated 23 January 2026.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of one No. telephone kiosk to 1no. retail unit.
•    The details for which approval is sought are a site management plan (relating to Condition 4) and a
     delivery and servicing plan (relating to Condition 5).

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by Mr Pulkit Gupta of Ellora Estates Ltd against
      the Council of the London Borough of Islington. This application is the subject of a
      separate Decision.
Background, Preliminary and Procedural Matters
3.    Planning permission was granted on 19 March 2020 for the conversion of a
      redundant telephone kiosk to a retail unit (I refer to that planning permission
      throughout this decision as “the original permission”). It was subject to eight
      conditions including the usual condition setting a three-year deadline for
      implementation.
4.    An application seeking the approval of details relating to the original permission,
      dated 20 July 2025, was received by the Council the following day. That
      application form used the description “Approval of details pursuant to conditions 4
      (site management plan) and 5 (delivery and servicing plan) of planning permission
      reference: P2019/3524/FUL dated 19/03/2020 for change of use of one No.
      telephone kiosk to 1no. retail unit”. This information is reflected in the banner
      heading above.
5.    The Council refused to approve the details, on the basis that “there is insufficient
      evidence in place to demonstrate that the application ref: P2019/3524/FUL was
      commenced within 3-years”, and that the conditions therefore could not be
      discharged. There was an error in the officer report and the decision notice, in that
      both gave the date of the original permission as 7 April 2020. This was corrected in
      the Council’s appeal statement but, while unfortunate, it has had no material


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008275


      bearing on my decision; there is nothing to suggest that anything took place
      between 19 March and 7 April 2023 which might otherwise have required me to
      seek clarification from the main parties.
6.    Within the context of an appeal made under section 78 of the Town and Country
      Planning Act 1990 it is not within my remit to definitively determine whether a
      particular use has already been established as claimed by the appellant, though it
      would be open to them to apply to have that matter determined under section 191
      of the Act. Nevertheless, before I can determine whether or not the submitted
      details should be approved, it is necessary for me to consider whether or not they
      can be on the balance of the evidence before me. This forms the basis of the main
      issue I have identified below.
7.    On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
      Framework (“the Framework”). While the new Framework included substantial
      changes from the previous version, its provisions most relevant to this appeal were
      not altered significantly. I therefore consider that there has been no need for me to
      seek submissions on the revised Framework, and am satisfied that no party’s
      interests have been prejudiced by my taking this approach.
Main Issue
8.    In view of all of the above, the main issue is whether the submitted details could be
      approved (having regard to the question of whether or not the original permission
      is still extant) and, if so, whether they should be.
Reasons
9.    The appeal relates to a traditional red telephone kiosk, one of a pair outside No 71
      Upper Street. It is no longer in use for its original purpose and, as I have set out
      above, planning permission was granted in 2020 for its change of use and
      conversion to a retail unit. That development was required to begin by 19 March
      2023; condition 4 required the submission and approval of the site management
      plan prior to the commencement of the development, while condition 5 required
      the submission and approval of a delivery and servicing plan before the first
      occupation of the approved retail unit.
10. The appellant has submitted two pieces of evidence which, they contend,
    demonstrate that the original permission has been implemented. These are an e-
    mail sent by the appellant to the Council on 26 June 2025, referring to a tenancy
    agreement for the kiosk dated 14 May 2020, and a “notice of deemed contract”
    from Engie Power Limited dated 12 June 2022. It is the appellant’s case that the
    tenancy agreement confirms that a tenant was secured after the grant of the
    original permission, while the communication from Engie provides evidence that
    the original permission was implemented through the carrying out of works to
    install an electricity supply to the kiosk.
11. I was not, in fact, provided with a copy of the actual tenancy agreement referred to,
    but that is not a significant omission here; such an agreement would indicate that
    responsibility for the kiosk had been transferred, but would not demonstrate that
    the change of use (in planning terms) provided for by the original permission had
    actually commenced. The notice from Engie shows only that responsibility for any
    use of electricity at the kiosk had been transferred; it does not show that any work


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008275


      had been carried out in respect of the electricity supply or otherwise in connection
      with the implementation of the original permission.
12. As I have also noted (though I address this only in passing as, in view of the
    shortcomings of the evidence I have just described, it is not necessary for me to
    delve into further questions around “conditions precedent”), condition 4 of the
    original permission is a pre-commencement condition. The appellant seeking to
    discharge it more than two years after the deadline for implementation of the
    original permission gives further weight to my view that the original permission had
    expired without having been implemented.
13. On the balance of the evidence before me, it has not been demonstrated that the
    original permission had been implemented within the necessary timeframe. As
    such the submitted details could not be approved, so I consider that the Council
    was correct to refuse the application.
14. I note that the Council’s officer report states that “had the application been
    considered acceptable overall” – that is, had it been submitted in a timely
    manner – it would have recommended the discharge of both conditions. However,
    in view of the conclusion I have reached in respect of the implementation of the
    original permission, it is not necessary for me to consider whether the submitted
    details should be approved. Indeed, it would not be appropriate for me to do so, as
    this could fetter the discretion of a future decision maker in the event of a planning
    application for an identical or similar development coming forward in the future.
Other Matters
15. The appellant noted a lack of objections to, and potential community benefits
    arising from, the establishment of an active business use in the redundant
    telephone kiosk. However, as I have just explained, it has not been necessary for
    me to consider the planning merits of the scheme here.
16. The appellant also raised concerns about the Council’s treatment of the application
    to which this appeal relates. These matters are addressed in the associated costs
    decision.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons I have set out above, I conclude that the appeal should be
    dismissed.



M Cryan
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
