Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by S F Barnes MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008784
202A High Street, Harwich, Essex CO12 3AJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Ibrahim Karagoz against the decision of Tendring District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00239/FUL.
•    The development proposed is adaptations to accommodation above restaurant and new external
     access staircase.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Application for Costs
2.     An application for an award of costs was made by Mr Ibrahim Karagoz against
       Tendring District Council. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Notwithstanding the description above, the plans show an outdoor terrace area
       would also be formed at second floor level. The Council assessed the proposal on
       this basis, and so shall I.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026, after the passing of deadlines for the exchange of
       statements and final comments on this appeal. The main parties have had the
       opportunity to comment upon the revised Framework and I have taken their views
       into consideration in my assessment.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
        • the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area, with
           particular regard to whether the proposal preserves or enhances the character
           or appearance of the Lower Dovercourt Conservation Area (‘CA’); and
        • the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers,
           with particular regard to privacy.
Reasons
       Character and appearance
6.     The appeal site contains a mid-terrace, 3 storey early 20th century building with a
       2-storey rear addition. Rear additions of various designs, with largely unaltered
       roof forms, are a common feature on the host terrace. The appeal building has

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008784


       been previously extended at its ground floor to form a first floor terrace. Access to
       residential accommodation at its upper floors, is gained by an external staircase
       leading to that first floor terrace from a publicly-accessible rear access lane. The
       lane has 2 access points from Kingsway and another from Station Road and it is
       bounded by the rear of rows of terraced housing that fronts onto those roads.
       Those terraces also fall within the CA and feature largely unaltered rear additions.
7.     The CA covers a wide area which is divided by the Lower Dovercourt
       Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan (2023) (the ‘AMP’)
       into distinct character areas. The site falls within the core of the CA’s historic
       terraced streets which are associated with Harwich’s early development as a
       seaside resort. As it relates to this appeal, the significance of the CA derives partly
       from the architectural interest of its 19 and early 20th century buildings. The appeal
       building is identified within the AMP as one of the CA’s positive buildings.
8.     The proposal would form an elevated terrace with balustrade by cutting into a
       section of the rear addition’s pitched roof. This would be accessed via an
       additional external staircase from the first floor terrace. The profile of the rear
       addition’s rear wall would be unaltered, but immediately beneath the proposed
       terrace a parapet abutment would be built-up to support that structure. The terrace
       would provide external amenity space for a re-configured second floor flat, whilst
       new recycling, refuse and cycle storage for both flats is proposed at the first floor
       terrace.
9.     The proposed balustrading, its supporting parapet abutment and the residential
       paraphernalia likely to be found on the proposed terrace would result in significant
       and incongruous additional massing at an elevated position. In the interests of
       privacy, screening might be required at the side of the terrace adjoining 206-208
       High Street. However, such screening need only result in a minimal increase in
       massing that would not, in itself, cause harm.
10. Although part of the existing roof slope and the sloped profile of the rear addition’s
    outer wall would be retained, the proposal would nonetheless detract from the
    legibility of the rear addition’s traditional roof form, which presently contributes to a
    unifying effect when viewed in the context of the many surrounding properties that
    share such rear addition features. Due to the siting and elevated position on the
    building, the proposal’s adverse effects would be clearly visible from surrounding
    sites and from the rear access lane, including the more remote entrance from
    Kingsway to the north of the site. This would result in harm to the positive
    contribution made by the building to the CA and harm its significance overall.
11. Examples of second-floor level external staircases are present along the rear of
    this terrace. However, as those do not lead upto elevated terraces, they are not
    directly comparable to the scheme before me. Roof terraces may be common
    features in other town centres, too. However, that fact does not justify the proposal
    which I have considered in its individual circumstances.
12. As the site falls within the CA, I am mindful that Section 72(1) of the Planning
    (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (‘the Act’) requires special
    attention to be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of conservation areas. Framework Policy HE6 sets out that when
    considering the potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008784


       conservation. Having regard to the localised effect on the significance of the CA,
       the proposal would result in a low degree of harm.
13. Framework Policy HE6(4) directs that where a development proposal would harm
    the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. The proposal would provide private outdoor space for residents of the
    reconfigured second floor flat. This dedicated outdoor space, intended to take
    advantage of views, would provide occupiers with a recreational and functional
    value that would contribute to improving their living conditions. In so doing, it would
    have a beneficial impact on the quality of housing stock in the town centre.
    However, this would be experienced largely as a private benefit by its occupiers.
    Accordingly, this carries only limited weight in my assessment.
14. The scheme would also rationalise circulation within the building and allow the flats
    to be fully self-contained. It is contended that the proposal is necessary to comply
    with Building Regulations, particularly in regard to fire safety. However, there is no
    compelling evidence before me that the building cannot be safely used in its
    current configuration or that its ongoing use as housing would be in peril were the
    appeal to fail. I therefore attach only limited weight to this factor, either as
    justification for the proposal or a public benefit.
15. The proposal seeks to provide better insulated flats. However, little quantified
    evidence is before me to demonstrate the extent of any improvement in energy
    efficiency. Accordingly, this too carries only limited weight. Provision would also be
    made for storage of recycling, refuse and cycles, although similar modest benefits
    could reasonably be provided in an alternative, less harmful scheme.
16. The construction and refurbishment of the building required to deliver the proposal
    would reasonably be associated with some economic benefits. Nonetheless, given
    the scheme’s small scale and the limited duration of those benefits, these would
    carry limited weight.
17. Overall, the benefits identified would not outweigh the considerable importance
    and weight that I attach to the harm to the CA. For these reasons, I conclude that
    the proposal would have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the
    surrounding area. It would also fail to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA, resulting in conflict with the requirements of Section 72(1)
    of the Act and with the Framework’s heritage provisions. The proposal would also
    conflict with the relevant provisions of Policies SP7, SPL3 and PPL8 of the
    Tendring District Local Plan 2013-2033 and Beyond (‘Local Plan’) which,
    collectively, seek high standards of architectural design and to conserve the
    historic environment.
       Living conditions
18. The proposed terrace would be in close proximity to a second floor window at the
    adjoining 206-208 High Street, which appears to serve a habitable room of a
    dwelling. The proposed terrace would be sufficiently deep so that users could
    stand at its outer edge and look directly towards this neighbouring property.
    Consequently, this would harm the sense of privacy and seclusion for occupiers of
    this neighbouring flat. However, were the proposal otherwise acceptable, adequate
    privacy screening could have been secured by way of a planning condition.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008784


19. Thus, subject to a suitably worded condition, the proposal would have an
    acceptable effect on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular
    regard to privacy. There would be no conflict with the relevant provisions of Policy
    SP7 and Policy SPL3 of the Local Plan, which seek to protect the privacy of
    occupiers of nearby properties.
Other Matters
20. Framework Policy L2 paragraph (1)(d) refers to creating additional homes and
    floorspace through additional development within existing plots. However, whilst
    the existing flats are described as not fully self-contained, the application form
    states that the proposal would not change the number of residential units at the
    site. Nor would it result in additional floorspace. In any event, that policy does not
    preclude me from finding harm or determining that a proposal may be
    unacceptable. Furthermore, as the proposed terrace would not provide a public or
    community facility, Framework Policy HC1 is not engaged.
21. There were no objections from neighbouring occupiers, businesses, Harwich Town
    Council or Environmental Protection. However, the absence of objection does not
    in itself make a proposal acceptable and has not been determinative.
22. The appellant’s personal contribution to the Harwich Chamber of Commerce is not
    a matter I can take into account in this appeal. I have therefore based my
    assessment solely on the planning merits of the proposal before me.
Conclusion
23. Whilst the proposal would not harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers,
    it would nonetheless harm the CA. Given its small scale, the social, environmental
    and economic benefits of the scheme outlined above would reasonably be
    described as limited. Having regard to national decision-making policies in the
    Framework, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by its
    adverse effects through harm to the CA.
24. For the reasons given, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that a decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S F Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
