Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by B Phillips BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6008234
Landfall Annexe, Landfall, Chilworth Road, Chilworth, Romsey SO16 7LA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Mehta against the decision of Test Valley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02952/FULLS.
•    The development proposed is existing annexe to become separate dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A drawing illustrating the appeal property and its surrounding area is included with
       the appeal in order to provide context for plot sizes. This drawing does not alter the
       proposal in any way, and there is no harm to natural justice in my accepting this
       drawing at this stage.
3.     The Government published in August 2026 a revised version of the National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The Council and the appellant have
       had opportunity to comment on this and I have taken into account any
       representations received.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues in this case are:
       • the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the surroundings;
       and
       • the effect of the parking and access arrangement on character and appearance
       and biodiversity.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal property, ‘Landfall’ is located on Chilworth Road, a lengthy residential
       road within the settlement of Chilworth. Near to the appeal site, the road is mostly
       characterised by large, highway fronting detached dwellings within substantial
       plots. The large distance between the properties provides a consistent spacious
       setting to the surroundings.
6.     The site is located within character area 1B of the Residential Areas of Special
       Character (RASC) supplementary planning document appraisal document (2019).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008234


       This document explains that the purpose of the RASC designation is to ‘protect
       these areas from inappropriate development; including for example …. higher
       density redevelopment of the plots.’ It explains further that ‘spacing between
       buildings should be maintained to retain the visual separation that exists in the
       immediate vicinity and to ensure the character of the area is not broken up’.
7.     The appeal property, a large two storey dwelling sits within a characteristically
       large plot. Its existing large annexe building is located in very close proximity
       directly to the side of the main house.
8.     Even if there would be no physical alterations and, given the depth of the plot, the
       overall size of both plots would be comparable 1 to the 0.54ha average described in
       the RASC, a new independent dwelling located so close to a neighbouring
       property would be at odds with the existing pattern of built form. This would
       diminish the established spacious character of the immediate street scene. This
       would be materially different from the effect of the existing annexe building
       associated with the main house.
9.     An appeal2 is referenced which granted planning permission for the erection of
       four dwellings following the demolition of Heather Hill, and a planning approval 3 for
       9 dwellings, including 5 apartments. The Heather Hill development is a backland
       style cul de sac development of smaller units set back from the highway, and as
       such is not comparable to the spacious general highway fronting character of the
       immediate surroundings. The benefits associated with a number of dwellings
       would also be different to scheme before me, and the proximity of apartments
       would naturally be different. They are not directly comparable to the scheme
       before me, therefore.
10. In conclusion on this main matter, the proposal would therefore harm the character
    and appearance of the surroundings. This would be contrary to Policies E1 and E4
    of the Test Valley Borough Revised Local Plan DPD 2011-2029 (LP) (2016) which
    collectively, amongst other matters, seek to ensure high-quality development that
    is compatible with the character of that RASC.
Parking
11. No alteration is proposed to the existing single access to Landfall. It would
    therefore serve two separate dwellings. This would entail the occupants and
    visitors to the new dwelling driving directly past the frontage of Landfall.
12. Nevertheless, I observed that there would be sufficient room for manoeuvring
    within this arrangement. Submitted drawing 1B illustrates 3 parking spaces (for
    Landfall) to the west of the dwelling and two for the annexe building directly in front
    of it.
13. Were I minded to allow the appeal, a condition to secure further appropriate details
    such as turning areas for both properties could ensure that this layout would not
    lead to conflict nor the blocking of any access way. This would not therefore lead
    to undue pressure for further access points and subsequent potential to remove
    roadside hedgerow or trees.

1
  There is therefore no conflict with the conclusions of appeal references APP/C1/760/W/16/3159869 and
APP/C1/760/W/16/3152135
2
  Appeal reference APP/C1760/W/16/3152135
3
  Application reference 21/00718/FULLS.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6008234


14. The proposed parking arrangements would be suitable and not therefore lead to
    harm to character and appearance nor biodiversity. There would be no conflict with
    LP Policy T2 which requires parking provisions to be well designed and
    appropriately located so as to be convenient to users.
Other Matters
15. The appeal site is within the catchment areas of the Solent and Southampton
    Waters and New Forest Special Protection Areas (SPA). The special interest of
    the Solent and Southampton Waters SPA relates to its habitats which support
    overwintering birds. Similarly, the variety of wet and dry heathland and woodland
    habitats in the New Forest SPA support the feeding and breeding of different bird
    species.
16. The conservation objectives for both SPA’s are, in summary, to ensure that the
    integrity of the site is managed or restored in order to protect the habitat and the
    birds that depend on it. The birds which are features of the SPA’s are vulnerable to
    disturbance from recreational activities, which would likely increase through new
    housing development.
17. The appellant has indicated that they intend on providing financial contributions
    towards mitigation and purchasing offset nitrate credits, however no legal
    agreement to secure this is before me. As I am dismissing the appeal for other
    reasons, I am not pursuing this matter further because it could not lead me to a
    different decision.
18. The additional unit of accommodation would contribute to the Government’s
    broader objective of significantly boosting the supply of homes. Economic and
    social benefits are also likely to arise from the independent occupation of the unit.
    However, again, even if the development would make efficient use of an existing
    building location with access to facilities and services, given the quantum of
    development in this case, I give each of these matters limited weight in favour of
    the scheme.
19. The lack of any adverse impact in relation to matters such as the living conditions
    of the neighbouring properties or biodiversity are not a matter in favour of the
    proposal.
Conclusion
20. I have found that the proposed parking arrangement would be suitable and not
    therefore lead to harm to character and appearance nor biodiversity, and benefits
    would arise from the proposed development. However, these must be balanced
    against the harm I have identified to the character and appearance of the
    surroundings, and the associated conflict with the development plan. I give
    substantial weight to this conflict.
21. The proposal is contrary to the development plan as a whole and there are no
    other material considerations, either individually or in combination, of sufficient
    weight to indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed and
    permission is refused

       B Phillips INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
