Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 July 2026
by L Francis BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008679
Oozedam, High Road, Fobbing, Thurrock SS17 9HT
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
           against a refusal to grant planning permission.
     •     The appeal is made by Mr Kevin Allen against the decision of Thurrock Borough Council.
     •     The application Ref is 25/00966/FUL.
     •     The development proposed is part demolition of existing dwelling and erection of 5 No. dwellings.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr Kevin Allen against Thurrock Borough
   Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. An updated National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026, during the consideration of the appeal. The Council and the appellant
   were given the opportunity to comment upon the revisions insofar as they relate to the
   appeal. Submissions were received from both main parties; I have taken them into
   account in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
           •    whether the appeal site is grey belt land and whether the proposal would be
                inappropriate development in the Green Belt having regard to the National
                Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and relevant development plan
                policies; and,
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the surrounding
                area.
Reasons
Grey Belt and whether Inappropriate Development
5. Core Strategy Policies CSSP1 and CSSP4 set out, amongst other things, the Councils
   strategy for the location of development, including housing in the Green Belt. Policy
   PMD6 sets out the Council’s approach to development in the Green Belt. However, all


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008679


     these policies pre-date the current version of the Framework; I have necessarily
     assessed the appeal scheme against the criteria set out in the Framework.
6. The Framework defines grey belt as land in the Green Belt comprising previously
   developed land and/or any other land that, in either case, does not strongly contribute
   to any of purposes (a), (b), or (d) in Policy GB2. It is not disputed that the appeal site
   does not strongly contribute to purposes (a), (b) or (d) of GB2. The appeal site
   therefore meets the definition of grey belt land as set out in Annexe B of the
   Framework.
7. Framework policy GB6 states development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it
   falls within one of the categories in policy GB7. The exception set out in GB7(1)(g)
   requires i) the development would utilise grey belt land and would not fundamentally
   undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the area
   of the plan; ii) there is an evidenced unmet need for the type of development proposed;
   iii) the development would be in a sustainable location, with particular reference to
   policy TR3 of the Framework, and iv) in the case of major development involving the
   provision of housing, the development proposed complies with policy GB8.
8. With reference to criterion i), due to its location between the linear pattern of
   development along High Road and open countryside beyond, the appeal site would
   assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment. However, bearing in mind
   the scale and location of the site, I do not regard it as making a significant contribution
   in this respect when considered across the area of the plan taken as a whole. I am
   satisfied therefore that the appeal site would not fundamentally undermine the
   purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan.
9. With regard to criterion ii), there is a demonstrable unmet need for housing. This is
   evidenced by the Council’s housing land supply quoted in the officers report as being
   the equivalent of 1.02 years.
10. With regard to the appeal site’s location (criterion iii), Framework policy TR3 aims to
    locate development where it can support sustainable patterns of movement, enable
    good accessibility for different users and make the most of existing and proposed
    transport infrastructure. The policy requires the vision for the site, type of development
    and its location to be taken into account in this assessment.
11. The site is within walking distance of some services and facilities including a farm shop
    and cafe, garden centre, church, Public House and recreation ground. These facilities
    would be accessible by level, well-lit footways. There is also a bus stop on the High
    Road, within around 100m of the site, with services to Orsett hospital and Basildon.
    Even though the bus services are not frequent, there are services throughout the day
    which would provide an alternative means than the private car of accessing services
    and facilities. There are other facilities locally in Corringham village including a pre-
    school, alternative bus services, a medical centre and primary school within around
    2km of the site, all accessible via the footway along High Road, which would be
    walkable for some but not all.
12. In the context of the site’s semi-rural location, the proposal would be in a sustainable
    location given the availability of public transport and the relative accessibility of
    services and facilities through walking or cycling.
13. Criterion iv of policy GB7(1) is not applicable since the proposal would not constitute
    major development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008679


14. The Council have referred to an assessment of openness in their submissions. The
    grey belt concept means that the development does not need to prove it will not affect
    the openness of the Green Belt for the land to be categorised or developed as grey
    belt.
15. To conclude on this main issue therefore, the appeal site would not be inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt, as it would satisfy the requirements of Framework
    policy GB7(1)(g).
Character and Appearance
16. The appeal site comprises a detached dwelling set within a large plot fronting High
    Road. There is an extensive rear garden, mostly laid to lawn, which extends beyond
    and to the rear of neighbouring gardens. There are several outbuildings, mostly
    clustered along the northern boundary of the rear garden. The garden is bounded by
    mature hedgerows and trees which contribute to its verdant setting. There are
    neighbouring gardens and open fields adjacent. The immediate area has a verdant,
    rural character behind the main ribbon development lining this part of High Road.
17. Built development along High Road is largely confined to its west side, with expansive
    views across open countryside to the east. There are several side roads running off
    the west side of High Road. These have an informal character, containing historic
    industrial/commercial uses and a loose pattern of residential development, such as
    that found to the north of the appeal site along Inglefield Road, Mill Lane and Patricia
    Drive.
18. The evidence before me indicates that there have been several housing schemes over
    the years which have effectively infilled some gaps along the side roads and on High
    Road, including some examples of new cul-de-sacs leading off High Road. As a
    consequence, there has been a ‘thickening’ of the settlement grain over time.
    However, this is largely focussed on the more northerly reaches of Fobbing around
    Inglefield Lane. Notwithstanding this, the overriding development pattern is of a ribbon
    of dwellings along the west side of High Road, with more sporadic development to
    existing side streets. Open countryside and patches of woodland separate Fobbing
    from the village of Corringham to the west. The spacious, more rural character
    surrounding the appeal site contributes to the rural, verdant setting of Fobbing.
19. The appeal proposal would create a new residential cul-de-sac of 5 new dwellings,
    accessed from High Road. The existing dwelling would be reconfigured and reduced in
    width to accommodate the access road. Along with the access road, each house would
    have a driveway, parking area and its own residential curtilage. The proposed houses
    would broadly reflect the scale and form of some of the detached dwellings located on
    High Road. The extent and distribution of built development across the plot would
    result in an increased intensity of residential development. The footprint of built
    development would extend beyond the existing outbuildings and residential
    paraphernalia into areas of the site that are currently laid to lawn.
20. By extending the built development deep into the appeal site, the proposal would have
    the effect of harming the predominantly linear pattern of development in this part of
    Fobbing. The rural character to the rear of the site would be harmfully eroded. The
    consequent suburbanisation would significantly change the character of the site. This
    would appear incongruous with the surrounding garden land and fields when viewed
    from High Road, Patricia Drive and from other dwellings nearby.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008679


21. There would be a significant element of landscaping, including the retention of the
    extensive hedgerow and trees to the very rear of the site and its boundaries. Whilst the
    extent of landscaping would provide a degree of mitigation in relation to local views, it
    would not mitigate the change in character or pattern of development.
22. I acknowledge the detailed design of the dwellings would draw on local features and
    materials. The buildings would be well designed, and they would reduce in scale
    towards the rear of the site, with reference to the transition to a more rural landscape.
    However, this would not overcome the harm I have identified arising from the extent of
    development, suburbanisation of the site and consequent erosion of the rural character
    of the immediate surroundings, which as I have identified above, positively contributes
    to the setting of Fobbing.
23. Notwithstanding my view on the detailed design of the dwellings and use of materials, I
    conclude on this main issue that the proposed development, for the reasons outlined
    above, would result in significant harm to the character of the area. This would conflict
    with Policies CSTP22, CSTP23 and PMD2 of the Thurrock Core Strategy and Policies
    for the Management of Development 2015 (Core Strategy). Taken together, and
    amongst other things, these policies require a positive response to local context and to
    protect local character and distinctiveness. There would also be a conflict with
    Framework Policy DP3(1) insofar as it sets out that “development proposals should
    respond to their context… so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings”.
24. In their decision letter, the Council also refer to Core Strategy Policy PMD6 which
    concerns development in the Green Belt. The policy pre-dates the current Framework,
    and as I have found that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, it is not directly relevant to this main issue.
Other Matters
25. The appeal site falls within the zone of influence of the Thames Estuary and Marshes
    Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar site. These are designated due to the
    internationally important numbers of non-breeding birds and their estuarine/coastal
    habitats including Avocet, Dunlin, Grey plover, Hen harrier, Knot and Ringed plover.
    The conservation objectives are, amongst other things, to ensure that the site
    contributes to achieving the aims of the Wild Birds Directive by maintaining or restoring
    the extent and distribution of the habitats qualifying features, the populations and
    distribution of qualifying features and supporting processes on which the habitats of
    the qualifying features rely.
26. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (the
    Habitats Regulations) require the decision maker to undertake an Appropriate
    Assessment where there are likely significant effects from the proposal, either alone or
    in combination with other plans or projects.
27. The appeal proposal would result in a net increase of 5 dwellings. Ordinarily it would
    be necessary for me as the Competent Authority in the context of this appeal, to carry
    out an Appropriate Assessment (AA) pursuant to the Habitats Regulations prior to
    securing any necessary mitigation. Regulation 63(1) of the Habitats Regulations
    indicates that a requirement for an AA is only necessary where the competent authority
    is minded to grant permission for the proposal. As I am dismissing the appeal for other
    reasons, it is not necessary here for me to undertake an AA. I do not need to consider
    this matter further as it could not lead me to a different conclusion.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008679


28. With reference to the sustainability of the appeal site’s location, the Council has drawn
    my attention to an appeal decision at land adjacent to Starlight, Patricia Drive, Fobbing
    (reference APP/M1595/W/25/3360211). Whilst there are some similarities between the
    sites in terms of location and relative availability of public transport, the appeal site on
    Patricia Drive was accessed via an unmade track; as such I do not consider it directly
    comparable to the appeal before me in terms of the sustainability of location. I have
    necessarily assessed the appeal scheme on its own merits.
29. My attention has also been drawn to an appeal decision on Oxford Road, Horndon-on-
    the-Hill (reference 6000930). The judgement as to the sustainability of any particular
    location is highly site specific. The scheme referred to is not in the vicinity of the appeal
    site, and I cannot directly compare it in terms of public transport and access to services
    and facilities. I note however that the Inspector concluded that there were limited
    facilities within walking distance, which I have not concluded to be the case here.
30. I have been referred to a planning application which was approved at Carlton, High
    Road, Fobbing (reference 26/00266/FUL, decision dated 8 May 2026) which is located
    sufficiently close to the appeal site for it to be relevant. Whilst this site is on the High
    Road, it is located towards Inglefield Road where the pattern of development is more
    clustered. The site does not have the same relationship with open countryside as the
    appeal site and is not entirely comparable.
31. With respect to other housing schemes in and around High Road, I have been referred
    to several examples where the Council has granted planning permission for varying
    forms of residential development over the past decade or so. The appellant has, in
    particular, drawn my attention to planning permissions granted for 5 dwellings at The
    Robins, High Road (reference 25/00802/FUL dated 10 November 2025); a scheme of
    4 dwellings at Oakdene, High Road (reference 24/01353/OUT dated 16 May 2025); 5
    dwellings for over-55’s at 40 High Road (reference 20/01051/FUL dated 19 January
    2021) and scheme of 9 dwellings at Thames View Farm, High Road (reference
    15/00766/FUL dated 20 November 2015).
32. Each of the schemes listed above I consider relevant, as each involved the creation of
    a cul-de-sac off High Road, lined with housing, which is a comparable form of
    development to the appeal proposal. However, I note these schemes are concentrated
    to the more northerly reaches of High Road, where there is already residential
    development along side streets including Inglefield Road and Mill Lane, giving that part
    of Fobbing a less ‘linear’ character than the area immediately around the appeal site.
    The appeal site is distinguishable from these examples in terms of the largely
    undeveloped land surrounding it, characteristic of its semi-rural location and
    transitional point to open countryside between Fobbing and Corringham. The planning
    permissions I have been referred to do not lead me to conclude that the appeal
    scheme should be allowed.
33. Reference has also been made to various other permissions granted by the Council
    including a site on Patricia Drive (20/00281/FUL dated June 2021). Whilst this is close
    to the appeal site, the scheme of 3 dwellings was replacing existing buildings and the
    scheme reduced the overall amount of built form on site. The permitted scheme at
    Sunnyside, Inglefield Road (reference 19/01490/FUL dated June 2020) replaced farm
    buildings and is located off an existing road leading from High Road; limited parallels
    can be drawn with the appeal scheme in terms of location or character of the site.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008679


34. My attention has been drawn to the Thurrock Design Strategy Supplementary Planning
    Document 2017. The proposal would be consistent with some of the guidance
    presented. However, a degree of compliance with the guidance does not outweigh the
    harm I have found in respect of the appeal proposal.
35. The appellant submitted the proposal following pre-application advice, to which they
    consider the appeal scheme has responded. The Framework stresses the benefits of
    early engagement and of good quality pre-application discussion. Although pre-
    application advice is not binding, it is clearly unfortunate if proposals are adjusted but
    the final outcome is negative. Nevertheless, I am obliged to consider the appeal
    scheme on its own merits, on the basis of the information before me.
Other Considerations
36. Set against the harm identified, the proposal would deliver a net gain of 5 new
    accessible family sized dwellings. It would support the Framework’s objective of
    delivering a substantial increase in the supply of homes. In view of the evidenced
    unmet need for housing, Policy HO7 of the Framework requires that substantial weight
    should be given to this benefit.
37. I note the proposal would achieve the mandatory 10% Biodiversity Net Gain though
    on-site enhancement, to which I attach moderate weight as a benefit. There would be
    some limited ecological enhancements including the provision of features including
    native planting, bee bricks and bat boxes. The homes would be energy efficient and
    incorporate photovoltaic panels where possible, along with air source heat pumps. The
    alterations to the existing dwelling would include the addition of features to improve
    energy efficiency. I attach moderate weight to these benefits.
38. There would be temporary and ongoing economic benefits from the development
    through construction and future residents’ use of local shops and services, but given
    the scale of development, those benefits would be limited.
39. My attention has also been drawn to the provision of electric vehicle charging points.
    Whilst it would encourage the take up of lower-emission vehicles, I note these are a
    requirement of Building Regulations, and I attach limited weight to this as a planning
    benefit.
40. I note the Council do not consider there would be harm to highway safety, biodiversity
    or living conditions of nearby residents, subject to appropriate planning conditions. I
    have no substantive evidence before me which would lead me to disagree. This holds
    neutral weight in the planning balance.
41. In addition to the main issues identified above, there are concerns relating to other
    planning and non-planning matters including the effects upon views, privacy,
    precedent, surface water and drainage and the value of property. As I am dismissing
    the appeal on one of the main issues for the reasons given above, I have not pursued
    these matters further.
Planning Balance
42. The appeal proposal would be harmful to the character of the area and would conflict
    with the aims of the development plan and Policy DP3(1) of the Framework. I afford
    substantial weight to the harm I have identified.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008679


43. I also attach substantial weight to the delivery of additional housing, particularly given
    the shortfall in the Council’s 5-year housing land supply. However, the benefit of 5
    additional dwellings would not be significant in terms of addressing this shortfall. As set
    out above I attach moderate weight to the ecological enhancement features, energy
    efficiency and delivery of Biodiversity Net Gain.
44. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S5 sets out that in the Green Belt, where development would not
    be inappropriate through the application of Policy GB7, proposals should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies of the
    Framework, and in applying paragraph 2 of S5.
45. Paragraph 2 of S5 states that the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects
    include, but are not restricted to, situations where the development proposal would fail
    to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. Framework Policy
    DP3(3) states that development proposals should be refused if, without clear
    justification, they conflict with DP3(1).
46. Drawing the above matters together, I have identified unacceptable harm to the
    character of the area contrary to the development plan and Policy DP3(1) of the
    Framework. I conclude that the benefits of the appeal proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by this harm.
Conclusion
47. The material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be made other than
    in accordance with the development plan. For the reasons given above the appeal
    should be dismissed.

L Francis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
