Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by R Cahalane BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008742
Land Adjacent Everglade Farm, Mount Pleasant Lane, Lymington SO41 8LS
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr Connor Cooper against the decision of New Forest National Park Authority.
• The application Ref is 25/00974FULL.
• The development proposed is 2no. concrete hardstands; stationing of 2no. residential caravans
  (compliant with the caravan act); laying of aggregate; sewage treatment tank; alterations to existing
  access.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. In the above banner heading, I have taken the description of development from the
   decision notice rather than the application form. The decision notice description is
   referred to in the appellant’s appeal statement and accurately describes all relevant
   aspects of the appeal scheme, including the proposed residential use. I have
   determined the appeal accordingly.
3. I am aware of an enforcement notice relating to the appeal site1, served in 2023 by
   the National Park Authority (NPA). However, that relates to a different type of
   development to that currently proposed. Whilst another enforcement notice was
   previously served on land near to the appeal site and was upheld at appeal2, that
   appeal did not consider the planning merits of the development enforced against.
   The above factors somewhat limit the relevance that these notices have to the
   current section 78 appeal, which I must determine having regard to all relevant
   planning merits and the submitted evidence before me.
4. On 17 August 2026, the Government issued a revised version of the National
   Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). As these revisions could affect the
   issues in this case, the NPA and the appellant were invited to make further
   comments. My decision reflects this latest Framework and the responses received.
Main Issues
5.       The main issues are:
          • whether the proposed development is within a suitable location having regard
            to development plan policies governing the countryside;


1
    National Park Authority Ref: 22/0155/EC
2
    Appeal Ref: APP/B9506/C/21/3266195

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008742


          • whether the proposal would conserve and enhance the landscape and scenic
            beauty of the New Forest National Park (NFNP), including consideration of
            effects upon tranquillity and trees;
          • the effect on protected species, with particular regard to great crested newts;
            and
          • the effect on highway safety, with particular regard to vehicular access to and
            from the appeal site.
Reasons
Location
6. The appeal site is outside of a “Defined Villages”3 settlement boundary, as set out
   in the NFNP Local Plan 2016-2036 (LP) (adopted 2019). For planning policy
   purposes, it is therefore within the countryside. LP policy SP4 sets out that
   development proposals will only be permitted outside the Defined Village
   boundaries and allocated development sites subject to five criteria (a. – e.).
7. LP policy SP28 sets out that small-scale affordable housing developments may be
   permitted as “exceptions” on sites in or adjoining villages to meet the identified
   needs of local people in these areas. However, there is no legal mechanism before
   me to secure the residential caravans as affordable housing.
8. In any event, the site’s location does not adjoin a village settlement, despite being
   in the vicinity of farm buildings and dwellings, and other land plots east of the site
   which I saw, at the time of my site visit, to contain various structures and
   paraphernalia. The appeal scheme thus does not comply with criterion a. to policy
   SP4, as it is not in accordance with policy SP28 on Rural Exception Sites.
9. It is put to me that the appeal scheme would provide small-scale residential
   accommodation designed to meet personal housing needs. However, there is no
   evidence before me to suggest that this amounts to an essential need for a
   countryside location. The proposal therefore does not comply with criterion c. to
   policy SP4.
10. Supporting text to LP policy SP4 advises at paragraph 4.18 that this policy also
    enables the delivery of housing specifically for New Forest commoners, Estate
    workers and dwellings tied to the rural economy, for example agricultural and
    forestry workers’ housing. The appellant has not put forward a need case in these
    respects, and thus the appeal scheme does not comply with policy SP4 criterion d.
    As the proposal does not form a redevelopment of an established employment site,
    it does not comply with policy SP4 criterion b., which requires accordance with
    policy DP44 on employment sites.
11. At the time of my visit, within the appeal site I observed a small wooden shed,
    several small containers, a greenhouse and other paraphernalia. Even if these
    were to be considered as existing buildings for the purposes of criterion e. to LP
    policy SP4, the proposal involves a residential use type that is not supported by the
    criteria listed under policy SP19. The appeal scheme thus does not comply with
    criterion e. to policy SP4.


3
    Ashurst, Brockenhurst, Lyndhurst and Sway


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision 6008742


12. Supporting text to policy SP4 also advises that the Defined Villages are considered
    to be the most sustainable settlements in the NFNP. They have the broadest range
    of community facilities, local employment opportunities, transport links and a good
    range of other services for residents and visitors. The appeal site lies between the
    Defined Village of Sway and the larger town of Lymington. That town is outside of
    the NFNP boundary.
13. Routes from the site to these settlements are largely along narrow and unlit roads
    with no segregated footways. Given this, and the respective distances involved,
    non-vehicular routes to the facilities and services in Sway and Lymington would not
    be convenient or welcoming in terms of distance and accessibility constraints. The
    site’s location would thus deter or constrain many non-vehicular trips required to
    cater for the essential needs of future residents, including those with protected
    characteristics. Future residents would thus likely be heavily dependent on the use
    of private vehicles for their day-to-day needs.
14. I therefore conclude that the proposed development is not within a suitable location
    having regard to development plan policies governing the countryside. In arriving at
    this conclusion, I have had regard to the site’s rural context and that the appeal
    scheme would generate limited additional activity compared with larger forms of
    residential development. The appeal scheme conflicts with policy SP4 of the LP,
    the relevant requirements of which are already set out above.
15. The first reason for refusal also cites conflict with LP policy SP19. However, this is
    a permissive policy relating to the delivery of dwellings within certain locations,
    including within the Defined Villages. I have thus found no conflict with this policy,
    as conflict with another LP policy would not have any bearing on the purpose of
    policy SP19 as a permissive policy. That being said, the appeal scheme is not a
    type of development that is explicitly supported by policy SP19.
Landscape and scenic beauty of the NFNP
16. Supporting text to LP policy SP15 describes tranquillity as the relative peace and
    naturalness, combined with the open and unfenced landscape of much of the
    NPNP that gives a sense of space, remoteness and freedom. The largely
    undeveloped nature of the appeal site and its immediate surrounds, coupled with
    the levels of natural enclosure, provide a sense of tranquillity, albeit tempered by
    vehicular traffic movements along Mount Pleasant Lane.
17. Land east of the site along the lane has been subdivided, and the wider environs
    contain scattered dwellings, farmsteads, paddocks and woodland. It is put to me
    that the character surrounding the proposal site includes similar sites with caravans
    as that proposed. Even if the surrounding plots include caravans, at the time of my
    site visit, none were visible from either within the appeal site or along the lane.
18. In any event, the land either side of the appeal site is subject to an enforcement
    notice against overnight accommodation, amongst other things. I thus have
    insufficient certainty that any similar caravans either side of those proposed are
    lawful. In this context, I envisage that movement and light generation from
    residential use of the site throughout the year would inevitably erode tranquillity.
19. Within the appeal site, land levels decline noticeably from Mount Pleasant Lane,
    and there is a large area within site that is clear of tree growth. Caravans are
    typically of low height and when compared to conventional housing, they do not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008742


        have the same extent of built form and permanence. They would however have a
        discernible visual presence, and the westernmost caravan would be visible from the
        lane, albeit at a distance, due to the proposed proximity to the site boundary.
20. Despite the heavily vegetated setting, some other seasonal views of the wider
    proposed development would also be possible along the lane. Most notably along
    the site entrance, as the proposed vehicular access improvement works would
    necessitate removal of roadside shrubbery.
21. The site contains further shrubbery within, including trees towards the rear. The
    proposal would require removal of shrubbery, most notably across the site’s
    rearmost section where the concrete hardstands, residential caravans and
    surrounding hardstanding is proposed. This shrubbery is protected by a woodland
    Tree Preservation Order (NPA Ref: TPO/0010/19). The proposed development
    would also be adjacent to trees outside of the appeal site. The abovementioned
    shrubbery makes a positive contribution to the natural beauty of the NFNP.
22. The majority of tree roots are typically found in the top shallow section of soil.
    Therefore, and in the absence of tree survey information before me demonstrating
    the contrary, the proposal could cause root damage to surrounding trees, including
    through compaction of the soil structure.
23. The caravans and associated hardstanding areas thus cannot reasonably be
    described as low impact. This built form would jar with and adversely diminish the
    character of the site and its surrounding context. In landscape terms, and also for
    the above reasons, the proposed physical alteration of undeveloped land for
    residential use and associated hardstanding, necessitating loss of shrubbery, would
    harm the intrinsic natural beauty of the NFNP.
24. For the above reasons, I conclude that the appeal scheme would not conserve and
    enhance the landscape and scenic beauty of the NFNP, including when
    considering the effects upon tranquillity and trees. The proposal thus conflicts with
    LP policies DP2, SP7, SP15, SP17 and DP18. These policies seek, amongst other
    things, development to be contextually appropriate and sympathetic in terms of
    appearance, form, siting and layout, to protect and enhance the setting of groups
    and individual trees and hedgerows, to avoid a gradual suburbanising effect, and to
    avoid or mitigate unacceptable environmental impacts in respect of tranquillity.
25. The appellant is willing to accept conditions requiring a landscape plan, an
    arboricultural impact assessment and tree protection plan, retention of boundary
    vegetation, replacement planting, long-term landscape management and external
    lighting restrictions. Whilst appropriate construction methods may avoid adverse
    harm to retained trees within and surrounding the site, such conditions would
    however not mitigate all the above harm that I have identified in respect of the
    overall proposed development.
Protected species
26. In their consultation response, Naturespace UK advises that the appeal site
    includes wet woodland, which the appellant has not disputed. Wet woodland is a
    suitable habitat for great crested newts (GCN) which are protected species4. This
    habitat is also listed as one of the habitats of principal importance in England5.
4
    under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended)
5
    Section 41 of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006 (as amended)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6008742


27. As already set out in the preceding main issue, the appeal scheme requires
    removal of shrubbery, most notably across the site’s rearmost section where the
    concrete hardstands, residential caravans and surrounding hardstanding are
    proposed. These natural features to be removed could provide habitat for GCN.
28. Whilst the NPA has not identified any protected species actually present on the
    site, conversely the appellant has not provided survey information, undertaken by a
    suitably qualified ecologist, that demonstrates an absence of protected species
    such as GCN. Paragraph 99 of Government Circular 06/2005 states that it is
    essential that the presence or otherwise of protected species, and the extent that
    they may be affected by the proposed development, is established before the
    planning permission is granted, otherwise all relevant material considerations may
    not have been addressed in making the decision.
29. In this case, without any survey of the relevant habitat features, it is simply not
    known whether GCN are present within or within influencing distance of the appeal
    site and, if they are, whether mitigation measures would be appropriate. The
    appellant would accept planning conditions relating to the submission of ecological
    assessments and mitigation measures. However, given the degree of uncertainty
    relating to the findings of such assessments, use of conditions would not be
    reasonable in this case.
30. Therefore, the absence of sufficient information means I cannot rule out potentially
    significant harm to protected species. Given this, and having regard to the above
    Government Circular advice, there is conflict with LP policies DP2 and SP6 insofar
    as they require development to respect the natural environment and to protect,
    maintain and enhance locally important features of the natural environment,
    including habitats and species of biodiversity importance.
31. The NPA found no reason to conclude that the Biodiversity Net Condition (BNG)
    would not be capable of being discharged, in terms of the proposal securing a
    minimum 10% BNG. I have no reason to disagree, irrespective of my conclusion on
    this main issue. However, compliance with the statutory provisions relating to BNG
    as set out in the Environment Act 2021 neither weighs in favour nor against
    allowing this appeal.
Highway safety
32. The site has an existing vehicular access point onto Mount Pleasant Lane. The
    NPA contends that these works have not been lawfully undertaken, although its
    lawfulness cannot be formally determined under this section 78 appeal.
33. In any event, I found exit visibility from the appeal site to be significantly restricted
    by dense shrubbery on earth banks either side of the access. Provision of
    appropriate visibility splays, as indicated in the Hampshire County Council Highway
    Authority (HCCHA) guidance before me6, would therefore undoubtedly require
    removal of shrubbery along Mount Pleasant Lane.
34. The appellant intends to upgrade the existing access as part of the overall appeal
    proposal. However, the submitted plans before me do not show what the available
    sight lines would be when exiting the appeal site by vehicle. There are also no


6
    Technical Guidance Note TG3 - Stopping Sight Distances and Visibility Splays


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  5
Appeal Decision 6008742


     vehicle tracking and swept path analysis details, including in respect of how a
     mobile home would safely enter and exit the site.
35. Although my visit was a snapshot in time, traffic levels and vehicle speeds were
    generally low. This suggests that it might be possible to provide less extensive
    visibility splays than as explicitly set out in TG3. The appeal proposal is however
    not supported by technical information accounting for achievable sight lines,
    average speeds approaching the site access, or the anticipated nature and amount
    of traffic generation and movements entering, exiting and from within the site.
36. On the basis of all the above, there are risks in highway safety terms. Given the
    absence of a bespoke assessment of the transport impacts, and sufficiently
    detailed plans, I cannot reach a conclusion as to what the precise visibility splays
    requirements are for the proposal, nor whether these can be achieved at the site.
37. The above absence of more detailed evidence does not allow me to conclude
    whether or not harm would result, or whether conditions would be effective in
    managing this issue. Taking a precautionary approach, I conclude that there would
    be harm to highway safety arising from the proposal.
38. I have not been directed to a policy requirement for refuse vehicles to enter and exit
    this site. HCCHA also requested that the proposed access and associated
    driveway should be constructed of a non-migratory surface materials for the first
    2m, to reduce the risk of loose materials being transferred to the highway. Precise
    surface materials could however be secured by means of planning condition.
Other Matter
39. Based on the evidence before me, the proposal is within influencing distance of the
    Solent Special Protection Areas/Ramsar sites. The Conservation of Habitats and
    Species Regulations 2017 (the Habitat Regulations) require that permission may
    only be granted after having ascertained that it will not affect the integrity of
    European Sites and Ramsar sites. However, as I am dismissing the appeal for
    other substantive reasons, I am not pursuing this matter further as it could not lead
    me to a different decision.
Planning Balance
40. I have found that the proposed development is not within a suitable location having
    regard to development plan policies governing the countryside. The development
    would also not conserve and enhance the landscape and scenic beauty of the
    NFNP. The above amounts to actual and harmful impacts arising from the
    proposal, and I cannot rule out potentially significant harm to protected species and
    biodiversity. Whilst provision of caravans is a reversible form of development, the
    appellant has not applied for temporary permission and thus the above harms could
    persist for many years, if I allow this appeal.
41. The above amounts to conflict with LP policies DP2, SP6, SP7, SP15, SP17 and
    DP18. The proposal is thus not a sustainable development proposal as set out in
    LP policy SP1. The appeal scheme also conflicts with the National Park statutory
    purposes requiring conservation and enhancement of natural beauty and wildlife,
    which is also reflected in LP policy SP1. This extent of policy conflict amounts to
    conflict with the development plan as a whole.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008742


42. My conclusion of harm on the highway safety main issue is based on an absence of
    adequate evidence. For the avoidance of doubt, had I concluded favourably on that
    main issue, it would not have affected the overall outcome of the appeal, given the
    extent of development plan conflict as I have identified above.
43. The scheme would provide additional small-scale housing accommodation, to
    make productive use the land parcel and to provide a lawful and managed form of
    occupation. It would make a small but material contribution to housing delivery. The
    LP sets out that 800 dwellings will be delivered within the NFNP between 2016 and
    2036, which is an evidenced locally derived figure.
44. The Framework’s national decision-making policy (NDMP) HO7 sets out that
    substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will
    contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community, as identified through needs assessments prepared for the area of the
    local planning authority and other relevant evidence. There is however no evidence
    before me to indicate a current shortfall in housing supply within the NFNP.
45. Moreover, there is no substantive evidence before me to indicate that the
    residential accommodation proposed would meet the needs of the groups of people
    listed under NDMP HO1. I therefore afford moderate weight in favour of the
    provision of two additional units of residential accommodation, and the associated
    social and economic benefits arising from this.
46. The proposal is not a form of development listed in NDMP S5 as one that should be
    approved outside settlements. This policy also states that development proposals
    comprising isolated homes, which are those lying outside settlements or groups of
    houses, should not be approved other than in accordance with NDMP HO11. Even
    if the appeal site could be described as part of an established rural landholding and
    existing pattern of development, it is not located within groups of houses.
47. There is no evidence before me indicating that the appeal scheme would meet an
    essential need for a rural worker. It is self-evident that the other permissive
    circumstances listed under NDMP HO11 do not apply to the proposal.
48. In applying NDMP S5, the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects
    include, but are not restricted to, situations where the proposal would fail to comply
    with one of the national decision-making policies which state that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. In this respect, NDMP DP3
    sets out a list of key principles for well-designed places.
49. The key principles relevant to this appeal set out that development proposals
    should, amongst other things, respond to their context, including the character and
    features of their site and its setting, so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings. Proposals should also prioritise walking, wheeling, cycling and public
    transport. For the reasons set out in the first and second main issues, the appeal
    scheme would not achieve these key principles.
50. NDMP N4 governs Protected Landscapes which, as set out in the Framework’s
    Annex B Glossary, includes National Parks. It seeks development proposals to be
    sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to the statutory purposes and
    special qualities of the Protected Landscape. NDMP N4 also sets out that
    substantial weight should be placed on the importance of conserving and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008742


     enhancing the natural beauty of these areas, and to conserving and enhancing
     wildlife in National Parks.
51. In light of all the above considerations, the benefits of approving the appeal
    development proposal are in this case substantially outweighed by adverse effects.
Conclusion
52. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as a
    whole and the material considerations before me, including the Framework, do not
    indicate that a decision should be made otherwise than in accordance with the
    development plan. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



R Cahalane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
