Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by J Smith MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008864
Land adjacent to 33A Chelford Road, Somerford CW12 4QD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against
     a refusal to grant Permission in Principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Bill Buckley against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/3451/PIP.
•    The development proposed is permission in principle application for the construction of up to 5 no.
     dwellings.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
      advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-
      led development. The permission in principle consent route has two stages: the first
      stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-
      principle and the second (technical details consent) stage is when the detailed
      development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these two
      stages.
3.    The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location, land
      use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are considered as
      part of a subsequent technical details consent application if permission in principle is
      granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.    A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework ('the Framework') was
      published on 17 August 2026. There have been significant amendments to it. I have
      therefore sought comment from the parties on its implications for this appeal.
Main Issues
5.    The main issues are whether the location, proposed use, and amount of
      development are appropriate for residential development, with specific regard to:
      •    whether the development would be in a suitable location; and,
      •    the effect of the development upon the efficiency of the Jodrell Bank telescopes, a
           World Heritage Site.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008864


Reasons
Suitable location
6.    The appeal site is located within the open countryside, but is next to the settlement
      boundary of Congleton and the built-up area of Somerford. It is an open field which is
      free from development, despite its close relationship to the settlement boundary.
      Policy PG6 of the Cheshire East Local Plan Strategy 2017 (CELPS) defines the open
      countryside as the area outside of any settlement with a defined boundary. It states
      that within such locations, only certain forms of development that are essential will be
      permitted. As a proposal for up to five dwellings, the proposal would not amount to
      any of these essential developments.
7.    Policy PG6 does however note that exceptions will be made. This includes the limited
      infilling in villages through the infill of a small gap with one or two dwellings in an
      otherwise built-up frontage. As a proposal for up to five dwellings, I am not of the
      view that this can reasonably be described as limited, given the specific reference to
      one or two dwellings in this policy. In addition, the appeal site is only bordered by one
      existing property, so it would not be in an otherwise built-up frontage. The appeal
      proposal has also not been put forward as an affordable housing scheme and at this
      stage of a permission in principle application, it is not possible to determine whether
      the proposal would be of any exceptional design.
8.    The listed exceptions also refer to development in the open countryside. However,
      the proposal would not replace or re-use existing rural buildings. It would not involve
      an extension to an existing dwelling. It would not involve the expansion of an existing
      business, nor would it be essential for the conservation and enhancement of a
      heritage asset. Therefore, with regard to Policy PG6 of the CELPS, the proposal
      would be located within the open countryside, and it would not be an essential
      development allowed in such a location, nor would it meet one of the identified
      exceptions.
9.    In addition to PG6, the Council’s first reason for refusal refers to harm to the open
      countryside through urbanisation and countryside encroachment, contrary to Policy
      SE1 (Design). SE1 requires development to contribute positively to its surrounds by,
      amongst other things, achieving a sense of place by protecting and enhancing the
      quality, distinctiveness and character of settlements. Although the detailed design of
      the proposal is not before me at the permission in principle stage, introducing a
      cluster of up to five dwellings in this open field would represent an urbanising form of
      development that would erode the rural character of the open countryside, in conflict
      with the aims of SE1 as well as PG6.
10. My attention is now drawn to the accessibility of the appeal site. Policy SD1 of the
    CELPS is focused on sustainable development within Cheshire East. Amongst other
    considerations, it states that wherever possible, development should be prioritised to
    the most accessible and sustainable locations. Policy SD2 of the CELPS sets out that
    housing development should provide access to a range of forms of public transport,
    open space, key services and amenities.
11. With regard to public transport, the supporting text to Policy SD2 clarifies that bus
    stops and Public Rights of Way should be available within 500 metres of a
    development, and railway stations should be within 2 kilometres where
    geographically possible. The nearest bus stops and railway station are location
    beyond these recommended distances. With regard to services and amenities, the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008864


      supporting text also notes that services such as a supermarket, post office, cash
      machine, schools and others, should be located within 1 kilometre. Exceptions to this
      include a post box or convenience store, which should be located within 500 metres
      of a development. Again, the appeal site would not be located within the distance
      parameters to these services and amenities.
12. Congleton is located just beyond Somerford and offers a significantly broad range of
    services and facilities, including schools, supermarkets, healthcare provision,
    employment opportunities and a wider variety of retail and leisure uses.
    Consequently, future occupiers would be likely to rely on the closer neighbouring
    settlement of Congleton to meet many of their everyday needs. Given the regular and
    often essential nature of such journeys, together with the need in some instances to
    transport shopping or other items, future occupiers would be likely to rely on private
    vehicles rather than on the nearby the bus services, or the presence of a National
    Cycle Network route.
13. Nevertheless, I recognise that the journey to Congleton is relatively short in time and
    distance, when undertaken by private vehicle. Consequently, the development would
    retain a reasonable and overall sustainable relationship with the services and
    facilities available within the nearby settlement of Congleton. Although this would
    result in some conflict with the cited policies, the degree of harm that I attribute to this
    conflict would be limited overall.
14. At this stage of my assessment of this main issue, it is important to consider a point
    raised by the appellant in relation to several new homes that have been approved by
    the Council along Chelford Road. These homes have been displayed on a map.
    Critically, this map illustrates to me that these cited applications are to the south of
    the appeal site. Although only marginally, owing to the long length of Chelford Road,
    these properties are located closer to Congleton than the appeal site, which is
    located on the edge of Somerford.
15. Therefore, I find that the proposed development would be in general conflict with
    Policies PG6, SE1, SD1 and SD2 of the CELPS. Collectively, amongst other things,
    these policies require development to reduce the need to travel by being located
    within sustainable locations, provide access to a range of key services and amenities
    and contribute to the overall creation of sustainable communities, amongst other
    considerations. However, as previously noted, the harm of which I ascribe to this
    conflict would be limited.
Jodrell Bank
16. Jodrell Bank is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Observatory occupies a largely
    rural setting and comprises a collection of scientific instruments, buildings and
    archaeological remains that illustrate the evolution of radio astronomy. The key
    features include the Grade I listed Lovell Telescope, the Grade I listed Mark II
    Telescope, associated control and engineering buildings, and surviving remains of
    earlier experimental apparatus. Together these assets demonstrate the technological
    and scientific achievements that established Jodrell Bank as a centre of international
    importance.
17. The Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) sets out the key attributes for their effective
    protection and management. The OUV notes that Jodrell Bank is recognised for its
    internationally significant contribution to the development of radio astronomy and the
    advancement of scientific understanding of the universe. The Observatory played a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008864


      pioneering role in the emergence and evolution of radio astronomy during the 20th
      century and contains evidence of all major stages in the discipline's development
      from its post-World War II origins. The OUV attributes of Jodrell Bank are a result of
      its exceptional contribution to scientific innovation, including the development of large
      radio telescopes and interferometry techniques which transformed astronomical
      research worldwide. It is recognised as an outstanding technological ensemble
      illustrating the transition from optical to radio astronomy and the emergence of large-
      scale collaborative scientific research.
18. The significance of the Jodrell Bank World Heritage Site is therefore derived from the
    survival of a comprehensive range of historic structures, instruments and associated
    remains that collectively chart the development of radio astronomy. The Observatory
    remains in active scientific use, and the majority of its historic assets and
    relationships are well preserved. Its authenticity is reinforced by the continued
    operational use of the site for astronomical research, the retention of its
    predominantly rural setting, and the survival of original structures, materials and
    spatial relationships. Therefore, the continued operational efficiency of Jodrell Bank,
    a key attribute of the World Heritage Site’s OUV, must be preserved.
19. The appeal site is located within the Jodrell Bank Radio Telescope Consultation
    Zone. The University of Manchester has advised that equipment commonly
    associated with residential development can generate radio frequency interference,
    which has the potential to adversely affect the efficient operation of the radio
    telescopes at Jodrell Bank. Due to the cumulative impact of this proposal in
    conjunction with other developments within the Consultation Zone, Jodrell Bank now
    objects to further development across a substantial part of the area as a matter of
    principle.
20. Policy SE14 of the CELPS notes at point 3 that proposals should consider their
    impact on the elements which contribute to the OUV of Jodrell Bank. Further, Policy
    HER9 of the SADPD notes at point 3 that proposals which would affect the Jodrell
    Bank World Heritage Site must be accompanied by a heritage statement. Such a
    statement should address the effect of any development proposal falling within the
    buffer zone on the operational efficiency of the telescopes through radio interference
    and the effect of any development proposal on all other historic attributes of the
    Observatory including its setting.
21. Policy HE8 of the Framework is also concerned with World Heritage Sites. It notes
    that to secure the long-term future of World Heritage Sites and support the
    conservation of their significance and OUV, development proposals that affect a
    World Heritage Site should be supported by an assessment of the impact, including
    any potential cumulative impact, on the significance and attributes of OUV of the
    World Heritage Site, amongst other considerations.
22. No Heritage Statement has been provided to demonstrate that the proposed
    development would not adversely affect the operational efficiency of the telescopes
    through radio frequency interference, nor to assess the impact of the proposal on the
    wider historic significance of the Observatory, including its setting. This omission is a
    determinative factor in the outcome of this appeal.
23. In reviewing the appellant's submissions on this matter, a central argument is that
    there is an inconsistency in the University of Manchester’s approach, namely its
    failure to object to other comparable or larger residential developments. However, the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008864


      concern raised by the University is not limited to the impact of this proposal in
      isolation, but rather to the cumulative effect of successive developments within the
      Consultation Zone over time. The appellant also contends that the construction of up
      to five dwellings would have no more than a minor impact on the operational
      efficiency of the World Heritage Site. However, no robust evidence or technical
      analysis has been provided to substantiate this assertion, and it is not supported by
      the submitted evidence.
24. I am encouraged to utilise planning conditions to secure mitigation to deal with this
    issue. However, the PPG indicates that it is not possible to impose conditions as the
    terms of any permission in principle must only include the site location, type of
    development and amount. Even though conditions could, in principle, be imposed at
    the technical details stage, the absence of evidence now means it is not possible to
    be satisfied that this proposal would not affect the operational efficiency of the
    telescopes and thus, its overall historic significance.
25. As such, due to the absence of such convincing evidence to provide clear
    demonstration that the proposal would not have an adverse impact on the World
    Heritage Site and its functionality, I conclude that the appeal proposal would conflict
    with Policy SE14 of the CELPS and Policy HER9 of the SADPD, along with Policy
    HE8 of the Framework. It would harm the significance of this asset.
Overall conclusion on the main issue
26. In conclusion on the main issue, the proposed location, use and amount of
    development would not be appropriate for residential development. This is due to the
    proposal’s adverse impact upon the Jodrell Bank World Heritage Site and the
    operational efficiency of the observatory, and its location beyond the settlement
    boundary of Congleton.
Planning and Heritage Balance
27. Policy S3 of the Framework creates a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development, noting that outside settlements, Policy S5 of the Framework should be
    applied. As identified earlier within this decision, the appeal site does sit beyond the
    settlement boundary, albeit by a limited incursion. It is nevertheless located outside of
    a settlement and Policy S5 is an important consideration for this appeal. This states
    that certain forms of development should be approved outside of settlements, unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
28. Policy S5.1(j) of the Framework states that development may be acceptable where it
    addresses an evidenced unmet need, including housing proposals in areas where
    the local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites. In such circumstances, the development must be physically well
    related to an existing settlement, be of a scale that can be accommodated by that
    settlement, taking into account the existing or proposed availability infrastructure.
29. The Council is currently unable to demonstrate a five-year housing land supply.
    Whilst the proposed development would make only a modest contribution, the
    delivery of up to five dwellings would nevertheless assist in improving housing supply
    within Cheshire East, as well as nationally. The appeal site is located on the edge of
    Somerford, next to the Congleton settlement boundary. This would result in a strong
    functional and spatial relationship with Congleton, where a wide range of services,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008864


      facilities and employment opportunities are readily accessible within a very short
      journey. Taking these factors into account, the proposed development would be well
      related to an existing settlement and, given its modest scale, could be
      accommodated without placing undue pressure on existing or planned infrastructure
      within the wider area. Accordingly, the proposal would constitute development that
      complies with Policy S5.1(j) of the Framework. Given the magnitude of development,
      I afford these benefits moderate weight.
30. Policy HE6 of the Framework is a national decision-making policy. It stipulates that
    when considering the potential effect of a development proposal on the significance
    of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation, where the more important the asset, the greater the weight should be.
    For the reasons set out above, and in the absence of sufficiently robust evidence
    demonstrating that the proposal would not adversely affect the operational efficiency
    of the telescopes or the significance of the World Heritage Site, the proposal would
    give rise to harm of the World Heritage Site. I attach very high substantial weight to
    the conservation of the Jodrell Bank World Heritage Site, given its international
    importance.
31. Policy HE6.4 states 4 that where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its significance
    should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal. These
    public benefits include the provision of up to five houses which would contribute to
    the overall housing land supply position within Cheshire East. At the Technical
    Details Consent stage, a biodiversity net gain assessment would be provided, and
    would possibly provide a net gain at the appeal site. It is put forward that the
    development would be for self-build housing. However, there is no mechanism before
    me to secure this at this stage. There would also be economic benefits during and
    after the construction of these dwellings. The Council’s conclusion that the proposal
    would not result in harm to matters such as highway safety and residential amenity
    amounts to a finding of an absence of harm and is generally expected in order to
    satisfy the relevant policy requirements.
32. I therefore conclude that the public benefits would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects that would result from this harm. The proposal therefore fails to
    satisfy the requirements of national decision-making Policy HE6 of the Framework.
    Despite my finding in relation to the limited conflict with development plan in relation
    to the site’s location, the proposal would conflict with the development plan, as a
    whole, and the material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it.
Conclusion
33. For the reasons above, the appeal should be dismissed.



J Smith
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
