Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 July 2026 by I Ingledew BSc (Hons)
Decision by T Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008393
117 Lonnen Road, Dorset, Colehill BH21 7AU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Davies against the decision of Dorset Council.
•   The application Ref is P/PALH/2026/00711.
•   The development proposed is Single storey rear extension. Not connected to the existing garage to
    the rear. Extension to have pitched roof with brick and render walls to match existing house.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
   (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
   subject to limitations and conditions.
4. Where an application is made for prior approval for development which exceeds the
   limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph
   A.4(3) provides that the local planning authority may refuse the application where it
   considers that the proposed development does not comply, or that the developer
   has provided insufficient information to enable the authority to establish whether the
   proposed development complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that
   are applicable to such permitted development.
5. Paragraph A.4(7) to Part 1 requires the local planning authority to assess the
   impact of the proposed development on the amenity of the adjoining premises,
   taking into account any representations received. Following the Council’s
   notification, two comments were received from Wimborne Civic Society and the
   occupiers of 115 Lonnen Road. Neither of these representations included concerns
   relating to amenity, instead referring to matters outside of the scope of this appeal.
   Additionally, the Council did not raise concerns regarding the effect on the amenity
   of the occupiers of any adjoining premises. From what I saw on site, I have no
   reason to disagree with this conclusion.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008393


6. The plans included with this appeal suggest the addition of a dormer to the roof of
   the existing property however are not included within the description of the
   development and the application was only made under Class A of the GPDO for
   the enlargement of a dwellinghouse. For the interest of clarity, I have not assessed
   the dormer as part of this appeal.
Main Issue
7. The main issue is whether the proposed development would be permitted
   development under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
Reasons for the Recommendation
8. The appeal property is a two storey, detached dwelling. At its rear elevation, the
   property hosts a small single storey projection which the Council and appellant are
   in agreement is original to the host property.
9. The proposal would extend to a depth of approximately 5m and would have a width
   of approximately 5.86m that would span almost the width of the original
   dwellinghouse. As set out in paragraph A.1(j) of the GPDO, development is not
   permitted under Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A if the extension projects
   beyond a wall forming a side elevation and would have a width greater than half the
   width of the original dwellinghouse. The proposed extension would project beyond
   a wall that forms the side elevation of the house and would extend to a width
   greater than half the width of the property, therefore not constituting permitted
   development.
10. The appellant puts forward that the proposal is a rear extension and therefore the
    Council’s judgement based on paragraph A.1(j) is a misinterpretation of the GPDO.
    Although the proposal involves a rear extension, the proposal also extends from a
    side elevation. The technical guidance1 defines a side elevation as any wall that
    cannot be identified as being a front wall or rear wall, with the diagram included in
    the technical guidance for A.1(j), although not outright demonstrating an example of
    permitted development, indicating how to identify the walls forming a side elevation.
11. In this instance, this applies to the side elevation forming the single storey
    projection to the rear of the property. Where an extension is beyond any side wall
    and fills the area between a side elevation and a rear wall, then the restrictions in
    paragraphs A.1(g) and A.1(j) will apply. Although the rear aspect of the extension
    accords with the limitations and restrictions of A.1(g) in terms of height and depth, it
    fails to accord with the width restrictions of Paragraph A.1(j). Even though
    paragraph A.1(g) is ahead in the structure of the GPDO, this does not denote a
    hierarchy or preference with a proposal required to meet all limitations, conditions
    and restrictions to which it is subject to.
12. Additionally, the diagram shown in the technical guidance for interpreting paragraph
    A.1(g), that the appellant has included in their statement, where a rear elevation is
    stepped, does not demonstrate the wrap around proposal before me which includes
    the filling in of the area between the side elevation and rear wall. This diagram is
    therefore not applicable in interpreting this particular case.



1
    Permitted development rights for householders: Technical Guidance (September 2019)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6008393


13. For the reasons above, I therefore conclude that the proposal would fail to meet the
    specific requirements outlined in Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, Paragraph A.1(j) of
    the GPDO.
Conclusion and Recommendation
14. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

I Ingledew
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
15. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and
    agree with the reasoning and recommendation. On that basis the appeal is
    dismissed.

T Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
