Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Jonathan Edwards BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008569
Land On The South Side Of Glenfall Way, Cheltenham GL52 6XZ
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (the
  Act) against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr Simon Steele-Perkins (Waddeton Park Ltd) against the decision of
  Cheltenham Borough Council.
• The application Ref is 25/00650/OUT.
• The development proposed is described as “outline application for the erection of 4 no. self-/custom-
  build dwellings (Class C3). Access to be determined in detail. All other matters reserved”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal site address in the header above is taken from the information
       provided with the appeal. It is more complete than the site address provided on the
       planning application form.
3.     The application leading to this appeal sought outline planning permission with all
       matters apart from access reserved for future consideration. The site layout plan
       numbered 24.25.002.PL.005C shows the proposed means of vehicular and
       pedestrian access to and within the site in terms of positioning and circulation
       routes. I have had full regard to these details in my assessment of the appeal.
4.     The application form is clear in stating that approval is not currently sought for
       matters of appearance, landscaping, layout and scale. Despite this, the submitted
       drawings and information provide a significant level of detail on the layout of the
       proposed development as well as the scale of the proposed dwellings. I have had
       regard to these details in my assessment but I have treated them as being
       submitted only for indicative purposes given the clear indication as to the details
       for which approval is sought on the application form.
5.     A completed unilateral undertaking under section 106 of the Act has been provided
       by the appellant (the UU). This includes planning obligations that require (a) a
       financial contribution towards Cotswold Beechwoods Special Area of Conservation
       (the SAC) mitigation measures, (b) the submission and approval of a self-build and
       custom-housebuild scheme and measures on the marketing of the proposed
       development as self-build and custom-build plots, (c) the submission and approval
       of a green infrastructure scheme and measures to ensure its provision and
       management, and (d) the approval and implementation of a biodiversity gain plan
       and habitat management and monitoring plan. The Council has had an opportunity
       through the appeal process to submit comments on the UU.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008569


6.     In August 2026 and after the appeal was lodged the government issued a revised
       version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). At the same
       time, the government also released the Housing Delivery Test figures for each
       local authority for the 3 year period up to 2025 (HDT results). I have invited
       comments from the main parties on these documents and I have taken the
       responses into account.
Main Issues
7.     In light of the Council’s refusal reasons and the UU, I consider the main issues are
       (i) whether the site is a suitable location for the proposal having regard to
       development plan policies and the Framework, and (ii) the effect of the
       development on the character and appearance of the area including whether it
       would conserve or enhance the natural beauty of the Cotswold National
       Landscape (the NL). If I find the proposal would be unacceptable in these regards
       it follows to consider whether other factors, including the terms of the UU, would
       outweigh any identified harm so as to justify allowing the appeal.
Reasons
Suitability of location.
8.     The appeal site is adjacent to, but outside, the Principal Urban Area of
       Cheltenham (PUA) as defined in the Gloucester, Cheltenham and Tewkesbury
       Joint Core Strategy 2017 (JCS). It is not previously developed land within an
       existing built up area as it is a field vacant of buildings and beyond the
       recognisable built up extent of Cheltenham. Also, the site is not allocated for
       housing development. As such, part 4 of JCS policy SD10 only allows housing
       development on the site if it is for affordable housing, if it is brought forward
       through a Community Right to Build Order or if it would accord with exceptions
       defined in district or neighbourhood plans. There is no case made by the appellant
       that the proposal would accord with any element of part 4 of JCS policy SD10. As
       such, I conclude the development would conflict with JCS policy SD10 when read
       as a whole and so it would not be in a suitable location having regard to the JCS.
9.     As the site is outside the PUA, the proposed development would not be within a
       settlement as defined under the terms of the Framework. Accordingly, policy S5 of
       the Framework is applicable as it sets out the types of development that should be
       approved outside of settlements.
10. There is evidence of an unmet need for housing that the proposal would help
    address. The Council is unable to identify a supply of deliverable sites sufficient to
    provide a minimum of 5 years’ worth of housing as required under paragraph 8 of
    Annex D to the Framework. Indeed, there is a significant shortfall as the Council is
    only able to demonstrate 2.69 years’ worth of housing land supply when assessed
    against its housing targets. Moreover, the HDT result for the Cheltenham Borough
    is 56% and so below 75% of the requirement for the 3 years leading up to 2025 as
    referred to at paragraph 12(c) of Annex D.
11. As such, part 1(j) of Framework policy SD5 is relevant. The development would be
    physically well-related to Cheltenham as it would adjoin a residential cul de sac on
    one side and it would be opposite housing on the other side of Glenfall Way.
    Future residents of the proposed houses would be able to easily walk to the
    nearby primary school and other facilities within Cheltenham would be within a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008569


       reasonable walkable distance for some residents. Also, there are nearby bus stops
       that allow access to bus services to other parts of the town. Therefore, I conclude
       the proposal would accord with part 1(j)(i) of policy SD5 of the Framework and so
       in these regards the site would be a suitable location for housing.
Effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area and the NL.
12. A post and rail fence as well as mature trees and bushes lie on the front roadside
    boundary of the site. However, significant gaps within the vegetation allow clear
    views from the highway of the field. As the land levels slope downwards from the
    road there are also views of wooded land in the distance, referred to in the
    submissions as the Cotswold Escarpment. The site has an attractive rural
    appearance and character due to its open nature, the boundary vegetation and the
    views from and across the plot of the wider countryside, particularly from Glenfall
    Way and Ryeworth Road. Adjacent and nearby houses indicate the field is on the
    edge of a settlement but their presence does not significantly undermine the
    countryside qualities of the site and the scenic wider views.
13. The submissions indicate the retention of the rear of the site and the stretch of the
    field nearest to the eastern boundary as open land. Nevertheless, the development
    would radically change the appearance and nature of at least part of the field.
    Wherever the houses are positioned, it is highly likely that they would be clearly
    seen from any part of the field left as open space, even if new planting is provided.
    The introduction of new houses and residential uses would diminish the openness
    of the field and its rural qualities.
14. The dwellings could be designed to be low level. Also, they could be laid out as
    shown indicatively in a row running at right angles to Glenfall Way so that a line of
    sight from the road towards the Cotswold Escarpment is maintained. Even so, the
    houses are bound to interrupt and impinge to some degree on existing views onto
    and across the site. Also, they would mar the appreciation of the field as part of the
    wider countryside.
15. It is likely there would be views of the development from an existing footpath that
    runs along a track to the side of the field. Also, the houses would be seen from
    windows in the residences that face the site on the opposite side of Glenfall Way
    as well as from windows in the property on The Orchards that lies on the western
    site boundary. From these vantage points, the development would be seen as a
    form of encroachment beyond the current extent of built development onto rural
    land. As a result, the development would spoil the landscape character and the
    natural beauty of the countryside.
16. The site represents a small part of the NL and it is located on its edge close to
    residential areas. Nonetheless, the field’s open and rural qualities contribute to the
    scenic attractiveness of the NL, particularly when looking out from Glenfall Way
    towards the Cotswold Escarpment. Such views are appreciated by local residents
    and by walkers when travelling to and from the public right of way. By interrupting
    and spoiling such views, the development would be harmful to the NL’s scenic
    beauty. Consequently, it would not be compatible with the landscape.
17. New housing on the site would not be entirely alien to the area as it would be seen
    in the context of the adjoining and nearby residences. Also, the visual effects of
    the scheme could be softened and mitigated to a degree through sensitive design
    and additional planting, particularly as a large part of the field would be retained as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008569


       open space. Even so, the detrimental impacts of the development on the character
       and appearance of the site and the countryside landscape would be highly
       noticeable from nearby properties and from the road.
18. I am referred to appeal decision reference number APP/B1605/W/25/3361502 that
    relates to a proposal for housing on a nearby site. The Inspector dismissed that
    appeal partly due to the effects on the landscape. This current proposal relates to
    a different site and proposal and so I am not bound to reach the same decision as
    the previous Inspector.
19. Nevertheless, for the reasons as set out above, I conclude the development would
    have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area and that it
    would not conserve or enhance the natural, scenic and landscape beauty of the
    NL. In these regards, it would not accord with JCS policies SD4, SD6 and SD7 as
    well as policies L1 and D1 of the Cheltenham Plan 2020 (CP). Amongst other
    things, these policies look for development to respect the character of a site and its
    surroundings, to protect landscape character and the scenic beauty of the NL and
    to avoid harm to the setting of Cheltenham and views into or out of the NL.
Points in support of the proposal and planning balance.
20. For the reasons as set out under the 2 main issues, the proposal would not accord
    with the JCS and the CP when read as a whole. It follows to consider whether
    other factors justify granting planning permission contrary to the development plan.
21. Policy S5 of the Framework is applicable in the assessment of the appeal for
    reasons as set out under the first main issue. Under the terms of part 1 of this
    policy the development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
22. Policy H07 of the Framework indicates that substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of providing homes that would help address the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. The proposal would make a modest
    contribution in terms of numbers towards the provision of housing but this is an
    important factor given the current undersupply in housing land and the identified
    deficiencies in housing delivery.
23. The UU includes a planning obligation that requires the development to be initially
    marketed as self-build or custom-build housing plots. The submissions indicate the
    Council is not fulfilling its statutory duties under the Self Build and Custom
    Housebuilding Act 2015 to ensure there are sufficient plots with planning
    permission for self-build housing. Indeed, the Council has not sought to dispute the
    appellant’s claim that there is currently a significant shortfall of 114 plots when
    assessed against the demand as shown on the Council’s self and custom building
    housing register. However, the relevant planning obligation also sets out a process
    whereby the development would not provide self-build units in the event that a
    marketing exercise for self-build housing is unsuccessful. Therefore, it is not
    guaranteed that the development would lead to new self-build housing.
    Consequently, this factor adds only moderate weight towards allowing the appeal.
24. The Council raises concern that there is no planning obligation that secures the
    provision and long term management of measures to provide a 10% increase in
    the biodiversity value of the site. However, this matter is addressed through the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008569


       planning obligations as set out in the UU. Therefore, I find the proposal would be
       acceptable in these regards and so there would be no conflict with JCS policy
       INF6. Indeed, the development would lead to an enhancement in biodiversity to a
       level that adds modest weight in support of allowing the appeal.
25. Moreover, the UU includes planning obligations that would secure a green
    infrastructure scheme including public open space and a new footpath link from
    the road to the existing public right of way at the rear corner of the field. These
    obligations would lead to benefits in terms of providing a new area of open space
    and an alternative route for walkers that is less affected by traffic compared to the
    existing footpath. These benefits attract moderate weight in support of allowing the
    development.
26. I am referred to appeal decision reference number APP/B1605/W/21/3273053,
    under which outline planning permission was granted for up to 250 houses on land
    at Oakley Farm, Cheltenham. The Inspector for that appeal notes the Council’s
    view that development within the NL may be needed to ensure a sufficient supply
    of land to meet additional housing needs. However, the Inspector in that case was
    considering a housing proposal significantly larger than the current appeal
    scheme. There is little evidence before me to show that land within the NL is
    required to accommodate a scheme for 4 houses. Therefore, the comments within
    the previous appeal decision letter attract limited weight in support of the current
    proposal. Even so, I find the overall benefits of the development and factors in
    support of allowing the appeal attract considerable weight.
27. The proposal would be contrary to policy N2 of the Framework as it would not
    contribute positively to the natural environment but instead it would cause harm to
    landscape character and the natural beauty of the countryside. Policy N4 of the
    Framework states that substantial weight should be placed on the importance of
    conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of Protected Landscapes, including
    the NL. The provisions under part 2 of policy N4 of the Framework do not apply as
    the proposal would not be major development within the NL. However, even if it is
    treated as being limited development, the proposal would not accord with part 1 of
    policy N4 of the Framework as it would not avoid harm to the statutory purposes
    and special qualities of the NL. Also, to allow the appeal would go against the duty
    under Section 245 of the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023 to seek to
    further the statutory purposes of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of
    the NL. Therefore, I attach very considerable weight to the harm that would be
    caused in these regards.
28. The identified conflict with JCS policy SD10 is afforded very little weight as the
    policy is materially inconsistent with the provisions on housing outside of
    settlements as set out in part 1 of policy SD5 of the Framework. The benefits of
    the development would clearly outweigh the harm caused by virtue of this policy
    conflict. However, the overriding factor is the detrimental effects that would be
    caused to the character and appearance of the countryside and to the NL. The
    harm caused in these regards substantially outweighs the benefits of the
    development. As such, the proposal would not accord with policy S5 of the
    Framework when read as a whole. Therefore, I find insufficient grounds to allow
    the appeal contrary to the development plan.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008569


Other Matter
29. The site is within the zone of influence for the SAC where it is likely that new
    housing would lead to additional recreation and ill-effects on the SAC’s qualifying
    features. The UU requires a contribution to be made towards measures to mitigate
    the effects of recreation on the SAC. However, I need not consider this matter
    further as I have already found the appeal should be dismissed for other reasons.
    A finding that the proposal would be acceptable in these regards would be a factor
    of neutral weight that would fail to affect my overall conclusion.
Conclusion
30. For the reasons given above, I conclude the appeal should be dismissed.

Jonathan Edwards
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
