Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by R Gee BA (Hons) Dip TP PGCert UD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008500
Bromsgrove House, Honeysome Road, Chatteris PE16 6SB
    •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
         against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
    •    The appeal is made by Hayley Carver against the decision of Fenland District Council.
    •    The application Ref F/YR25/0750/F was approved on 9 January 2026 and planning permission
         was granted subject to conditions.
    •    The development permitted is change of use of land for residential use, siting of a mobile home to
         be used as an annexe and removal of existing mobile home.
    •    The condition in dispute is No 5 which states: The occupation of the mobile home hereby
         approved shall cease no later than three years from the date of this decision. On or before that
         date, the mobile home shall be removed from the site and the land reinstated to its former
         condition, unless planning permission has been granted to extend the period of occupation.
    •    The reason given for the condition is: To define the scope of the permission and enable the Local
         Planning Authority to reassess the impact of the use over time, including the demonstrable need of
         the caravan and associated personal circumstances. This is in the interests of visual and
         residential amenity and the spatial strategy, in accordance with Policy LP1, LP3, LP12 and LP16
         of the Fenland Local Plan.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for the development the subject of
   application ref F/YR25/0750/F for the change of use of land for residential use, siting
   of a mobile home to be used as an annex and removal of existing mobile home at
   Bromsgrove House, Honeysome Road, Chatteris PE16 6SB.
Preliminary Matters
2. My attention has been drawn to a previous permission at the site1. While there are
   similarities between the proposals, the material circumstances differ, including the
   location of the proposal as it is understood that the previous scheme largely used the
   footprint of an existing outbuilding. Furthermore, the Policy context differs. Although
   the earlier decision is a material consideration the permission has lapsed, and in any
   event, I have reached my own conclusions based on the merits of the current
   proposal.
3. On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council and
   the Appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the latest
   version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.




1
    Ref: F/YR21/1346/F

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008500


Background and Main Issues
4. Although officers recommended that planning permission be refused, Members
   resolved to grant permission. This was subject to a number of conditions.
5. This is an appeal against a condition attached to that grant of planning permission.
   That permission was for a change of use of land for residential use, siting of a
   mobile home to be used as an annexe and removal of existing mobile home. It
   seeks removal of condition no5 that allows the mobile home for a period of 3 years.
   I understand that the Council consider this and other conditions would outweigh
   any harm arising from the development.
6. The type of appeal before me requires me to determine the planning application as
   if it had been made in the first instance. Accordingly, I am not confined to
   considering only the disputed condition and may reach a different conclusion from
   the Council on the acceptability of the development, including whether planning
   permission should be granted at all. I raised this, and my concerns, during the
   course of the appeal.
7. Policy DM6 of the Framework requires planning conditions to be necessary to
   make development acceptable in planning terms, relevant to the development and
   planning considerations generally, sufficiently precise to enable compliance and
   enforcement, and reasonable in all other respects.
8. Having regard to the above, the main issues are whether the condition is
   reasonable and necessary having regard to:

       i)       whether future occupiers of the proposed development would be safe from
                flooding and whether the proposal would comply with national and local
                planning policies which seek to steer new development away from areas at
                the highest risk of flooding;

       ii)      whether it is a suitable location for residential development; and

       iii)     the effect of the proposal on character and appearance.
Reasons
Flood risk
9. The appeal site lies within Flood Zone 3a. Policy LP14 of the Fenland Local Plan
   (LP) requires development in areas at risk of flooding to follow a sequential
   approach. Where applicable, proposals must pass the Sequential Test and
   Exception Test, demonstrate an identified need for the development, and be
   supported by a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) showing that the
   development can be made safe for its lifetime, would not increase flood risk
   elsewhere, and incorporates appropriate flood risk mitigation measures without
   reliance on emergency services. This stance is supported by the guidance
   contained within the Cambridgeshire Flood and Water SPD 2016.
10. The Framework states that inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding
    should be avoided by directing development away from areas at highest risk, but
    where development is necessary, making it safe without increasing flood risk
    elsewhere.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008500


11. The Sequential Test forms the first stage of the Framework's approach to
    managing flood risk and seeks to steer development to areas at the lowest risk of
    flooding. The revised Framework adopts a strengthened sequential approach to
    flood risk as set out in Policy F5 and requires the Sequential Test to be applied
    unless specific exemptions apply.
12. Whilst the mobile home is described as ancillary accommodation, the proposal is
    not a householder development within an existing residential curtilage. It comprises
    a material change of use of land to residential use together with the siting of a
    mobile home. Accordingly, as a mobile home intended for permanent residential
    use Annex F of the Framework classifies the development as highly vulnerable. In
    Flood Zone 3a such development requires both the Sequential Test and Exception
    Test to be satisfied. In these circumstances, I am not persuaded that the proposal
    falls within the scope of Policy F5(2)(c) of the Framework to be exempt from a
    Sequential Test.
13. I appreciate that large tracts of the Council’s district fall within Flood Zone 3.
    Although the Environment Agency has not raised an objection to the development,
    its lack of objection is predicated upon the development meeting the Sequential
    Test. Even if the Sequential Test was passed, the Exception Test would need to be
    passed where wider sustainability benefits must be demonstrated, and a site-
    specific flood risk assessment must demonstrate that the development would be
    safe from all sources of flood risk.
14. The Flood Risk Assessment2 indicates that the mobile home is to be raised 0.6m
    off the ground. However, the plans indicate a brick-and-mortar skirt around the
    mobile home which would hinder the free flow of water underneath. Although it is
    stated that the main dwelling and annexe owner would be made aware of the
    Environment Agency’s Flood Warning Service, which will notify them of a potential
    flood risk at the appropriate times, this would not adequality resolve the risk in the
    event of a flood which could occur at night and could worsen relatively swiftly.
15. As the proposal is not supported by a Sequential Test, it conflicts with the
    Framework's flood risk policies. The Exception Test is only engaged where the
    Sequential Test has first been satisfied and therefore need not be considered
    further.
16. For the reasons stated, I cannot be satisfied that the future occupiers would be safe
    from flooding. The proposal would fail to comply with local and national policies in
    respect of flood risk, and the development would not comply with LP Policy LP14
    which requires development to pass both the Sequential and Exception Tests,
    demonstrate need and show a positive approach to flood risk management. Nor
    would the proposal comply with the Framework for the reasons set out above.
Location
17. Policy LP1 of the LP sets out to deliver sustainable growth and to reflect the
    presumption in favour of sustainable development as set out in the Framework and
    Policy LP3 of the LP sets out the district-wide spatial strategy where the focus for
    the majority of growth to be in and around its four market towns. The application
    site is located in an ‘Elsewhere’ location, where development is restricted to that
    which is essential for agriculture, or other uses requiring a rural location.

2
    ref H10269/MH/mh dated 13 February 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
Appeal Decision 6008500


18. Part D of Policy LP12 of the LP sets out that when considering proposals for
    residential uses in areas away from the market towns and villages the applicant
    should provide supporting evidence and explain a number of criteria a) – f) to justify
    development in such circumstances. Part E of the said Policy states that
    applications for mobile homes will be considered in the same way as permanent
    homes, including subject to flood risk considerations.
19. The permission was subject of condition 4 that limited occupancy such that it would
    be closely linked to the house.
20. The proposal is advanced as ancillary accommodation. The type of accommodation
    proposed would contain all the facilities required to facilitate independent living and
    would go beyond what could be considered as basic ancillary accommodation with
    no obvious reliance on the main dwellinghouse. Despite the Appellant’s contention
    that the proposal is not for an independent unit, in my judgement the proposal
    would not function in an ancillary manner to the main dwelling. I therefore find that
    the Council’s concern that the proposal would be tantamount to an independent
    dwelling is not unfounded.
21. Consequently, the proposal does not fall within the list of exceptions for
    development in such locations. The appeal site is proximate to existing built form
    and would not be in an isolated location in the context of the Framework. However,
    this does not overcome the conflict with Policies LP1 and LP3 of the LP.
22. I therefore conclude that the removal of the condition would result in a permanent
    residential use that would conflict with the district-wide spatial strategy and
    accordingly would not be in an appropriate location having regard to local and
    national planning policies. This draws the proposal into conflict with Policies LP1
    and LP3 of the LP.
Character and appearance
23. The condition in dispute requires the mobile home to be removed from the site and
    the land reinstated to its former condition within 3 years of the date of the
    permission.
24. Even if I were to consider the proposal as ancillary accommodation, Policy LP16
    supports such proposals providing it does not cause adverse harm to the local
    character, or to the general environment.
25. The appeal site lies outside of the built-up area of Chatteris, within a cluster of built
    form comprising two dwellings and various agricultural and commercial uses,
    surrounded by open countryside.
26. The proposal would utilise the same access and driveway as Bromsgrove House
    and would introduce a mobile home close to the boundary with the existing
    residential dwellings. However, the location of the proposed mobile home falls
    outside the residential curtilage of Bromsgrove House and accordingly a change of
    use to residential is sought. Furthermore, the mobile home would have its own
    curtilage separate to the main dwelling, and would be located on agricultural land.
27. Notwithstanding the limited height of the proposal, the mobile home is of
    considerable width, domestic in its appearance, including its external finish. In
    addition, by virtue of the inherent domestication of an undeveloped field there
    would be harm to character and appearance. Furthermore, an extensive area of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008500


       land is included within the red line boundary. The use of this area of land would
       likely result in some domestic paraphernalia, including planting and other
       domestication of the plot, which may not require the benefit of planning permission.
       This would give rise to a suburban appearance contrary to its agrestic character
       and appearance. Accordingly, the proposed development, including the extent and
       use of the land would undermine the rural character and appearance of the area.
28. The removal of the existing caravan from the residential curtilage attracts neutral
    weight in respect of the character and appearance of the area. The evidence before
    me indicates that the stationing of the caravan does not require planning
    permission and therefore a condition requiring its removal from site would be
    unreasonable. Moreover, the visual impact of the mobile home arising from its
    differing context is not directly comparable. Consequently, any visual benefit arising
    from its removal should not be treated as a benefit of the proposal.
29. I therefore conclude that the removal of the condition to allow for the permanent
    stationing of the mobile home would be materially harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area in conflict with Policies LP12 and LP16 of the LP. Amongst
    other things these policies seeks development that makes a positive contribution to
    the local distinctiveness and character of the area, enhances its local setting,
    responds to and improves the character of the local built environment, provides
    resilience to climate change, reinforces local identity and does not adversely
    impact, either in design or scale terms, on the street scene, settlement pattern or
    the landscape character of the surrounding area.
Other Matters
30. I recognise that the proposal before me has evolved since a previous refusal3 in an
    attempt to overcome some of the Council’s concerns. However, the provision of an
    amenity area and a lack of harm in respect of living conditions by way of
    overlooking, are neutral matters that do not outweigh the harms identified.
31. I appreciate the Appellants’ desire for the annex. Dismissing the appeal would
    mean that the Appellant would be likely to have to consider other options for
    meeting their accommodation needs. Nevertheless, there is no evidence before me
    to demonstrate that the appeal proposal would be the only means by which such
    needs may be reasonably met. As such, while I have had regard to the Appellants’
    personal circumstances and preferences, based on the evidence before me these
    carry only limited weight in favour of the proposal and does not outweigh the harm
    that I have found.
32. The Appellant has referred to the financial burden that would allegedly arise from
    compliance with condition no5. Policy DM5 of the Framework advises that viability
    considerations should be assessed having regard to the circumstances of the
    particular case and that it is for the decision-maker to determine the weight to be
    afforded to such evidence. However, no viability appraisal, financial assessment, or
    other substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that compliance with
    the condition would render the development unviable or result in an unreasonable
    financial burden. In the absence of such evidence, I attach little weight to this
    assertion.



3
    F/YR25/0352/F


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008500


33. I recognise the Appellant's concern that the continued presence of the condition
    may create uncertainty regarding future living arrangements. However, no medical
    evidence or other substantive documentation has been submitted to demonstrate
    that this uncertainty has resulted in, or would be likely to result in, material harm to
    health or wellbeing.
34. The Appellant states that the previous approval at the site did not have a similar
    condition imposed. I do not know the full circumstances in which that permission
    was granted. However, this permission has now lapsed and therefore carries very
    limited weight in the determination of the proposal before me.
35. I note the representations in support of the proposal. However, this is a neutral
    matter which does not outweigh the harms identified.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
36. The revised Framework introduced a ‘presumption in favour of sustainable
    development’ for specific types of proposals outside of settlement boundaries in
    National Decision Making Policies (NDMP) S3 to S5, which replaces the
    presumption as detailed in the previous Framework.
37. In this case, the appeal site lies outside a settlement, and the proposal therefore
    falls to be considered against NDMP S5. The proposal does not comprise one of
    the forms of development listed in S5(1) as being acceptable in the countryside.
38. Whilst S5(4) provides that development may be approved in exceptional
    circumstances where the benefits would substantially outweigh the adverse effects,
    S5(2) explains that the circumstances in which benefits are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not limited to, situations where a
    proposal would fail to comply with a national decision-making policy which states
    that development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
39. I have found that the proposal fails the Sequential Test and therefore conflicts with
    the Framework's flood risk policies. I attach substantial weight to this harm.
40. The proposal would give rise to some benefits, including a personal benefit to the
    Appellant and a degree of environmental enhancement. However, the evidence
    before me indicates that these benefits would be limited in nature and extent and, I
    therefore afford them only limited weight in the overall planning balance.
41. Consequently, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by
    the conflict with national flood risk policies, the unsuitability of the location and the
    harmful impact on character and appearance of the area. These matters are
    sufficient for me to conclude that the scheme is unacceptable. Indeed, the failure to
    meet the Framework criteria in respect of flood risk means that the development
    should be refused.
42. Drawing all matters together, whilst the Appellant seeks the removal of condition
    no. 5, a determination of this appeal requires me to consider whether a new
    planning permission should be granted for the development subject to revised
    conditions. I have considered the planning merits of the development as a whole.
    and for the reasons given above, I conclude that the development would be
    unacceptable and that planning permission should not be granted.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008500


43. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. In doing so, this removes the planning
    permission previously granted.

     R Gee
     INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
