Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 June 2026 by Scott Wilson LL.B. MSc MRTPI
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 19th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008239
Firs Hill, High Road, Chipstead, Surrey CR5 3QN
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Steve Lamb against the decision of Reigate and Banstead Borough Council.
   The application reference is 25/02108/HHOLD.
   The development proposed is two / single storey side / rear extension and alterations.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues
   in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded
   without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
              The effect of the development on the character and appearance of the host
               dwelling and the surrounding area, with particular regard to the Walpole
               Avenue Residential Area of Special Character (RASC) and the setting of the
               Walpole Avenue and Starrock Green Conservation Area (CA).
              The effect of the development on the living conditions of the neighbouring
               property, Swaylands.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
5. The appeal property comprises a two-storey residential dwelling situated within a
   generously proportioned rectangular plot. The building is set back from the highway
   and is enclosed by mature vegetation on all sides, except for a break along the
   shared boundary with the neighbouring Swaylands.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008239


6. The site is located within the RASC. The surrounding area is characterised by
   individual detached dwellings, many of which date from the early twentieth century
   and exhibit distinctive Arts and Crafts architectural qualities that make a positive
   contribution to local character. Development in the vicinity is typically set within
   generous plots, resulting in a spacious, low-density pattern. Whilst there is some
   variation in design, there remains a consistent use of comparable building forms
   and materials. Collectively, these characteristics establish a coherent and attractive
   character and provide a gradual transition between the built-up area and the
   surrounding countryside. The area is further notable for the limited extent of infilling
   or redevelopment.
7. The proposed development would introduce a first-floor element to part of the
   building and extend a two-storey section towards the shared boundary with
   Swaylands. The proposal would result in a substantial increase in the massing and
   scale of all elevations and would significantly extend the overall width of the
   building close to the shared boundaries, despite retaining a small gap either side.
   When taken together with the large two-storey rear extension, the development
   would markedly expand the footprint, resulting in a dominant, rectangular form
   occupying much of the plot width.
8. The symmetry of the fenestration, both horizontally and vertically, taken together
   with the form, would result in a Georgian character. Such detail would be at odds
   with the established character of the area, which is defined by buildings with
   distinctive Arts and Crafts architectural qualities set within spacious plots and with
   clear separation between them. Despite retaining the concept of the front feature
   gable, the design and otherwise rigid and expansive built form would conflict with
   the prevailing character.
9. This harm would be compounded by the introduction of a double-hipped roof
   incorporating a central valley gutter. This form would appear alien when compared
   to the typically steeply pitched roofs and prominent chimney features characteristic
   of the surrounding area.
10. I am directed to planning permission granted at ‘Ashleigh’1 and I am provided with
    some detail, including plans. That proposal was separated from neighbouring
    properties on one side by an access road differentiating it from the subject appeal
    in terms of spatial relationship to its plot and other properties. Although that
    application proposed a substantial increase in size, it is not directly comparable to
    the size and scale of the subject appeal. Furthermore, the design of that property
    incorporated architectural design features, such as the roof, which were compatible
    with the surrounding area. I therefore distinguish that grant of planning permission
    from the subject appeal and afford it little weight.
11. Whilst the appeal site is not located within the CA, it is adjacent to its boundary.
    The significance of the CA is set out in the Planning Committee report dated 6
    March 2024. The designation derives from a concentration of well-designed Arts
    and Crafts buildings, characterised by the consistent use of local materials, steep
    roof pitches, prominent chimney stacks, and asymmetrical compositions, including
    works by notable architects such as George Blair Imrie. Its significance extends
    beyond individual buildings to encompass their generous plots, mature vegetation,
    and the strong integration of built form with the landscape, giving rise to a spacious,

1
    19/01831/HOLD


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008239


     low-density character. Overall, the CA derives particular importance from the
     cohesion and group value of its buildings and their setting, which Historic England
     identifies as being of special architectural interest.
12. The overall form, scale and spacious, low-density character of the CA can be
    readily appreciated from the public highway. During my site visit, which I recognise
    represents a snapshot in time, I observed a notable level of pedestrian activity,
    including walkers and runners, and the presence of speed limits, which is indicative
    of its village-like environment. I was able to walk through the area and directly
    experience its qualities, including the mature vegetation, the prevalence of Arts and
    Crafts style buildings, and the limited extent of infilling or redevelopment. The CA
    reads as a coherent and unified composition. In addition, I observed along High
    Road that the scale of development, when combined with spacious plots and
    mature landscaping, contributes positively to a strong and attractive village setting
    which complements the CA. The setting is therefore not merely attractive; it is an
    important part of the area’s overall significance.
13. Given the importance of the setting of the CA and the proximity and visual
    prominence of the appeal site, it follows that harm to the character and appearance
    of the host dwelling, and the surrounding area will result in harm to the setting of
    the CA. The proposal would adversely affect elements that make a positive
    contribution to the setting of the CA, namely the generous nature of the plots and
    the spatial relationship of the buildings to plot size, the construction and detailing,
    and would fail to better reveal its significance. Whilst the harm to the significance of
    the CA as a whole is limited, this is a matter of considerable weight and
    importance. Having regard to the Framework I must also balance this harm against
    any public benefits.
14. I accept that the proposal could create a more efficient and usable living
    environment. However, I have not been provided with any evidence of the
    necessity of these matters or how they would provide any public benefit. I therefore
    consider them personal benefits that would not outweigh the harm identified.
15. The use of high-quality materials is commendable in its attempt to reflect detailing
    characteristic of the area. I accept that material usage combined with policy
    compliance can create suitable schemes. However, in this instance, I do not
    consider that the use of plain clay roof tiles, rendered elevations and timber sash
    windows would by themselves be a public benefit, particularly when I have found
    harm to the character and appearance of the host dwelling, the surrounding area,
    and the setting of the CA. I afford this matter little weight.
16. The proposal would provide some economic benefit through the employment of
    local construction workers and associated construction services and their use of
    local businesses. However, given the scale of the proposal any benefit would be
    limited, and therefore carries little weight.
17. I therefore conclude that the public benefits would not outweigh the harm I have
    found to the significance of the CA.
18. Consequently, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the host
    dwelling, the RASC and the setting of the CA. Accordingly the proposal would
    conflict with Policies DES1, DES3 and NHE9 of the Reigate and Banstead
    Development Management Plan (2019), and Policy CS4 of the Reigate and
    Banstead Local Plan Core Strategy (2014), insofar as they seek high quality design

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008239


     that promotes and reinforces local distinctiveness and conserves and enhances
     heritage assets and their setting.
19. Furthermore, the proposal would conflict with guidance in the Reigate and
    Banstead Borough Council Local Character and Distinctiveness Design Guide
    Supplementary Planning Document (2021), insofar as it seeks well designed
    development that respects and responds to its context, incorporates appropriate
    scale, width and footprint, and has a roof design that follows the pitch, eaves
    height, ridge height and form within the road, amongst other things.
20. The proposal also conflicts with the design and heritage policies of the National
    Planning Policy Framework (August 2025).
Living Conditions
21. The appeal building currently exists in a side by side relationship with its neighbour
    Swaylands. The proposed side extension and further rear extension would place a
    flank wall at approximately two metres from the shared boundary with an eaves
    height of approximately 5.65 metres. Whilst there would be no fenestration on this
    flank wall it would project beyond Swaylands rear building line by six metres,
    approximately. It would present a significant material increase in mass and scale
    directly adjacent to Swaylands outdoor amenity space and would be overbearing.
22. There is a gap in the mature vegetation on the shared boundary and at this location
    the boundary treatment is limited to a fence. Given the proximity, height and depth
    of the proposal, the experience from the dedicated outdoor seating area of
    Swaylands would be one of an overbearing flank wall. Whilst the remaining garden
    would be unaffected by the proposal, that would not mitigate the adverse impact to
    the dedicated seating area.
23. Likewise, the proximity to the boundary taken together with the height and depth of
    the proposal would lead to an overbearing presence when viewed from the first
    floor window closest to the proposal. This would be experienced as overbearing
    despite the fact that the plans show that the proposal would not breach a 45-degree
    line to the rear windows of Swaylands. Views from other rear facing windows at
    Swaylands would provide views of the proposal; however, these would be too
    oblique to materially affect outlook.
24. Consequently, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the living conditions of
    Swaylands with particular regard to overbearing. Accordingly, the proposal would
    conflict with Policy DES1 of the Reigate and Banstead Development Management
    Plan (2019), and Policy CS4 of the Reigate and Banstead Local Plan Core Strategy
    (2014), insofar as they require high quality design with no adverse impact on
    neighbouring occupiers and that the impact on surrounding properties is minimised.
25. The proposal would also conflict with the guidance in the Reigate and Banstead
    Borough Council Supplementary Planning Guidance on Householder Extensions
    and Alterations (2004), insofar as it seeks good design that does not appear
    overbearing when viewed from neighbouring properties.
Other Matters
26. The appellant maintains that the proposal would comply with several policies within
    the development plan. I accept that the proposal would comply with some aspects
    of the development plan, its objectives and supporting texts; however, these

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008239


     compliances would be neutral considerations that would not outweigh the harm
     identified as a result of conflict with other development plan policies.
27. The appellant has referred to other developments in the area in addition to the
    previously discussed Ashleigh. However, I have not been provided with any
    substantive detail of these other developments. Therefore, I cannot be certain
    under which development plan and against which policies they were considered or
    if they even have planning permission at all. Consequently, I cannot draw direct
    comparisons to the subject appeal and afford them little weight in my consideration.
Conclusion and Recommendation
28. The proposal would conflict with policies of the development plan and there are no
    material considerations, including the benefits of the proposal, which justify granting
    permission contrary to the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given
    above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I recommend that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

Scott Wilson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
29. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
