 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 1 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6008441
 44A Sauncey Avenue, Harpenden, Hertfordshire AL5 4QL
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
      planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Oli Galway against St Albans City and District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 5/2025/1696.
 •    The development proposed is the demolition of existing 3 bedroom dwelling, garage and
      conservatory and construction of new 4 bedroom dwelling with parking, landscaping alterations and
      re-grading of the rear garden with garden outbuilding.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of
   existing 3 bedroom dwelling, garage and conservatory and construction of new 4
   bedroom dwelling with parking, landscaping alterations and re-grading of the rear
   garden with garden outbuilding, at 44A Sauncey Avenue, Harpenden, Hertfordshire
   AL5 4QL in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 5/2025/1696, subject
   to the conditions on the attached schedule.
Background and Procedural Matters
2. Section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) provides that
   an applicant may appeal if the Council has not given notice of its decision on a
   planning application within the statutory period (or within an extended period if
   agreed in writing).
3. The Council did not issue a decision in this case, but it has prepared a delegated
   planning application report, which includes its consideration of the proposal, and in
   which it states that, in the absence of an appeal against non-determination, it would
   have refused planning permission. In framing the main issue in the appeal, I have
   had regard to that report, including its putative reason for refusal, and to
   representations from interested parties.
4. The site lies adjacent to the Harpenden Conservation Area. Section 72(1) of the
   Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires that special
   attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
   appearance of conservation areas. In this case, the Council does not allege that
   the conservation area’s setting would be harmed. Having regard to the large size
   of the plot; its context; the scale, siting, form and design of the scheme; and the
   appearance of the house it would replace, I agree with that assessment.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6008441


5. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   (‘the Framework’). Having regard to the main issue in this appeal, there are no
   material differences between it and the now superceded version which was in place
   at the time of the Council’s decision.
6. Finally, the description of the proposal was amended during its consideration by the
   Council. In my banner and formal decision, I have used that amended description,
   to which the appellant agreed by email dated 26 February 2026.
Main Issue
7. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on neighbouring occupiers’ living
   conditions, with particular regard to the outlook from 46 Sauncey Avenue (‘No 46’).
Reasons
     Living conditions
8. No 46 has side facing windows and French doors leading to an outdoor seating
   area which face a fence on the boundary with No 44A.
9. The proposed dwelling would be taller, bulkier and would have a larger footprint
   which would extend further to the rear, compared to the dwelling it would replace.
   However, unlike the existing dwelling which has a store room to the side, the
   replacement would be set in slightly from the boundary with No 46. Moreover, its
   deepest section, which would project furthest beyond the rear face of No 46, would
   be single storey with a limited bulk. The central section of the side elevation
   closest to No 46 would have a roof which would slope down towards a low ground
   floor level eaves line, thus also limiting its bulk.
10. Consequently, although the proposed dwelling would have higher eaves lines and a
    steeper roof pitch compared to the dwelling it would replace, having regard to its
    form and siting, and the existing boundary fence, it would not have a harmfully
    overbearing impact on the occupants of No 46. In reaching that conclusion, I also
    note that the proposed house would have a very limited impact on the principal
    outlooks from No 46’s rear facing windows and doors, and its main rear amenity
    area, which are down that property’s spacious garden.
11. The windows in the proposed side elevation facing No 46 would serve a small
    snug, and a garage which is not a habitable space. They would be at ground floor
    level and would face the boundary fence. As a result, neither window would cause
    a significant loss of privacy or light pollution for the adjacent occupiers.
12. The proposed garden outbuilding would be located in a slightly elevated position
    towards the end of this long plot, close to the rear boundary, where it would broadly
    align with the siting of an outbuilding in the garden of 44 Sauncey Avenue (‘No 44’).
    It would therefore be a considerable distance from the rear elevations of No 44 and
    No 46. Given its siting, its limited single storey height, and existing side boundary
    treatment and landscaping, it would be reasonably screened from view, and it
    would not give rise to significant light pollution.
13. Reasonable incidental use of the outbuilding, including as a gym, office and shed
    as depicted on the plan, would not cause a harmful level of noise or disturbance.
    Notwithstanding its proximity to the side boundary, that conclusion also applies to
    the small cycle storage area. Whilst it is claimed that the proposed dwelling may

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6008441


     be served by a heat pump, I have no such information before me, and I am not
     persuaded that such a facility, even if it were proposed, would give rise to
     significant noise or disturbance.
14. For these reasons, the scheme would not have a harmfully adverse impact on the
    living conditions at No 46 or No 44. It would not therefore conflict with Policies 69
    and 70 of the City and District of St Albans District Local Plan Review (1994)
    (‘LPR’), nor with Policies H2 and ESD1 of the Harpenden Neighbourhood Plan
    2018 – 2033 (2018) (‘HNP’). Amongst other things, and in general terms, these set
    out a requirement for a high standard of design, having regard to neighbouring
    properties, and achieving a tolerable level of privacy between dwellings.
15. Neither would it conflict with the broadly similar stance, including the requirement to
    provide for a high standard of amenity, in emerging Policies SP12, DES1 and
    DES5 of the Draft Local Plan Main Modifications Publication (2041).
16. It would also accord with the Framework, including its stance at Policy P3 that
    development proposals should be appropriate for their location, and should avoid
    exposure to levels of noise and artificial light which could have an unacceptable
    adverse effect on health and quality of life.
     Other matters
17. Given the scheme’s appropriate design, it would not conflict with those
    development plan policies, including HNP Policy ESD2 and LPR Policies 69 and
    70, which require development to be considerate of, and make a positive
    contribution to, local character.
Conditions and Conclusion
18. I have considered suggested planning conditions against the tests at Policy DM6 of
    the Framework, making minor adjustments where necessary in the interests of
    clarity and precision, and having regard to its stance that conditions that are
    required to be discharged before development commences should be avoided
    unless there is clear justification.
19. As well as the standard time limit, in the interests of certainty, I have imposed a
    condition requiring that the development be carried out in accordance with the
    approved plans.
20. The Council has suggested a condition stating that development shall not
    commence until a Construction Management Plan has been submitted and
    approved. Given the residential context of the site, which is accessed directly from
    the public highway, its location opposite a school, and that the scheme involves the
    demolition and replacement of a building, such a condition is necessary in the
    interests of the safety and convenience of highway users and to protect nearby
    occupiers’ living conditions. It is necessarily phrased as a pre-commencement
    condition to address those matters from the outset of development. Having regard
    to S100ZA (5) and (6) of the Act, the appellant agreed to this condition by email
    dated 8 April 2026.
21. My conditions 4, 5 and 6 are necessary in the interests of the character and
    appearance of the area. Condition No 7 is necessary to protect the adjacent
    occupiers’ living conditions.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6008441


22. On the application form it is stated that the biodiversity net gain requirement does
    not apply to this scheme, as it is a self-build dwelling. Given that the application
    was submitted before 6 August 2026, that exemption still applies. My condition
    No 8 is therefore necessary requiring that it complies with the definition of self-build
    development. Consequently, the Council’s suggested condition No 11 is
    unnecessary.
23. My condition No 9 is imposed in accordance with S114 of the Levelling Up and
    Regeneration Act 2023.
24. An interested party has suggested a condition requiring that the garden room
    should not be used for any residential purpose, including night time sleeping. In the
    interests of clarity, to protect adjacent occupiers’ living conditions, and having
    regard to its proposed use as depicted on the plan, my condition No 10 is
    necessary requiring that the outbuilding be used for purposes incidental to the
    dwelling.
25. The Council has also suggested a condition stating that, notwithstanding the
    provisions of Class A of Part1 of Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning
    (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) the dwelling
    shall not be enlarged or extended without the grant of permission.
26. However, the Planning Practice Guidance advises at ID: 21a-017-20190723 that
    conditions restricting the future use of permitted development rights may not pass
    the tests of reasonableness or necessity. Having regard to that advice, the
    considerable size of this plot, the spacious setting of the proposed development
    and its context, such a condition is unnecessary.
27. For the above reasons, and having regard to all other matters raised, including
    representations by interested parties, the appeal is allowed and planning
    permission is granted for the proposed development.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
 Appeal Decision 6008441


                                  SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
       date of this decision.
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans: 1434-001, 1434-201 Rev K, 1434-202 Rev O,
       1434-100 Rev J, 1434-101 Rev J, 1434-102 Rev J, 1434-110 Rev J,
       1434-111 Rev J, 1434-112 Rev J, 1434-113 Rev J, 1434-114 Rev J,
       1434-115 Rev J, 1434-212 Rev Q and 1434-211 Rev J.
    3) No development shall commence until a Construction Management Plan
       (‘CMP’) has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local Planning
       Authority.
         The CMP shall provide for: photographic condition survey of public
         carriageways, verges and footways in the vicinity of the site; routing of
         construction vehicles to/from the site; access arrangements to the site;
         programme of works; the estimated number, type and routing of construction
         vehicles per day/week; traffic management requirements; construction and
         storage compounds; siting and details of wheel washing facilities, cleaning of
         site entrances, site tracks and the adjacent public highway; timing of
         construction activities; provision of on-site parking prior to commencement of
         construction activities; details of measures to protect pedestrians and other
         highway users from construction activities on the highway; details of measures
         and training to reduce the danger posed to cyclists by HGVs; and where works
         cannot be contained wholly within the site, a plan should be submitted showing
         the site layout on the highway including extent of hoarding, pedestrian routes
         and remaining road width for vehicle movements.
         The approved CMP shall be adhered to throughout the construction period for
         the development.
    4) Prior to the commencement of above ground works, specifications of the
       materials to be used in the construction of all external surfaces, shall be
       submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local Planning Authority. The
       development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
    5) Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted, full details of hard
       and soft landscape works shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by, the
       Local Planning Authority. These details shall include hard surfacing materials,
       planting plans; written specifications (including cultivation and other operations
       associated with the establishment of plants and grass); schedules of plants
       noting species, plant sizes and proposed numbers/densities where appropriate;
       and an implementation programme; and a plan demonstrating replacement tree
       planting within the site at a minimum ratio of 2:1 to compensate for any tree loss
       arising from the development.
    6) If within a period of five years from the date of the planting of any tree, that tree,
       or any tree planted in replacement for it, is removed, uprooted or destroyed or
       dies, or becomes seriously damaged or defective, another tree of the same
       species and size as that originally planted shall be planted at the same place,
       unless the Local Planning Authority gives its written consent to any variation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
 Appeal Decision 6008441


    7) Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling, the window in the first floor flank
       elevation facing 44 Sauncey Avenue shall be glazed in obscure glass and shall
       be non-opening below a height of 1.7 metres taken from internal finished floor
       level. The window shall be retained as such thereafter.
    8) The dwelling hereby approved shall be constructed as self-build and custom
       housebuilding dwelling within the definition of self-build and custom build
       dwellings in section 1(A1) of the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015
       (as amended). The first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted shall be by
       a person or persons who had a primary input into the design and layout of the
       dwelling, and the Council shall be notified, in writing, of the persons who intend
       to take up first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted at least two months
       prior to first occupation.

    9) Unless the development has been completed, a development progress report
       must be provided to the Local Planning Authority 12 months from the date of
       planning permission being granted. Such a report shall be provided annually
       thereafter from the date of approval, until the development is completed.

    10) The garden outbuilding hereby permitted shall not be used other than for
        purposes incidental to the dwelling known as 44A Sauncey Avenue.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       6
