Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008773
Land adjoining The Ridings, Singleborough, Buckinghamshire MK17 0RF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr. R George against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/4181/PIP.
•    The development proposed is erection of a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 1 detached dwelling.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
      land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
      considered as part of the subsequent Technical Details Consent application stage
      (TDC stage), if permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal
      accordingly.
3.    The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) indicates that other statutory requirements
      may apply at the TDC stage such as those relating to listed buildings and
      conservation areas. However, the duty in Section 66(1) of the Listed Buildings and
      Conservation Areas Act 1990 (the Act) including the effect on the setting of listed
      buildings, does apply, as a reference to permission in principle was introduced by
      the Housing and Planning Act 2016. Furthermore, the general duty in conservation
      areas under Section 72(1) of the Act applies to the exercise of any functions under
      the Planning Acts which includes permission in principle. These duties should
      therefore be exercised when considering permission in principle cases.
4.    On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
      Framework) was published. The main parties have been invited to comment on the
      relevance of the Framework to the appeal, I am therefore satisfied they have not
      been prejudiced. Consideration has been given to those comments received in
      reaching the appeal decision.
5.    Following the publication of the Framework, the Council now contest that though it
      considers the proposed development conflicts with the development plan, material
      considerations indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance with
      it. Notwithstanding this, as the appeal has been submitted I will proceed to
      determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence before me.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008773


Main Issue
6.       The main issue is whether the location, the proposed land use and the amount of
         development is suitable for residential development, having particular regard to (a)
         the Council’s development plan strategy for development, and (b) whether the
         proposed development would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of
         the Singleborough Conservation Area and the effect on the setting of the Grade II
         listed buildings, Park Lodge and Old Vine Cottage.
Reasons
Spatial Strategy
7.       The appeal site comprises an undeveloped parcel of land, located between two
         dwellings and their grounds. Due to the site’s relationship with its surroundings, I
         do not find the site can be considered ‘isolated’ as has been established in the
         context of the Framework. A dwelling could also be comfortably located within the
         site and as such I do not find any harm in relation to the amount of development
         proposed.
8.       Singleborough benefits from no services other than a bus stop, which it has been
         brought to my attention is only served by a bus service on the 2 nd and 4th
         Thursdays of the month. Singleborough Lane also does not benefit from a footway,
         such that a pedestrian would have to walk along the highway and share it with
         vehicles. The nearest other settlement is Great Horwood, which has some
         services and facilities, whilst a greater range are available further away in
         Winslow, however there is a lack of sustainable transport options to access these.
9.       Policies S2 and S3 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan 2021 (the LP) provide the
         Council’s spatial strategy and preferred locations for growth within the local
         authority area. Their aim is to direct new housing towards existing urban centres
         and defined rural settlements with existing services and facilities. The policies
         require that development accords with the settlement hierarchy set out in Table 2
         of the LP. Singleborough is not listed within Table 2 and is therefore not where
         development is directed towards.
10. Policy D51 of the LP outlines instances where infill development could be
    acceptable within ‘other settlements’. However, as Singleborough is not listed
    within Table 2’s category ‘other settlements’ it is not applicable. The main parties
    agree that in relation to the spatial strategy the application site is located within the
    countryside.
11. Consequently, the proposal would not be in a suitable location for residential
    development. Permitting it would be harmful in that the strategy for the distribution
    of housing would be undermined and as car borne travel would be encouraged.
Heritage Assets
12. Records of Singleborough date back to the Domesday Book and there is a range
    of medieval building remains within the CA. The significance and special interest of
    the CA, in my view, is primarily derived from the settlement’s agricultural origins,
    comprising of a number of historic farmhouses and dwellings, including a number


1
    Accessed online version August 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008773


      of listed properties. Overall therefore, the significance of the CA derives from its
      historic, architectural and archaeological value.
13. The listed buildings within the CA include the nearby Old Vine Cottage and Park
    Lodge. Their special interest and significance is derived from their architectural
    and historic interest due to their design and age. Both are timber framed buildings,
    with Old Vine Cottage dating from the 15th century and Park Lodge from the
    16/17th century, with the former also having a thatched roof.
14. The Singleborough Conservation Area Appraisal 2012 (the SCAA) highlights the
    contribution of trees and grassed areas within the CA to providing a visual
    connection between the built and green environments, reflecting the agricultural
    origins of the settlement. The open and spacious feel of the CA form a key part of
    its character, and the gaps between buildings provide an important contribution
    towards this.
15. Notwithstanding the appeal sites varying descriptions within the SCAA, it is an
    undeveloped gap between buildings. The site is bordered by hedgerows and is
    relatively open but for a few trees. Its undeveloped nature adds to the verdant and
    spacious feel of the CA. Therefore, the site contributes positively towards the
    character and appearance of the CA and the setting of the nearby listed buildings.
    As the appeal site has a Public Right of Way (PRoW) running through it, it is also
    somewhere the CA can be readily appreciated from.
16. Though the details of the appearance and layout of the proposed dwelling would
    not be submitted until the TDC stage, the principle of residential development in
    the location of the appeal site would result in the loss of space between dwellings
    and the domestication of the site. This would adversely affect the verdant
    character of the site and result in a loss of openness and perceived spaciousness
    within the CA, altering the approach to Singleborough from the PRoW. This would
    harmfully undermine and conflict with the positive characteristics of the CA and
    would harmfully reduce the appeal sites contribution towards it.
17. Park Lodge is separated from the appeal site by a tennis court and mature
    vegetation, and Old Vine Cottage, situated opposite, is set back from the highway.
    While these relationships would help limit the effects from the appeal development,
    the harm identified above would also change the approach to these properties and
    how they are experienced causing harm to their setting.
18. The proposal would harm the designated heritage assets. However, due to the
    plots contiguous boundaries with the neighbouring properties and its similar size to
    those located to the south, following their general form, the harm would be at the
    lower end of the spectrum, but nonetheless of considerable importance and
    weight. In accordance with the Framework, where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and
    its significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal, with substantial weight given to the asset’s conservation.
19. The proposal would contribute towards housing supply, and the Framework
    provides support for small sites which typically can be built out quicker and have a
    more immediate effect on housing supply. The proposal would also result in long
    and short term economic and social benefits, through the construction process and
    through the future occupier’s use of services and facilities within the area.
    However, due to the scale of the development these matters would amount to only

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008773


      a limited benefit of the scheme with limited weight. The appellant has forwarded
      that the proposal would result in the increase in width of the PRoW, however this is
      not a matter that can be secured at this stage and would be determined at the
      Technical Details Consent stage, so carries little weight.
20. Even taken together these public benefits would not outweigh the substantial
    weight to be attached to the conservation of the designated heritage asset.
    Consequently, the proposal conflicts with policy HE6 of the Framework.
Conclusion on Site Suitability
21. For the reasons above, the appeal site would not be a suitable location for
    residential development having regard to its location, the proposed land use and
    the amount of development. It would neither preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA and the setting of the listed buildings would not be
    preserved. The proposal conflicts with the aims of policies S1, S2, S3, T1 and BE1
    of the LP, which seek amongst other things to control the location of development,
    encourage the use of more sustainable forms of transport and protect the historic
    environment.
Other Considerations
22. When applying the Settlement Hierarchy Assessment2 criteria, Singleborough may
    score comparatively with other locations in the ‘other settlements’ category of the
    LP in terms of availability of services and its proximity to larger settlements.
    However, while the spatial strategy supports infill development in principle in rural
    areas within settlements, it does not extend this support to settlements that are too
    small to represent sustainable locations for growth. All the other settlements
    referenced have larger populations than Singleborough, so they are materially
    different. Therefore, I find this carries little weight and this does not outweigh the
    harm identified.
23. My attention has been drawn to an appeal in the settlement of Gibraltar 3, which is
    a place also not listed in the settlement hierarchy. I note the Inspectors findings in
    that case highlighted that Gibraltar benefitted from a public house, a bus stop a
    couple of minutes’ walk from the site with a frequent bus service, and the larger
    settlement of Westlington was within walking distance, which had a greater
    number of services and could be reached by a surfaced footpath. All credentials
    that the current appeal site does not benefit from, therefore the context of the two
    sites are materially different. My findings in relation to the accessibility of
    Singleborough to services and facilities in general are consistent with that of the
    Inspector at the appeal located to on Land top the rear of Ashwell House,
    Singleborough Lane, Singleborough4.
24. Though the PRoW may be able to be fenced under The Town and Country
    Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, the openness
    would nonetheless still be appreciated through the lack of built form on the site. As
    a result I find this carries little weight and this does not outweigh the harm
    identified.


2
  Settlement Hierarchy Assessment for the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan to accompany Proposed Submission Plan September
2017
3
  APP/J0405/W/24/3356545
4
  APP/J0405/W/25/3375223


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
Appeal Decision 6008773


Planning Balance
25. The conflict I have identified with policies S1, S2, S3, T1 and BE1 of the LP,
    results in a conflict with the development plan read as a whole.
26. Policy S5 of the Framework states certain forms of development should be
    approved outside of settlements unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. This includes limited infilling
    within groups of housing, which the appeal proposal comprises of.
27. Though the proposal conflicts with policies S1, S2 and S3 of the LP, they are
    materially inconsistent with policy S5 of the Framework, which provides more
    broad support for limiting infilling outside of settlements. As a result, this conflict is
    given very limited weight in accordance with the Annexe A of the Framework.
28. Circumstances in which the benefits of approving development proposals are likely
    to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not restricted to,
    situations where the development proposal would fail to comply with one of the
    national decision-making policies which state that development proposals should
    be refused in specific circumstances.
29. Under Policy DP3 of the Framework, development must respond to their context,
    including the history, character and features of the site and their setting, so that
    they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Proposals that fail to do this
    without clear justification must be refused. As set out within the main issue of this
    appeal, I have found harm to the character and appearance of CA and the setting
    of the nearby listed buildings, which is in conflict with national decision-making
    policy HE6 of the Framework that requires substantial weight is given to the
    preservation of designated heritage assets.
30. Policy TR3 of the Framework seeks to guide development to sustainable locations
    by setting out certain principles. Though this includes the location of developments
    generating significant amounts of movement in locations that are sustainable,
    whilst the proposal is only for one dwelling, it also includes more general principles
    about sustainable patterns of movement. Such as the use of existing or proposed
    transport infrastructure in optimising the amount or density of development which
    can be accommodated in different locations, especially where this can support
    more walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport use. The environmental
    impacts of traffic and transport infrastructure should also be identified, assessed
    and taken into account.
31. The impetus of policy TR3 aligns with Framework policy DP3(2.d), which outlines
    that well designed places should provide transport infrastructure and choices
    which support the design vision for the site, provide good connections to the wider
    settlement (or those nearby), and prioritise walking, wheeling, cycling and public
    transport.
32. As set out within the main issues of this appeal, the appeal site is poorly
    connected to services and facilities and would rely almost entirely on the private
    car to meet its day-to-day needs. Consequently, this would not accord with the
    Framework’s aim to support sustainable movement patterns and conflict with the
    aims of Framework policies DP3 and TR3.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008773


33. Overall, I find the benefits of approving the development proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects. As such, the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development does not apply.
Conclusion
34. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
