Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026
by L Reid BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008264
Land to the west of The Cottage, Snakes Lane, Ugley, Essex CM22 6HW
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Dr Edward Perkins against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•      The application Ref is UTT/25/3066/OP.
•      The development proposed is for up to five new dwellings.

Decision
1.      The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted for up to five new
        dwellings at Land to the west of The Cottage, Snakes Lane, Ugley, Essex CM22
        6HW in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref UTT/25/3066/OP,
        subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.      The application is in outline with all matters other than access reserved for future
        consideration. I have therefore dealt with the appeal on this basis, treating the
        proposed site plan, floor plans and elevations as purely indicative of how
        development could be accommodated on the site. The access is proposed from
        Snakes Lane.
3.      Appeal decisions must be made on the basis of the currently-adopted
        development plan. Since the application was determined, the Uttlesford Local Plan
        2021 – 2041 March 2026 (the Local Plan) has been adopted and supersedes the
        Uttlesford Local Plan January 2005 (the old Local Plan). The Council has provided
        the relevant policies, and both main parties have had the opportunity to comment
        on the implications for this appeal. I am therefore satisfied that my consideration of
        the appeal against the policies in the new Local Plan has prejudiced no party.
4.      Since the appeal was made, the Government published a revised National
        Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the 2024 and 2025 Housing
        Delivery Test results. Both main parties have had the opportunity to make
        representations, and I have taken the comments received into account.
5.      The appeal site has been subject to several previous planning applications and
        appeals. Most recently, permission in principle (PiP) for three dwellings was
        allowed at appeal in March 2025 (the March 2025 appeal)1, followed by the
        technical details consent (TDC) granted by the Council in September 20252. As


1
    Appeal Ref: APP/C1570/W/24/3350263
2
    UTT/25/2125/TDC

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008264


       both stages of the consent process have been approved, this is an extant planning
       permission.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
           •    Whether the appeal site is a suitable location for housing having regard to
                access to services and facilities and the spatial strategy; and,
           •    The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
Location
7.     The appeal site is outside of a defined settlement boundary and is therefore within
       the open countryside for planning policy purposes. The proposal would not fall
       within any of the exceptions to new dwellings in the open countryside set out in
       Development Policy 1 of the Local Plan. This policy is consistent with Policy HO11
       of the Framework and is therefore given full weight.
8.     Core Policy 3 of the Local Plan sets out the spatial strategy defining the settlement
       hierarchy. Development in the open countryside will not be permitted unless
       specifically supported by other relevant policies as set out in the Development
       Plan or national policy. I have not been directed to any other policies in the Local
       Plan which specifically support development of this type in this location.
9.     In terms of national policy, paragraph 1.e of Policy S5 of the Framework allows for
       the limited infilling within groups of houses. Whilst the appellant asserts that the
       proposal seeks to insert two additional dwellings within the layout of the approved
       TDC scheme, these dwellings are yet to be built. I must assess the proposal
       having regard to the appeal site's existing physical characteristics and its current
       relationship with surrounding development.
10. The appeal site comprises part of an open field. It adjoins the curtilage of The
    Cottage along one side but is surrounded by open countryside on the other sides.
    The proposal would therefore be next to built development on only one side. It
    would extend housing beyond the existing group, rather than being within it.
    Having regard to the physical context of the site, the proposal cannot reasonably
    be described as infilling within a group of houses. It would therefore not meet
    paragraph 1.e of Policy S5. The appellant has also referred to Policy HO8 of the
    Framework, but this is a plan-making policy.
11. Having regard to the case law referred to by the appellant, the development
    allowed at the appeal site in the March 2025 appeal decision was assessed
    against the policies contained within the old Local Plan, which the current Local
    Plan has now replaced. The Council has confirmed that the current Local Plan
    introduces a different policy context, with a higher standard for sustainability,
    prioritising sustainable transport modes, and an up-to-date spatial strategy and
    hierarchy. This is reflected in the spatial strategy policies set out above, and in
    particular Core Policy 26 which states that sustainable modes of transport should
    be prioritised in new developments to promote accessibility.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008264


12. Whilst the March 2025 appeal decision is a material consideration, the adoption of
    the current Local Plan represents a material change in circumstances, reducing
    the weight that can be afforded to this previous decision. Notwithstanding this, the
    Inspector in that decision did state that when judged solely against the relevant
    policy, the appeal site could not be said to be ideally placed to encourage
    sustainable means of transport and identified conflict with this policy. They took an
    on balance view, in finding that the appeal site was in an acceptable location. In
    reaching this conclusion, the Inspector exercised their planning judgement, a
    matter which is for the decision maker.
13. Ugley Green has limited services and facilities. Future occupants of the proposal
    would therefore need to travel elsewhere to meet their day-to-day needs. Nearby
    larger settlements of Elsenham and Stansted Mountfitchet offer a range of
    services and facilities, each served by a train service connecting to other cities and
    transport hubs.
14. Whilst the appeal site has access to some sustainable transport modes, these are
    subject to limitations that reduce their attractiveness and practicality for many day-
    to-day journeys. A short cycle ride can reach Elsenham and would provide an
    alternative means of travel to car. However, cycling would be unlikely to be a
    suitable option for all users and may be less appealing in adverse weather
    conditions or for trips involving children, shopping or mobility constraints.
    Furthermore, the bus stops on Alsa Street and at Ugley Village Hall can be
    accessed by bicycle, but there is no evidence before me that secure bicycle
    storage is available at these locations. As such, combining cycling with onward
    bus travel would be dependent on individuals having access to folding bicycles,
    which cannot be secured by the proposal and would not represent a realistic
    option for many users.
15. I also agree with the Inspector's findings in the March 2025 appeal decision that
    walking to the bus stops served by the 301 bus service would not be an attractive
    option for all users, notwithstanding that the service is relatively frequent and
    provides connections to larger settlements. The bus stops closest to the site are
    served by the 441 bus service. However, this operates only twice a day during
    term-time weekdays and would not assist with evening, weekend or school holiday
    journeys. Whilst the service may assist with some school-related journeys, its
    limited frequency and restricted operating times mean that future occupiers could
    not reasonably rely upon it to access the services and facilities required to meet
    their day-to-day needs.
16. Consequently, whilst opportunities for cycling and public transport use are
    available, they cannot be regarded as being prioritised in a manner that would
    make them the preferred choice for everyday journeys. Future occupants would
    therefore be reliant on the car for a significant proportion of their travel needs,
    which would not prioritise active travel over the use of the car, as required by Core
    Policy 27 of the Local Plan.
17. I have had regard to the Inspector's findings in the Maughans appeal decision
    (APP/C1570/W/19/3230897) and the Fieldgate Farmhouse appeal decision
    (APP/C1570/W/23/3321627), which found the sites to be in accessible locations.
    Whilst these sites are a similar distance to Elsenham as the appeal site, those
    conclusions reflected the Inspectors' planning judgements, based on the evidence
    presented in those cases, which is not before me. In addition, both decisions were

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008264


       made under the old Local Plan, and the policy context has changed.
       Consequently, whilst they are material considerations, I attach only limited weight
       to these decisions.
18. The Newlands Cottage appeal decision (Appeal Ref: APP/C1570/W/21/3269005)
    was also determined under the old Local Plan. It is also closer to Elsenham than
    the appeal site. Given these differences in both policy context and location, this
    previous appeal decision is of limited weight. In another appeal, reference was
    made to Planning Policy Guidance 13: Transport (PPG13). However, it has since
    been revoked and replaced by the Framework. It does not form part of the current
    policy framework and is of limited relevance.
19. Similar to the other appeal decisions, the Land adjacent to Village Hall
    (S62A/2024/0058) application was determined under the old Local Plan. Whilst the
    Inspector concluded that the site represented a generally accessible and
    sustainable location for additional housing, that conclusion was reached having
    regard to a range of proposed infrastructure improvements. No comparable
    improvements form part of the proposal before me. Consequently, the
    circumstances differ from those of the appeal, and I attach only limited weight to
    that decision.
20. For these reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal site would not be a
    suitable location for housing having regard to access to services and facilities and
    the spatial strategy. The proposal would harm the integrity of the Local Plan and
    would undermine the Council’s spatial strategy and ability to deliver a genuinely
    plan-led approach to development.
21. Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with Development Policy 1 and Core
    Policy 3 of the Local Plan, the purposes of which are set out above. It would
    conflict with Core Policies 26, 27 and 28 of the Local Plan. These policies,
    amongst other things, require development proposals to be located close to key
    services and facilities, to limit motor vehicle trips and to make walking and cycling
    the preferred choice for day-to-day trips. It would also be contrary to Policy S5 of
    the Framework which states that only certain forms of development should be
    approved outside settlements.
22. The reason for refusal refers to conflict with code M1.2C and guidance M1.14G of
    the Uttlesford District-Wide Design Code 2024 (the Design Code). However, it
    appears that these relate to design matters which are not determinative in the
    context of this main issue.
Character and appearance
23. The appeal site is adjacent to a cluster of housing that is generally sat within
    spacious plots and arranged in a loose and sporadic pattern. This form of
    development is characteristic of the area. Throughout the area, housing groups of
    various sizes are separated by areas of open countryside, which help maintain the
    dispersed pattern and contribute to the area's rural character. Whilst the appeal
    site forms part of this pattern and its openness makes a contribution to the
    character and appearance of the area, that contribution is limited. This is because
    the site is enclosed by hedgerows and trees. It therefore appears as a contained
    parcel of land rather than part of the wider countryside.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008264


24. Although scale, layout and appearance remain to be determined, the indicative
    proposed site plan suggests that the housing could be laid out around a shared
    drive, forming a small group of housing which would be consistent with the
    dispersed pattern of development. Whilst the proposal would be located near the
    existing group of housing along the lane, it would remain visually and physically
    distinct due to the distance between the groups and the vegetation around the
    appeal site. The retention and reinforcement of this vegetation could be secured
    through landscaping details at the reserved matters stage.
25. The proposal would therefore be perceived as a distinct group of housing, rather
    than as an enlargement of the existing group, meaning the fundamental
    characteristic of a dispersed pattern of development arranged in separate groups
    would remain evident. Whilst the proposal would increase the amount of housing
    in this location and therefore result in a degree of intensification, a development of
    up to five dwellings would not be such an extent that it would spatially compete
    with the village.
26. For these reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would not cause harm to
    the character and appearance of the area. Accordingly, the proposal would comply
    with parts i. ii. and iii of Core Policy 52 of the Local Plan, which require proposals
    to understand and enhance the surroundings, be locally informed and demonstrate
    a coherent pattern of development has been achieved.
27. The reason for refusal also cites conflicts with codes C1.1C, ID1.1C of the Design
    Code. As the design of the development is not under consideration at this stage,
    these are not relevant considerations.
Other Matters
Heritage assets
28. Section 66(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires that special regard is had to the desirability
    of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which it possesses.
29. To the east of the appeal site are Grade II listed buildings, Harewood Cottage3 and
    The Hermitage4. From the Historic England List Entries and my observations
    during the site visit, the setting of these listed buildings is derived in part, from their
    historic form and appearance, and the rural character of the area.
30. The appeal site has no apparent historic or functional association with the listed
    buildings in such a way that contributes to how these buildings are experienced or
    understood. It therefore makes a neutral contribution to their setting. Given the
    intervening distance, the proposal would preserve the setting of these listed
    buildings. The Council also raised no concerns in respect of these matters.
Other Council decisions
31. The Council has approved housing development on several sites with similar
    locational characteristics and access to public transport comparable to those of the
    appeal site. However, each application must be determined on its own merits. The

3
    Historic England List Entry Number: 1238083
4
    Historic England List Entry Number: 1221675


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          5
Appeal Decision 6008264


       Inspector is not bound by previous decisions of the Council, particularly where
       those decisions pre-date the adoption of the current Local Plan and were made
       under a different policy context. Whilst these decisions have been considered, only
       limited weight is afforded to them.
32. Any dissatisfaction with the manner in which the Council has handled the
    application is a separate matter and is not relevant to the planning merits of the
    appeal.
Interested parties
33. Whilst this section of Snakes Lane is a single-track road with limited opportunities
    for vehicles to pass, the Transport Technical Note submitted with the application
    concludes that the development would not have a perceptible adverse effect on
    the safe and efficient operation of the local highway network. I have seen no
    compelling evidence to suggest otherwise, and neither the Council nor the
    Highway Authority has raised an objection on highway safety grounds.
34. The appeal site is also located within Flood Zone 1, where the probability of
    flooding is low. In addition, the Council has confirmed that, given the scale and
    location of the proposal, sustainable drainage systems and other flood risk
    mitigation measures are not required.
Fallback
35. I have no reason to believe that if this appeal fails, there is no real prospect that the
    extant permission would not be implemented. Therefore, there is a greater than
    theoretical possibility that this permission will take place and subsequently, the
    extant permission represents a ‘fallback position’. The degree of weight to be given
    to the fallback position depends on whether or not it would be equally or more
    harmful than the proposal.
36. The appeal site would not be a suitable location for housing because opportunities
    for future occupiers to access services and facilities by sustainable modes of
    transport are constrained, resulting in a reliance on the car. This conflicts with the
    Council's spatial strategy. Whilst the adoption of the current Local Plan represents
    a material change in circumstances, these concerns would apply equally to the
    three dwellings that could be delivered under the extant planning permission.
37. It is acknowledged that scale is reserved for future consideration and the size of the
    proposed dwellings and likely number of future occupiers are not set. However, the
    extant permission includes a five-bedroom dwelling for up to eight occupants, a
    four-bedroom dwelling for up to eight occupants and a three-bedroom dwelling for
    up to six occupants, representing a large number of residents. The appeal proposal
    would increase the number of dwellings by no more than two compared with the
    extant permission and would not alter the site's location or its accessibility to
    services, facilities and sustainable transport options. Consequently, I find that the
    appeal proposal would give rise to a similar level of harm to that associated with the
    extant permission and attach significant weight to the extant permission as a
    fallback scheme.
Planning Balance
38. Whilst I have found that the proposal would not cause harm to the character and
    appearance of the area, the appeal site would not be a suitable location for housing

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008264


     having regard to access to services and facilities and the spatial strategy. The
     proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan as a whole.
39. Nevertheless, there is an extant planning permission for the erection of three
    dwellings at the appeal site. As set out above, the proposal would be no more
    harmful than the fallback position. This weighs heavily in favour of the appeal
    proposal.
40. Additionally, the Council cannot currently demonstrate a five-year housing land
    supply. The proposal would provide up to two more dwellings than the fallback
    scheme. Although this would make a small contribution to the housing land supply,
    it is a benefit. The proposal would also deliver both short-term and long-term
    economic benefits. These include job creation and increased spending during the
    construction phase, as well as ongoing expenditure and support for local services
    from future occupiers. Although the extent of the benefits would be limited because
    of the quantum of development, this nevertheless weighs in favour of the
    development.
41. Overall, whilst there is some conflict with the development plan, there are material
    considerations that indicate that a decision should be taken other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be allowed.
Conditions
42. I have attached conditions relating to the submission of reserved matters [1] and
    the time limits associated with this [2] and [3], along with a condition listing the
    approved plans to provide certainty [4].
43. As the Essex Historic Environment Record identifies the appeal site as being
    located within an area of archaeological potential, it is necessary to require an
    archaeological evaluation to be carried out [5] and for a final report to be submitted
    [6]. To ensure risks from land contamination are remediated, a contamination
    condition is imposed [7]. It is necessary to require a Construction Management
    and Environmental Plan to be secured in the interests of protecting the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupants [8].
44. To safeguard the character of the area and protect existing trees, it is necessary to
    require an Arboricultural Report to be carried out [9]. To conserve and enhance
    protected and priority species and habitats, it is necessary for a Biodiversity
    Enhancement Strategy to be implemented [10], for details of the external lights to
    be agreed [11] and for the mitigation and enhancement measures contained within
    the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal to be implemented [12].
45. Conditions relating to the laying out of the access [13], visibility splays [14],
    restrictions on gates [15] and cycle parking [16] are necessary to protect highway
    safety. In the interests of flight safety, there is clear justification for permitted
    development rights to be removed to restrict the design of external lighting [17].
    Restrictions are also necessary during the construction period to prevent airborne
    debris due to flight safety [18]. To provide accessible and adaptable homes, it is
    necessary to require the dwellings to be built in accordance with relevant
    standards [19].
46. Conditions relating to an energy assessment, climate change and sustainability
    statement, lighting and bin details, water efficiency, collection and recycling


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008264


       measures have not been imposed as they would pertain to the layout and scale of
       the development, and their necessity would be considered at the reserved matters
       stage. It is also not necessary to require electric vehicle charging as this is covered
       by building regulations.
47. Where biodiversity net gain (BNG) is applicable, the general biodiversity gain
    condition is deemed to apply to every planning permission granted. The condition
    is that the development may not be begun unless a biodiversity gain plan (BGP)
    has been submitted to the planning authority and they have approved the plan.
    BNG applies to the proposal and there are separate provisions governing the
    BGP, which can require the provision of a Habitat Management and Monitoring
    Plan where significant on-site enhancements are to be provided, which should not
    be duplicated by planning conditions. As such, I have not attached these
    suggested conditions.
Conclusion
48. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be allowed.



L Reid
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6008264


                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

    1) Details of the appearance, landscaping, layout, and scale ("the reserved
       matters") shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority before any development takes place and the development shall be
       carried out as approved.

    2) Application for approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the Local
       Planning Authority not later than three years from the date of this permission.

    3) The development hereby permitted shall take place not later than two years from
       the date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.

    4) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawing nos:

         SK10 Rev M – Location Plan, F23043/02.

    5) Prior to commencement of the development hereby approved, a Written Scheme
       of Investigation (WSI) to secure a programme of archaeological investigation,
       shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

         The programme of archaeological investigation identified in the approved WSI
         shall be completed prior to commencement of the development hereby
         approved.

    6) Following completion of the archaeological investigation and within six months
       from that completion, a final archaeological report or (if appropriate) a Post
       Excavation Assessment report and/or an Updated Project Design shall be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

    7) Prior to commencement of the development hereby approved, a Phase 1 Desk
       Study report documenting the ground conditions of the site with regard to
       potential contamination shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
       Local Planning Authority. This report shall adhere to British Standard
       10175:2011.

         If shown to be necessary by the Phase 1 Desk Study and prior to occupation of
         the development hereby approved, a Phase 2 Site Investigation adhering to
         British Standard 10175:2011 shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
         Local Planning Authority.

         If shown to be necessary by the Phase 2 Site Investigation and prior to
         occupation of the development hereby approved, a detailed Phase 3 remediation
         scheme shall be submitted for approval in writing by the Local Planning
         Authority. This scheme shall detail measures to mitigate any risks to human
         health, groundwater, and the wider environment. Thereafter, the detailed
         measures/works approved as part of the Phase 3 remediation scheme shall be
         completed in full before any permitted building is occupied.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          9
Appeal Decision 6008264


         Prior to occupation of the development hereby approved, a validation report shall
         be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority to show
         the effectiveness of any remediation scheme. The validation report shall include
         photographs, material transport tickets and validation sampling. Any such
         validation should include effective responses to any unexpected contamination
         discovered during works.

    8) Prior to commencement of the development hereby approved, a Construction
       and Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

         The CEMP shall specify the provisions to be made for the control of noise and
         dust emanating from the site in accordance with the best practicable means, as
         well as confirm the contact information of the person responsible to deal with
         complaints from the public.

         The approved CEMP shall be adhered to throughout the construction period.

    9) Prior to commencement of the development hereby approved, an Arboricultural
       Report in accordance with British Standard 5837:2012 shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

         The Arboricultural Report shall include protective measures for existing trees,
         which shall be implemented on the site before any equipment, machinery or
         materials are brought onto the site for the purposes of the development, and
         shall be maintained until all equipment, machinery and surplus materials have
         been removed from the site or until the substantial completion of the
         development (whichever is later). Nothing shall be stored or placed in any area
         fenced and the ground levels within those areas shall not be altered nor shall
         any excavation be made.

   10) Prior to any works above slab level, a Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy for
       protected, priority and threatened species shall be submitted to and approved in
       writing by the Local Planning Authority.

         The Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy shall include:
         a) purpose and conservation objectives for the proposed enhancement
            measures;
         b) detailed designs or product descriptions to achieve stated objectives;
         c) locations of the enhancement measures by appropriate drawings;
         d) persons responsible for implementing the enhancement measures;
         e) details of initial aftercare and long-term maintenance (where relevant).
         Thereafter, the ecological works shall be implemented in accordance with the
         approved details prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved.
   11) Prior to occupation of the development hereby approved, a lighting design
       scheme for biodiversity in accordance with General Note: 08/23 (Institute of
       Lighting Professionals) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
       Local Planning Authority.

         The scheme shall:

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6008264




    a) identify those areas/features on site that are particularly sensitive for bats and
       that are likely to cause disturbance in or around their breeding sites and resting
       places or along important routes used to access key areas of their territory, for
       example, for foraging; and,
    b) show how and where external lighting will be installed (through provision of
       appropriate lighting contour plans and technical specifications) so that it can be
       clearly demonstrated that areas to be lit will not disturb or prevent the above
       species using their territory or having access to their breeding sites and resting
       places.


         All external lighting shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and
         locations set out in the approved scheme and shall be maintained in accordance
         with the scheme at all times.
         Under no circumstances should any other external lighting be installed without
         prior consent in writing from the Local Planning Authority.
   12) All ecological mitigation and enhancement measures and/or works shall be
       carried out in accordance with the details contained in the Preliminary Ecological
       Appraisal (Arbtech, March 2025).

         The enhancement measures and works shall be carried out in full accordance
         with the approved details and shall be maintained as such at all times.

   13) Prior to occupation of the development hereby approved, the private drive shown
       on Drawing Number F23043/02 shall be constructed at right angles to the
       highway boundary and to the existing carriageway. The width of the private drive
       shall be 5.5 metres for at least the first 6 metres from the back of existing
       carriageway and provided with an appropriate dropped kerb crossing of the
       highway verge.
         The private drive shall remain as such at all times.
   14) Prior to occupation of the development hereby approved, the private drive
       access at its centre line shall be provided with a clear to ground visibility splay
       with dimensions of 2.4 metres by 31 metres to the north-east and 2.4 metres by
       32 metres to the south, as measured from and along the nearside edge of the
       carriageway. Such vehicular visibility splays shall be provided before the private
       drive access is first used by vehicular traffic and retained free of any obstruction
       at all times.

   15) Any gates provided at the vehicular access shall be inward opening only and
       shall be set back a minimum of 6 metres from the back edge of the
       footway/highway.

         The gates shall be retained as such at all times.

   16) Prior to occupation of the development hereby approved, cycle parking shall be
       provided in accordance with parking standards. The cycle parking facilities shall
       be secure, convenient, covered and shall be retained as such at all times.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6008264


   17) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any Order revoking or re-
       enacting that Order), all exterior lighting shall be capped at the horizontal with no
       upward light spill.

   18) Before, during and after the construction period (including excavation), no
       dust/smoke clouds nor pools/ponds of water shall occur or be created on, near
       or above the site and no airborne debris shall be created on or blown from the
       site from waste materials during or after the construction period, in accordance
       with the advice of Stansted Airport and the Civil Aviation Authority.

   19) The development hereby permitted shall be provided in accordance with the
       guidance in Approved Document S 2021 and shall be built in accordance with
       Optional Requirement M4(2) (Accessible and adaptable dwellings) of the
       Building Regulations 2010 Approved Document M, Volume 1 2015 edition.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
