Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 July 2026
by B Phillips BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008924
5A Water Street, Dursley GL11 4JG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and
     Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the
     GDPO).
•    The appeal is made by Melanie Meigh against the decision of Stroud District Council.
•    The application Ref is S.26/0346/P3E.
•    The development proposed is the conversion of existing vacant office storage building to provide 2
     flats.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
   3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for the conversion of
   existing vacant office storage building to provide 2 flats at 5A Water Street, Dursley
   GL11 4JG in accordance with the application S.26/0346/P3E and the details
   submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       No dwelling authorised by this prior approval shall be occupied until the
              window, rooflight and associated external works necessary to provide
              adequate natural light to the habitable rooms, as approved under planning
              permission ref. S.25/1492/FUL, have been completed in accordance with that
              permission.
     2)       Prior to the occupation of the residential units hereby approved, the noise
              mitigation measures as detailed in section 7 of the submitted ‘Noise
              Assessment’ by Walnut Acoustics dated 28/02/2026 shall have been
              implemented in full and shall be retained as such for the lifetime of the
              development.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The submitted plans illustrate various works such as windows, doors, bicycle and
       bin storage units. The application for prior approval is for a change of use only and
       as such, they are outside the remit of this appeal. This matter is discussed further
       below.

Application for costs

3.    An application for costs was made by Melanie Meigh against Stroud District
      Council. This application will be the subject of a separate decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008924


Background and Main Issue
4.     Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the GPDO) permits
       a change of use of a building and any land within its curtilage from a use falling
       within Class E (commercial, business and service) to a use falling within Class C3
       (dwellinghouses).
5.     Whilst there is no dispute between the main parties that the proposed
       development would qualify for permitted development under Paragraph MA.1. (1)
       and (2), the Council refused to grant approval on the basis that the proposal
       includes operational development, in this instance external windows and rooflight
       (in addition to cycle storage), which does not meet the requirements for permitted
       development under Class MA.
6.     The Council also consequently refused to grant approval on the basis that, without
       these alterations, the proposal would not meet the conditions in paragraph
       MA.2.(2) (f):
       (f) the provision of adequate natural light in all habitable rooms of the
       dwellinghouses
7.     The Council’s reasons of refusal therefore relate to the provision of natural light.
       The Council considers that the development complies with the other requirements
       set out in this paragraph, and based on the evidence before me, I see no reason to
       disagree.
8.     Accordingly, I consider the main issues in this case to be:

     • whether the proposed development would constitute permitted development as
       defined under Class MA; and if so,

     • the effect of the proposed development with regard to the prior approval matters
       specified in paragraph MA.2. (2) under Class MA with particular regard to the
       provision of natural light.
Reasons
9.     As set out above, the proposed plans indicate the insertion of new windows and
       roof lights. These works would represent building operations and would constitute
       development having regard to the provisions of Section 55 of the Town and
       Country Planning Act 1990. As such, the Council contend that the proposed
       development includes building operations required to facilitate the proposed
       change of use.
10. Class MA permits a change of use of a building but not operations required to
    facilitate the change of use. Consequently, the extent of the development
    proposed goes beyond that allowed under Class MA.
11. However, these works have planning permission approved under reference
    S.25/1492/FUL. This granted permission for ‘the replacement of roof material and
    insertion of new fenestration’. The planning permission expires on the 21/10/2028,
    and as such remains extant.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008924


12. A condition is proposed that would prevent occupation of the residential flats
    authorised by this prior approval until the works approved pursuant to this planning
    permission have been completed.
13. The Courts1 have concluded that this approach is acceptable in meeting the
    requirements of Paragraph W (13) of the GDPO and have also recognised it as an
    ‘obvious solution’ to allowing a change of use in certain circumstances. Such a
    condition would not therefore be unenforceable nor improper in any way.
14. I see no reason from the submissions before me why the circumstances of this
    case would lead to a different conclusion. No substantive difference between the
    requirements of now revoked Class O and its replacement Class MA in this regard
    has been put before me. The provision of the previously approved windows and
    rooflights would ensure that all habitable rooms would receive adequate natural
    light. That the previously approved scheme was for a different use class is not
    determinative, if it included a change of use to residential then the prior approval
    would not be necessary.
15. The submitted plans also include cycle and bin storage located outside the
    building. This goes beyond the remit of the conversion allowed under Class MA
    and is not part of these considerations. These elements would not therefore be
    granted prior approval under this appeal.
16. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would meet the
    criteria set out in MA.2 (f) of Class MA, Part 3 to Schedule 2 of the GPDO with
    respect to the provision of adequate natural light in all habitable rooms of the
    dwellinghouse.
Other Matters
    17. The site falls within the Dursley Conservation Area (CA) and there are a number of
        listed buildings nearby. I observed that the significance of the CA as a whole
        largely derives from historic market town character, and the rich and cohesive
        number of vernacular historic buildings that denote its evolution.
    18. The external alterations to the appeal building have been previously approved, and
        the proposed change of use to residential from its previous commercial storage
        warehouse use would have a neutral effect on the mixed use character of the CA.
        Its significance would therefore no be harmed.
    19. Similarly, the significance of the nearby listed buildings, including St James’ Parish
        Centre2 and 4 Broadwell3 mainly arise from their historic and architectural interest,
        but are also derived, in part, from their town centre settings. Given the position and
        nature of the proposed development and works, the settings of these (and other)
        designated heritage assets would be preserved, and their significance would not
        be harmed. It is noteworthy that the Council have not raised any objection in this
        respect.
20. The appeal site is located within the catchment of the Severn Estuary Special Area
    of Conservation (SAC). The grant of prior approval under Article 3(1) of the GPDO
    is subject to the provision of the Order and compliance with Regulations 75 to 78

1
  LW Zenith Ltd, R v Secretary of State (21 December 2022)
2
  List Entry Number: 1290814
3
  List Entry Number: 1219907


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6008924


         of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (the
         Regulations).
21. Article 3(1) of the GPDO provides a pre-commencement condition which must be
    met, where the development would affect a European site such as a SAC. This
    includes a separate application to the Council under Regulation 77 of the
    Regulations to allow the Council to undertake an appropriate assessment and,
    dependent on the outcome, determine whether the scheme could be undertaken
    as permitted development.
22. Neither the GPDO nor the Regulations prescribe a particular sequence that must
    be followed with regard to prior approval and Regulation 77 applications. As the
    requirement of both procedures must be met before the development could
    lawfully commence, there is no requirement for me to carry out an appropriate
    assessment in this instance, and no reason for me to consider this matter further
    as part of this appeal.
Conditions
23. Prior approval may be granted unconditionally or subject to conditions reasonably
    related to the subject matter of the prior approval.
24. Development under Class MA is permitted subject to conditions at paragraphs
    MA.2.(5) and (6) which provide that the development must be completed within a
    period of 3 years starting with the prior approval date and that any building
    permitted to be used as a dwellinghouse by virtue of Class MA is to remain in use
    as a dwellinghouse within the meaning of Class C3 of Schedule 1 to the Use
    Classes Order and for no other purpose, except to the extent that the other
    purpose is ancillary to the use as a dwellinghouse.
25. As set out above, a condition is necessary in order to ensure other permitted
    works are completed to provide sufficient daylight for the proposed dwellings.
26. A condition is also required to secure the noise mitigation measures outlined in the
    submitted noise assessment4. This would be in the interests of the living conditions
    of future occupants in relation to noise. These conditions relate to prior approval
    matters set out under Class MA.
27. Suggested conditions by consultees relating to matters such as construction hours
    and dust control measures do not relate to the prior approval matters, and
    therefore I have not imposed them.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed and prior approval
    should be granted.

B Phillips
INSPECTOR




4
    By Walnut Acoustics dated 28/02/2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
