 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 12 August 2026
 By Michael Evans BA MA MPhil DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6008012
 267 Singlewell Road, Gravesend DA11 7RN
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Gurdip Clare against the decision of Gravesham Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 20260101
 •    The development proposed is described on the application form as “Two storey rear extension, first
      floor extension on top of garage and reduce the garage width to give bigger side access, plus front
      porch and change the existing sheds to unified garden room”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue in this appeal is the effect on the streetscene.
Reasons
3. The appeal concerns a two storey detached dwelling with the upper floor being
   accommodated in the roofspace. The Appellant indicates that the host dwelling is
   set in the second largest plot in the street and that the floor area would only
   increase by about 30-32% with increases having occurred at nearby properties of
   50-70%. However, this is not, in itself, evidence of an absence of harm and it is
   necessary to consider the visual impact when assessing the effect on the
   streetscene.
4. The existing attached double garage is set 0.8m from the side boundary while the
   extended dwelling with a first floor side extension above the reduced width garage
   would have a gap of about 1.5m. Nevertheless, the single storey garage with its
   hipped roof and fairly low eaves significantly alleviates the bulk of the property.
   The ridge of its roof is also at an appreciably lower level than that of the main roof.
5. However, the development would result in the dwelling having a particularly long
   main roof. The front of the flat topped part would be in a straight line, with the lack
   of articulation emphasising the consequent size and bulk. This part would also be
   significantly longer than the ridge line of the existing property. The dwelling has
   three front gable features, while the enlarged house would have five, including the
   central porch.
6. Rather than appearing suitably subordinate, the front gables projecting from the
   roof would be unduly bulky. They would mostly extend forward beyond the eaves
   of the main roof or be level. Apart from the porch, they would have at most fairly

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6008012


     minimal gaps to the flat topped roof with the eaves levels of their own roofs rising
     significantly above that of the main roof. There would also tend to be fairly limited
     gaps between the gables with the porch feature having no separation from those to
     either side.
7. Such a relatively long roofscape and repeating gabled projections would result in a
   disproportionate cumulative increase in the scale, bulk and mass of the property.
   Given the generally noticeably more modest width, scale and bulk of other
   properties in the immediate vicinity to either side, there would be a discordant and
   jarring contrast with the enlarged dwelling appearing unacceptably dominant. This
   adverse visual impact would occur despite the fairly large size of the plot.
8. The Appellant identifies other properties in the locality that have been extended.
   However, these include dwellings in other roads, while those in Singlewell Road are
   often some distance from the appeal site or on the other side of the street.
   Consequently, these tend not to be part of the immediate context within which the
   impact of the proposed development would be most readily appreciated.
9. In any event, such enlarged properties are generally of an appreciably lesser bulk
   and often have a noticeably shorter roofline than would result in this case. While
   some of these have front gables the number resulting in this case would be
   relatively unusual, reflecting an unduly assertive presence in the street. As a result,
   these other cases lend no significant support to the appeal.
10. The height of the existing main roof would not be increased and there would be no
    adverse effect on building lines. However, despite matters such as these, it is
    concluded that the streetscene would be harmed. The failure to be visually
    attractive and integrate well with the area would be contrary to Core Strategy Policy
    CS19.
11. The National Planning Policy Framework indicates that decisions should ensure
    that developments satisfy a number of considerations. These include adding to the
    overall quality of the area and being visually attractive, which would not be
    achieved in this case.
12. There would be no harm to the living conditions of the occupiers of adjacent
    dwellings and no undue overlooking. However, these are neutral matters that
    weigh neither for nor against the proposal. The absence of any objections from
    neighbours does not confer acceptability and I must consider this appeal on its own
    merits. It is indicated that the scheme is needed for a large family, including
    accommodating parents and home working. However, in this case the additional
    space would be achieved at the unacceptable expense of the quality of the built
    environment.
13. This is a case where harm would arise and there would be conflict with the
    development plan. Moreover, there are no other considerations that would justify
    making a decision other than in accordance with the development plan and the
    appeal is dismissed. In reaching this decision I have carefully considered the
    photographs provided by the Appellant.

M Evans
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
