Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by R Gravett BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008359
9 Green Lane, Formby, Sefton L37 7DJ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Peters against the decision of Sefton Metropolitan Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is DC/2025/00544.
•      The development proposed is removal of existing timber doors to shop premises and replaced with
       powder coated steel doors and the installation of new shopfront signage.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’) was published in
         August 2026. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance
         which should be taken into account from the day of publication. The main parties
         have had the opportunity to comment on any implications for the appeal, and I
         have taken any comments received into account.
3.       The application was made retrospectively, and I observed that a new shopfront
         and steel doors have been installed to the front of the appeal property. However, I
         have dealt with the appeal based on the ‘Proposed Plans’ submitted with the
         application which shows a reduction in the height of the shopfront.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is the effect of the development on the host building and the
         character and appearance of the area, including whether it would preserve or
         enhance the character or appearance of the Green Lane Conservation Area.
Reasons
5.       The Planning Practice Guidance states that non-designated heritage assets
         (“NDHAs”) are buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes identified
         by plan-making bodies as having a degree of heritage significance in planning
         decisions, but which do not meet the criteria for designated heritage assets.
         However, it recognises that in some cases, NDHAs may be identified as part of the
         decision-making process on planning applications.1
6.       9 Green Lane (No 9) is situated at one end of a two-storey commercial building,
         known as the ‘Embassy Building’, which is located on a prominent corner at the

1
    PPG Paragraph: 039 Reference ID: 18a-039-20190723 & 040 Reference ID: 18a-040-20190723.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008359


        junction of Green Lane and Piercefield Road. The Embassy Building has historic
        significance as an example of a large mid-C20 leisure building, understood to
        originally have been built as a roller-skating rink. Its architectural interest is
        principally derived from the upper floor Art Deco façade and fenestration detailing,
        and it forms an interesting group with the late C19 ‘Grapes Hotel’ opposite which
        has elements of French renaissance revival architecture.
7.      Based on my own observations, although the style, colour and detailing of signage
        varies, the rhythm of the first-floor bays and columns have been continued and
        retained at ground floor, and the articulated glazed shopfronts contribute to the
        overall composition of the building. Accordingly, I find the building has both historic
        and architectural significance as a NDHA.
8.      The Embassy Building is within the Green Lane Conservation Area (“the CA”)
        which encompasses the southern half of Green Lane, extending east to Paradise
        Lane and west to Gores Lane. In accordance with the statutory duty set out in
        Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990,
        I have paid special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the
        character or appearance of the CA.
9.      As far as relevant to this appeal, the significance is derived from the importance of
        St Peter’s Church and the informal grouping and different scale of buildings in the
        CA. The interrelationship between buildings and open spaces also contributes
        significantly to the CA’s special interest. The Embassy Building is imposing, and it
        makes a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the CA, identified
        in the Green Lane Conservation Area Appraisal & Management Plan (2023) (“the
        CAA”) as a primary focal building.
10. It is clear from the photographs provided in the evidence, and those contained
    within the CAA,2 that the ground-floor frontage of the Embassy Building has been
    altered over time, and I appreciate this reflects the changing nature and function of
    the commercial and shop uses. However, since at least the 1930s, although not
    uniform in appearance, the shopfronts have been characterised by elements of
    glazing which articulated the ground floor façade. No 9’s pre-existing shopfront
    was broadly consistent with this, shown on the ‘Existing Plans as encompassing a
    shopfront with glazed doors and a wide vertical top light with glazing bars.
11. The proposed plan shows that the brickwork, render and lintel below the upper
    floor window would be reinstated and the height of the proposed shopfront would
    respect the existing fascia line. However, in contrast to No 9’s pre-existing
    shopfront, the installed steel doors and panelled shopfront surround are solid and
    flat and lack any depth or articulation despite the colourful graphics. The extensive
    solid element of the proposal fails to retain any sense of the proportions or
    openings of the pre-existing shopfront, and it appears a discordant addition to the
    ground floor frontage of the building. Whilst the shopfront and doors may be a
    reversible addition, they are nonetheless harmful to the overall composition and
    appearance of the Embassy Building, and therein its significance. It also appears
    incongruous when viewed from Green Lane in the context of the shopfronts in the
    parade on the opposite side of the roundabout, where glazing is prevalent.



2
    CAA page 33


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008359


12. The appellant refers to an appeal decision3 in respect of the display of non-
    illuminated signs to the corner elevation of the Spar convenience store (1-3 Green
    Lane) located at the other end of the Embassy Building. I do not have the full
    details of that proposal before me, nor the information which was before the
    Inspector at that time. However, I observed on my site visit that the Spar still has
    the characteristic columns and largely glazed shopfront described above, therein
    retaining articulation to the overall ground floor frontage.
13. I therefore conclude that the development causes harm to the host building, a
    NDHA, and to the character and appearance of the area, and it fails to preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the Green Lane Conservation Area.
14. Framework policy HE6(1) states that when considering the potential effect of a
    development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. This is irrespective
    of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial
    harm, or total loss of its significance. Policy HE6(3) is also clear that any harm to a
    designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight
    and should be dealt with in accordance with (4). This states that where a
    development proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset
    the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
    benefits resulting from the proposal.
15. Framework policy HE7 further requires that where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a NDHA, this should be weighed against the benefits of
    the proposal and a balanced judgement made, having regard to the scale of any
    harm or loss and the significance of the NDHA.
16. Despite the absence of an active frontage, I acknowledge that the commercial use
    of No 9 supports the continued vitality and viability of Green Lane as a shopping
    location. I duly afford this moderate weight.
17. The appellant asserts that steel doors are necessary for safety and security
    reasons, and I appreciate outward opening doors may be a fire safety requirement.
    However, I have little compelling evidence that break-ins, vandalism and/or anti-
    social behaviour are an issue in this location, or that adequate security could not
    be achieved in a manner which would cause less harm to the character and
    appearance of the building. Moreover, I have nothing before me to demonstrate
    that a shopfront of the type proposed is needed for the durability, long-term
    maintenance and occupation of the building or for the long-term viability of the
    business. I therefore afford these matters only limited weight.
18. For these reasons, I conclude that the public benefits resulting from the proposal
    do not outweigh the harm that I have found to the character and appearance of the
    CA, which should be afforded substantial weight. Nor, taking a balanced
    judgement, do the benefits outweigh the harm to the significance of the NDHA.
19. Consequently, the development conflicts with policies NH15 and EQ2 of ‘A Local
    Plan for Sefton’ (2017) (LP). Together, these require proposals to make a positive
    contribution to their surroundings through the quality of their design and to
    conserve or enhance the significance of NDHAs. It also conflicts with LP Policy
    NH12 insofar as it requires proposals to preserve or enhance the character or

3
    APP/M4320/Z/18/3202986


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008359


       appearance of a CA and ensure that replacement features are of an appropriate
       style, sympathetic to the buildings age, architecture and features.
20. Finally, the proposal conflicts with policies WS6 and ESD2 of the Formby & Little
    Altcar Neighbourhood Development Plan 2012-2030 (NP) which, amongst other
    things, requires development to make a positive contribution to local character and
    that new shop fronts respect local heritage.
Other Matters
21. In the absence of any persuasive evidence before me that the unauthorised
    development was intentional, policy DM8 of the Framework has had no bearing on
    my decision despite being referred to by the Council.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
    applications for planning permission must be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
23. I have concluded above that the proposal would conflict with development plan
    policies LP NH12, NH15 and EQ2 and NP policies WS6 and ESD2. These policies
    are not materially inconsistent with the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework and accordingly, I afford them full weight.
24. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance. Policy S3 of the
    Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable development requiring
    policy S4 to be applied. Policy S4(1) of the Framework establishes that
    development within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing
    so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies.
25. The proposal finds support from policy TC2 of the Framework which gives
    substantial weight to the benefits of supporting the overall vitality and viability of
    local centres, including where this can be achieved through the diversification of
    uses. However, the proposal conflicts with policy DP3 of the Framework which
    requires development to respond to their context, so that they integrate with and
    enhance their surroundings; such as through the use of materials and architectural
    features, and the restoration and integration of heritage assets. It also conflicts
    with policies HE6 and HE7 of the Framework, for the reasons given above.
26. On balance, I conclude that the benefits of the development would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the national-decision
    making policies of the Framework. The proposal conflicts with the development
    plan and material considerations – including the Framework – do not indicate that
    the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
27. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

R Gravett,
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
