Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by T Burnham BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008018
65 Grimshaw Lane, Manchester M40 2AX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr C Smyton (D2H Land Planning Development Limited) against the decision
     of Manchester City Council.
•    The application Ref is 144279/FO/2025.
•    The development proposed is Change of use of 1st Floor of Public House (Sui Generis) to a 6-Bed
     Guest House (Use Class C1).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr C Smyton (D2H Land Planning
       Development Limited) against Manchester City Council. That application is the
       subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The building to which the appeal relates comprises a vacant public house which
       was most recently known as the Kippax and previously known as the Gibraltar Inn.
       The appeal seeks a change of use of the 1st Floor of the building only. This is clear
       from the description of the proposal and with regard to the evidence of the
       appellant. The appellant, having stated that they have taken advice from the
       Council, is of the stance that the ground floor has a ‘nil’ use.
4.     Despite this, I have been provided with existing and proposed plans for both the
       ground and first floor of 65 Grimshaw Lane. The plans do not indicate and nor did
       my site visit suggest that the first floor of the building has any access or entrance
       other than from ground floor level.
5.     A further proposed ground floor plan has been provided during the course of the
       appeal. This clarifies that the first floor would have to be accessed from Bower
       Street, through the rear yard and then through a rear entrance at ground floor level
       from where a staircase to the first floor can be accessed.
6.     This raises questions as to whether the development sought could be granted with
       regard to the description of the development. However, regardless of this, I have
       considered the appeal on the basis of the main issues below.
Main Issues


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008018


7.       The first main issue is the principle of the development with regard to the
         development strategy for the provision of Use Class C1 accommodation in
         Manchester. The second is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of
         existing occupiers in the area with regard to any increases in comings and goings.
         The third is the effect of the proposal on parking provision within the area and
         whether there would be any unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Reasons
Principle of development
8.       The proposed plans for the first floor show that six en-suite guest rooms would be
         provided along with a laundry. Staff accommodation is also proposed which would
         incorporate three bedrooms, a kitchen and a living room.
9.       The first floor use is proposed as a guest house under Use Class C1. Use class
         C1 includes amongst other things hotels and boarding or guest houses. What is
         proposed here partly has the characteristics of a hotel in that it would provide en-
         suite bedrooms and partly of a guest house or bed and breakfast given the
         inclusion of a well sized managers flat which would occupy close to half the area of
         the first floor.
10. I therefore consider that Policy CC4 of the Manchester Core Strategy
    Development Plan Document (2022) (CS) is relevant to this appeal along with
    saved Policy DC4.1 of the Unitary Development Plan for the City of Manchester
    (UDP).
11. Policy CC4 of the CS and policy 4.1 of the UDP are not materially inconsistent with
    the national decision making policies within the Framework1 as they are policies
    which seek to assist in creating well designed places, which is a key principle of
    Framework Policy DP3.
12. Policy CC4 relates to Visitors in terms of Tourism, Culture and Leisure. The policy
    shows a clear drive for high levels of quality in terms of visitor accommodation with
    the supporting text indicating that the Council will use the planning process as an
    opportunity to improve the quality of hotel developments.
13. The site is in a location outside of the city centre. With regard to proposals for new
    hotels outside of the city centre the policy indicates they will be supported on
    amongst other grounds where the Council is confident that they will be deliverable.
14. Given that the ground floor is specifically excluded from the application, which is
    the subject of this appeal, I consider that there is no certainty that the C1 use
    proposed is properly deliverable under the terms of the description of the
    application. It would not be the high quality visitor accommodation that is sought.
15. Policy DC1 of the UDP relates to bed and breakfast accommodation. Amongst
    other things its states that with regard to applications for premises for bed and
    breakfast accommodation within the C1 use class, the Council will have regard to
    amongst other things, the standard of the accommodation for the intended
    occupiers of the premises and the ease of access for all.



1
    National Planning Policy Framework 2026.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6008018


16. The further ground floor plan submitted clarifies that access as it stands would only
    be provided via a rear double gate, through the rear yard directly adjacent to the
    bins and up a narrow staircase to the first floor. This would not make for a good
    quality access to or exit from the premises. Given this and the matters raised
    above, I cannot be assured that the accommodation as a whole would be of an
    appropriate quality or offer good ease of access for all.
17. The principle of the development with regard to the development strategy for the
    provision of Use Class C1 accommodation in Manchester would therefore not be
    acceptable. The proposal would subsequently conflict with both Policy CC4 of the
    CS and Policy 4.1 of the UDP.
Living conditions
18. Whilst I note the presence of 71 Grimshaw Lane, the majority of residential
    properties within the area are set across and away from the building on the
    opposite side of Bower Street on Douro, Partington and Fletcher Streets. The
    nearest residential property only has its side elevation facing towards the appeal
    building.
19. I must consider the wider character and appearance of the area which is to a large
    degree dominated by commercial premises. They can be observed extending
    away from the site and adjacent to residential properties on Bower Street whilst a
    large commercial premises dominates the area opposite the appeal building. The
    City Council Grimshaw Lane Depot is also close to the site.
20. I accept that there will inevitably be some comings and goings associated with the
    proposed use, which could include comings and goings within the evening and at
    night. However, within that context and taking account of the limited scale of the
    development proposed, which would only incorporate six bedrooms, there is
    nothing compelling to indicate that the proposal would result in any significant
    adverse impact on the living conditions of nearby occupiers as a result of the
    comings and goings.
21. There would therefore be no conflict with Policy DC 26.1-26.6 of the UDP nor
    Policy DM 1 of the CS which amongst other things require that developments likely
    to result in unacceptably high levels of noise will not be permitted in residential
    areas and that development should have regard to amongst other matters effects
    on amenity including noise.
Parking provision
22. The appellants parking study indicates that there is extensive unrestricted on-
    street parking close to the premises. I accept that the appeal site could be
    considered to be within walking distance of amongst other destinations, the Co-Op
    Live Arena as well as the Etihad Stadium. Local events may account for the
    photographs which show cars extensively parked on Grimshaw Lane. However,
    those incidents of increased parking are likely to take place regardless of this
    proposal.
23. I observed that a permit parking scheme appears to exist during the afternoon and
    evening time close to the existing residential properties close to the site.
24. The evidence indicates that the site benefits from good sustainable transport
    accessibility which indicates that there are multiple bus stops and the Central Park

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008018


       Metrolink within a 10 minute walk. Future guests would not therefore be reliant on
       the use of a private vehicle in any event.
25. There is nothing compelling to indicate that any, likely limited, increased parking
    demand in association with this proposal would cause any unacceptable additional
    parking stress or cause harm to highway safety. The Local Highways Authority
    response concludes that the proposal would have no unacceptable impact on the
    highway network.
26. There would therefore be no conflict with policies T 2, DM 1 or SP 1 of the CS
    which amongst other things require that new development is easily accessible by
    amongst other things public transport and that development should have regard to
    amongst other things vehicular access and parking and effects on amenity
    including traffic generation and that new development should maximise the
    potential of Manchester’s transport infrastructure including public transport.
Other Matters
27. The suggestion that the proposed use must come before the remainder of the
    development including the ground floor is made, but the reasoning for this is not
    clear and, in any event, the first floor use does appear to have a direct and
    necessary relationship with the ground floor.
Planning Balance
28. I accept that there would be various benefits associated with the proposal
    including the re-use of a currently vacant building which will create some
    employment opportunity. There would be further social and economic benefits
    including the support to tourism that would be associated with the proposal. I have
    not found any unacceptable impacts with regard to living conditions or parking
    provision.
29. Set against this, given the issues around access to the first floor I do not consider
    that there is any guarantee that the scheme would be deliverable or offer
    appropriate access for all. This raises serious doubts over the design quality of the
    scheme before me.
30. I note the provisions of Policies S3 and S4 of the Framework. Development
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects.
31. In this case I have identified conflict with development plan policy relating to the
    design standards for this type of accommodation with regard to access, which is a
    fundamental aspect of this type of development. There would be conflict with
    Policy DP3 and the benefits of approving the scheme would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects.
Conclusion
32. The proposal would conflict with the development plan and there are no
    considerations which indicate a decision otherwise than in accordance with it. The
    appeal should therefore be dismissed.

T Burnham INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
