 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 25 July 2026
 by A. J. Boughton MA (IPSD) Dip.Arch. Dip.(Conservation) RIBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 14 September 2026

 Appeal Ref: 6008667
 18 Beech Hill Enfield EN4 0JP
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Osman Ismail against the decision of The Council of the London Borough
     of Enfield.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00547/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is demolition of existing house and erection of two detached houses
     each with detached double garages, erection of five flats above parking for cars and bicycles and
     communal leisure facilities and a refuse/recycle bin store.


Decision

1. The appeal is dismissed.

Preliminary Matters

2. There are minor differences between the description of the development that
   appears on the application form and that used by the Council. These are not
   substantive to the decision to be made and, lacking confirmation as to the
   agreement for these changes, I have used that appearing on the application form.

3. In my consideration of this appeal I have had regard to the revised National
   Planning Policy Framework which was published on 17 August 2026.

4. The Council give four reasons for refusal (RFR) however RFR 1 and 2 both relate to
   the effect of the proposal on residential character and appearance, the remaining
   refusal reasons both relate to the internal arrangement of the site and I have
   therefore resolved the main issues to be as set out below.

5. The appeal site is not in proximity to any SSSI or protected Site or Area but is a very
   large suburban plot adjacent to open green belt land currently in use as a golf
   course. The appeal site is, however, nature-invaded with tall grasses and other
   elements such as stacks of felled tree trunks providing habitat opportunities. The
   large dwellinghouse proposed to be demolished has features such as timber
   cladding and eaves detailing which may present opportunity for roosting bats. The
   Council suggest the absence of a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (or any suitable
   ecological surveys) could be addressed by condition, however, this would be unsafe
   given the duties imposed by The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
   and established case law. Whilst this would be a matter relevant to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6008667


      determination of this appeal, given my conclusions on the Council’s reasons for
      refusal I have not found it necessary to consider this matter further.

Main Issues

6. The main issues are:
   • the effect of the development upon the established residential character of the
      area, also having regard to the appearance of the street scene, and
   • whether the development would be provided with safe and suitable access for
      pedestrians, and whether the development would make adequate arrangements
      for the management of waste.

Reasons

Character and Appearance

7. The appeal site, 18 Beech Hill (No.18) is a large mid-twentieth century dwelling of
   individual design, built at a scale which largely fills the width of its substantial plot in
   an established residential area. It appears to have been unoccupied for a significant
   period of time, the garden is overgrown and neglected but lacks any significant trees
   to the extensive rear garden area. Beech Hill is generally populated with large family
   houses in substantial plots, which in the case of No.18 and immediate neighbours,
   extends southwards to a rear boundary shared with the Hadley Wood Golf Course
   which lies within the metropolitan Green Belt. The generally large plots in this part of
   Beech Hill provide an open-textured and low-density development pattern
   historically presenting large single dwellings aligned with, but set back from, the
   road frontage that overall, presents a spacious, verdant, suburban environment in
   which the general frontage alignment of single dwellings plays a significant role.
   This strong character has changed to a minor degree with instances of housing to
   the rear being serviced by access drives between these frontage properties, also
   large replacement dwellings and some apartment blocks.

8. The Hadley Wood Neighbourhood Plan 2022-2039 (HWNP) acknowledges the
   pressures for redevelopment or conversion of larger family homes to flatted
   development, identifying the effect of this on the character of the HWNP area and
   the supply of family homes. This pressure is evident on the south side of Beech Hill
   where No.22 Beech Hill1, a close neighbour of the appeal site, has been
   redeveloped with two, three-storey, flatted blocks in a tandem arrangement,
   retaining a single street entrance with shared underground car parking. However, it
   is material that the HWNP was ‘made’ after the permission for No.22 had been
   granted and its policies therefore carry significant weight in contradicting any
   suggestions of precedent from the development at No.22.

9. The proposed development would replace the existing single family house with two
   detached houses aligned with the established frontage and, on garden land to the
   rear, a block of five apartments incorporating a semi-basement for car parking and
   shared facilities that include a swimming pool. The overall height of the rear
   building, although accommodated in part by the general front-rear slope2 of the site,
   would nevertheless be greater than the front houses which contain fewer storeys
1
    Permission granted July 2018 prior to the making of the HWNP
2
    A level difference (drop) of around 2m from that at the site entrance according to information provided


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                      2
    Appeal Decision 6008667


      but are set at a similar ground floor level due to the insertion of a semi-basement
      lower ground floor in the rear building. That building would be in a similar location to
      the rear block of the development at No.22 but with additional height, and would
      also broadly align with the detached houses to the rear of 6-10 Beech Hill.

10. Whilst the flatted block would not be prominent in the street scene, being set behind
    the front houses and some retained planting, the lower ground floor finished level
    would be similar to the existing ground levels at the rear boundary. In consequence
    it would be much more prominent that any of the other buildings in this rear
    alignment that I have mentioned due to its additional height and, there being little
    mitigation in terms of retained trees, would unacceptably dominate the surrounding
    area behind the frontage buildings. It would, in particular, conflict with Policy DMD
    83 of the Enfield Development Management Document Adopted November 2014
    (Enfield DMD) which indicates that development adjacent to the Green Belt should
    not increase the visual dominance and intrusiveness of the built form by way of by
    way of height, scale and massing.

11. Policies DMD5 of the Enfield DMD, Policy CP30 of the Enfield Plan Core Strategy
    2010-2025 (CS), and Policy D3 of the London Plan, seek, amongst other things, to
    ensure that development would not result in a clustering of conversions and should
    reinforce local distinctiveness. These policies are amplified with specific provisions
    in the HWNP. Importantly, in pursuit of these objectives, Policy HW11 of the HWNP
    repeats specific empirical limits originally set in Policy DMD5 of the Enfield DMD. In
    particular, it stipulates that flatted development which replaces single family
    dwellings must not exceed (either) ‘20% of all properties along any 200m of a road’
    or ‘1 out of a consecutive row of 5 dwellings’. Even if it were argued that a
    consecutive row of 5 dwellings might be identified to exclude No.22, the 20%
    restriction applies to any 200m of a road3. This is a distance which would include
    both the appeal site and No.22 within a block of no more than 7 housing plots4
    fronting the road. I therefore consider there would be a significant in-principle
    conflict with the development plan on that point alone to which significant weight
    should be attached due to the harm on the residential character of the area that I
    have previously described.

12. The Council have pointed to a recently dismissed appeal5 for a similar development
    to that currently found at No.22, but at No.26 Beech Hill6 where the Inspector
    concluded the proposed intensification of flatted development on the two sites would
    be harmful to the character of the area. Although the proposal subject to this appeal
    differs from these schemes in that it proposes flatted development limited to one
    building located to the rear of the site and two houses to the frontage, these
    differences do not indicate that I should reach a different conclusion in this case. To
    do so would be inconsistent with my conclusions in the preceding paragraph; that
    the proposed rear building would unacceptably dominate the surrounding area due
    to its height and mass.

13. The parties have been invited to comment upon the relevance of the revised
    National Planning Policy Framework (August 2026) (Framework), in particular

3
  Emphasis added.
4
  The insertion of flatted development at No.18 would result in 2/7 or 28.5% of those plots.
5
  Ref: APP/Q5300/W/24/3345524
6
  Located immediately adjacent to No.22 for a total of nine apartments.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                     3
    Appeal Decision 6008667


      Section 12; Making Effective Use of Land which is directed at easing approval for
      housing within settlements. Paragraph L2 (1) requires substantial weight to be given
      to the benefits of a development proposal which (at (d)) ‘… creat(es) additional
      homes……through sensitive redevelopment or additional development within
      existing plots…’. However, whilst I note the comments of the appellant, the
      provisions at sub-paragraph (iii) make clear that where development would occupy
      residential curtilages it should ‘not occupy more than twice the footprint of all
      existing buildings on the site……unless additional development can be
      accommodated without harm to the overall character of the area’. The proposal
      would more than double the existing footprint and would not be the ‘sensitive
      redevelopment’ stipulated in the Framework because there would be significant
      harm to the residential character of the area from the proposal. I consider, therefore,
      that the ‘substantial weight’ indicated by these provisions is not available to the
      proposed development.

14. Overall, I consider the proposal would not achieve the fine balance sought in the
    development plan between allowing additional development that is necessary to
    support housing delivery and protecting established character, of, in this case,
    Beech Hill. Further, even if I were to conclude, as the appellant suggests, that the
    location of the rear flatted block removes harm to the character of the street scene,
    this does not mitigate the in-principle conflict set out in HW11 which is directed at a
    broader consideration of residential character noting, in Policy HW12 of the HWNP,
    that development should have regard to the prevailing building height. The proposal
    would conflict with Policies DMD5, DMD6 and DMD 83 of the Enfield DMD and with
    Policies HW11 and HW12 of the HWNP which, taken together seek that
    development should respect the scale and form of existing patterns of development,
    should not overly dominate the adjacent Green Belt, and, further, that conversion to
    flatted accommodation should not be clustered such that the residential character of
    the area is adversely affected.

Pedestrian Access and Waste Management

15. The Council suggest the layout of pathways within the site does not provide safe
    access to the rear building and also express concern that the arrangements for
    refuse are unsuitable due to the distance and route by which residents in the flatted
    block would have to bring their individual bins to the collection building.

16. The proposal shows a single pedestrian gate access however there is no
    identifiable route for pedestrians or visitors wishing to access the flatted block
    beyond the frontage of the two front houses. As submitted it is likely that the central
    driveway, which is confined by the flank walls of the front houses, would operate as
    a shared surface for cars, pedestrians and cycles. Whilst it may be possible to
    adjust, by condition, the hard surface detailing to designate a pedestrian route and
    at the same time moderate conflicting vehicle movements, I consider, given the
    extent of site coverage by buildings and likely levels changes to the site7 which
    would arise from the development, this would not necessarily result in a satisfactory
    scheme in terms of levels and gradients. Such information absent I consider the
    development fails to accords with Policy DMD 47 of the Enfield DMD, which seeks


7
    Some appear to be indicated in the images provided by the appellant.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                     4
 Appeal Decision 6008667


    that development should provide attractive, safe, clearly defined and convenient
    routes for pedestrians including those with disabilities.

17. My conclusion on the third refusal reason is also relevant to the Council’s concerns
    as to waste management, which presumes occupiers of the rear flatted block would
    be responsible for moving their individual waste and recycling to the collections
    point, a distance uphill, depending on the point of origin, of at least 50m. I have
    considered the plans submitted and whilst the flats would have communal facilities
    and it is possible that their waste and recycling could be managed in a more
    practical manner, the submitted plans provide no indication of any alternative
    arrangements to that of individual owners carrying their waste and recycling an
    excessive distance. Having to do so frequently, there being no indication of storage
    facilities within the flatted block, would risk detriment of the visual and environmental
    amenity of the development from spillage or reluctance to carry such waste a very
    significant distance. I therefore consider the proposal conflicts with Policy DMD 8 of
    the Enfield DMD which seeks, amongst other things, that there should be adequate
    arrangements for refuse storage.

Conclusion.

18. I have concluded that the proposed development would, both by the insertion of
    flatted development at the rear of the appeal site in conflict with the limits set out in
    Policy HW 11 of the HWNP and from its height and prominence in a previously
    undeveloped location, that there would be significant harm to the established
    residential character of this part of Beech Hill which would conflict with Policies
    DMD5 and DMD81 of the Enfield DMD, Policy CP30 of the CS and Policy D3 of the
    London Plan. Together these seek to ensure development is sensitive to the
    characteristics, appearance and setting of the surrounding area. With my
    conclusions on the second main issue and all matters raised taken into account, my
    reasoning directs that the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan taken as a whole. In reaching these conclusions I have had
    regard to the submission of the appellant as to the effect of recently revised national
    policy. Consequently the appeal should be dismissed.


    Andrew Boughton
    INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
