Appeal Decision
by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6008378
407 Chester Road, Walsall WS9 0PH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by S Sanghera against the decision of Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/0753.
•    The application sought planning permission for the “Erection of 3 detached dwellings (2x 5bedroom
     and 1x 4bedroom) following the demolition of the existing dwelling” without complying with conditions
     attached to planning permission Ref 20/1070, dated 21 October 2021.
•    The condition in dispute is No 2 which states: “The development hereby permitted shall not be
     carried out otherwise than in accordance with the following approved plans details and documents:
     The development hereby permitted shall not be carried out otherwise than in accordance with the
     following approved plans details and documents: Revised Site Layout Drawing BV452 3A received
     19 September 2023, Plot 1 Type A Plans and Elevations received 16 June 2023 Plot 2 and 3 Type B
     Plans received 16 June 2023, Preliminary Bat Roost Assessment and Bird Survey (Map Ref. SP
     0760 9940, dated 17 August 2020) - Tree Constraints Plan (Dwg. No. AEL-18383-TCP, rev. A)”.
•    The reason given for the condition is: “To ensure that the development undertaken under this
     permission shall not be otherwise than in accordance with the terms of the application on the basis of
     which planning permission is granted, (except in so far as other conditions may so require)”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is turned away.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Planning permission was granted in October 2020, reference 20/1070 (‘the
       Original Permission’), for the erection of three detached dwellings following the
       demolition of the existing dwelling.
3.     Later, planning permission was granted on 14 December 2023, by virtue of
       Section 73 (s73) of the 1990 Town and Country Planning Act, for condition 2
       (approved plans) to be amended, reference 23/0672. Planning Practice Guidance
       states that a s73 application should not be used to extend the time period within
       which the development must start from that set out on the original permission.
       Nonetheless, the s73 approval included a new time limit condition that stated that
       the scheme must be commenced within three years of the date of the newly given
       permission.
4.     However, the s73 application the subject of this appeal seeks to make further
       adjustments to the conditions of the Original Permission (of reference 20/1070).
       This seeks to reduce the access road, amend the position of plots 2 and 3 and
       provide an integral garage for plots 2 and 3. The appellant states on the
       application form, that the development had not commenced when the application

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008378


       was made (26/6/25). However, this was later corrected by the applicant by
       correspondence, where the appellant states that the Original Application had been
       commenced and was 30% completed when the second s73 application was made.
5.     Nonetheless, the Council states that the Original Application expired 21/10/24 and
       therefore cannot be subject to a s73 application made in 2025. Furthermore, the
       Council also states that details pursuant to the discharge of the pre-
       commencement conditions have not been submitted.
6.     The appellant informs that during the course of the Council’s consideration of the
       most recent s73 application, the pre-commencement details of conditions 3a, 4a,
       5a and 6a were submitted to the Council. The Council has not disclosed the
       outcome of any assessment of these conditions, but this was arguable moot as the
       Council found the approval had lapsed unimplemented in any event. Furthermore,
       the appellant sought to amend conditions 2, 3a, 4a, 5a and 6a. However, the
       Council’s decision notice, officer report and the application form only sought to
       amend condition 2 (approved plans). I have therefore only considered matters in
       relation condition 2.
Main Issues
7.     The main issues are whether the s73 can be made in mind of the planning context
       of the scheme and, is so, whether condition 2 is reasonable and necessary and
       can be varied as proposed.
Reasons
8.     The appellant has provided a screenshot of the submission of the Building
       Regulations Notice, dated 19 December 2022, this shows the initial notice of an
       intension to start work but this was withdrawn for reasons undisclosed. A second
       entry shows that a second initial notice for building regulations was made 4/11/25
       where the initial notice was accepted. No further evidence has been provided,
       such as dated invoices, photographs or other documents, that might demonstrate
       or suggest when development commenced on site. As such, based on the
       submitted evidence it is not clear, on the balance of probabilities, that work was
       started on site in December 2022. Consequently, the submitted evidence does not
       confirm to my satisfaction that planning permission 20/1070 was implemented at
       that time.
9.     The appellant asserts that the Council agreed that the Original Permission had
       been implemented lawfully. However, this is not borne out by the Council’s
       comments which state that “we cannot possible determine the current application
       because it relates to the lapsed planning permission”. As such, there is no clear
       evidence that the proposal was started within the prescribed three years.
10. Furthermore, the pre-commencement conditions for the Original Permission and
    s73 approval 23/0672 are different. It seems that whilst the s73 application was
    made to vary condition 2 of the Original Permission, the appellant’s submitted pre-
    commencement condition details were for conditions 3a, 4a, 5a and 6a. These
    were clearly provided to satisfy conditions associated with approval 23/0672 as it
    includes 6a which does not part of the Original Permission.
11. The pre-commencement conditions associated with 20/1070 relate to conditions
    4a (landscaping and details of tree protection during construction) and 5a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008378


       (potentially hazardous materials). It appears that no approval has been given for
       the detail of these conditions. Condition 3a requires details of materials, prior to
       the construction above damp-proof course, and is not therefore regarded as a pre-
       commencement condition.
12. Caselaw establishes that where development has occurred in contravention of a
    pre-commencement condition, those works cannot be properly described as
    commencing the development authorised by the permission, where that condition
    goes to the heart of the permission. It is likely that some conditions will obviously
    go to the heart of a permission, some will not, and between those extremes the
    facts of the case will determine the position.
13. ‘Tree protection’ and ‘hazardous ground’ conditions are both relatively common
    matters that are dealt with in many development proposals. In that way, it is a
    routine and standard matter. Nevertheless, the extent to which proposals have
    been developed at application stage, together with the scale of the development
    and any existing arrangements, are likely to influence the need for further detail
    before acceptability can be confirmed. That something is a ‘routine’ matter is not,
    therefore, indicative that associated conditions do not go to the heart of a
    permission.
14. I do not have tree protection details or the survey for hazardous materials before
    me. However, based on the evidence submitted, it can be seen that condition 4a
    required a landscape scheme that included details of all soft landscaping,
    boundary treatments, earthworks and measures to protect retained trees through
    construction. The reason for the condition was to protect the visual amenities of
    the area. This condition was sought by the Council’s tree officer.
15. Furthermore, condition 5a was imposed due to the risk to human health based on
    the potential of hazardous materials being evident on site. The reason for the
    condition was to require the submission of a site survey to identify any potentially
    hazardous materials and for the submission of a Method of Statement to detail
    actions to be taken and timeframe for taking action to prevent localised
    contamination.
16. This condition was sought following the advice of the Council’s Pollution Control
    officer who recognised that due to the nature and age of the building on site, any
    potentially hazardous material (e.g. asbestos) should be identified and the
    production of a method statement required to detail the actions and time scale to
    be taken to prevent localised contamination. Despite the building having now been
    demolished it remains necessary to understand how demolition material was
    processed to prevent local contamination. This is of some additional concern as
    some building materials seem to have been rolled into the ground works as part of
    the site ground remodelling.
17. As such, it is entirely right for the details of replacement tree planting, including
    tree protection and for a hazardous ground-work survey to be agreed prior to the
    commencement of development so as to ensure that the development could,
    ultimately be built without causing adverse effects. Without that assurance, the
    Council would not ultimately have been content to permit the development at all.
    Thus, the unknown details at the time the original permission was granted, are the
    key sensitive facts arising from this case. They indicate that conditions 4A and 5A
    go to the heart of the original permission. Accordingly, even if development had


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008378


       commenced in December 2025, I am unconvinced that approval 20/1070 was
       commenced lawfully as important pre-commencement conditions had not been
       agreed enabling the works to lawfully start before the expiry of its three-year
       consent.
18. In the absence of the Original Permission, it follows that the application subject to
    this appeal could not have been made and was invalid. In this circumstance, I
    have no jurisdiction to determine the appeal. Therefore, even if allowing the appeal
    might result in other benefits such as those in connection with the delivery of
    housing, I take no further action in connection with it.
19. The appeal is turned away.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
