Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 June 2026 by J Kirkaldy BSc (Hons) PGDip MRTPI
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008745
Old Bean Cottage, Shellbank Lane, Bean, Kent DA2 8AX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Mojeed Odugbayi against the decision of Dartford Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is DA/26/00160/FUL.
•   The development proposed is for erection of part single/part double storey side extensions.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Procedural Matter
3. The most recent iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published in August 2026. With regard to the main issues of the
   appeal, the relevant policies are not materially different from the previous iteration of
   the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further
   consultation with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective
   cases would not be prejudiced.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
     •   whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
         having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan policies;
     •   the effect of the proposal on the openness and purposes of the Green Belt; and
     •   whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would
         be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very
         special circumstances necessary to justify the development.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Whether inappropriate development
5. The Framework states that the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
   sprawl by keeping land permanently open.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008745


6. Policy M12 of the Dartford Local Plan to 2037 (2024) (LP) requires extensions to be
   proportionate and subservient in appearance, bulk, massing and scale, and not
   result in a disproportionate addition to the original building.
7. Framework Policy GB6 1 sets out that development in the Green Belt is
   inappropriate other than in the case of specified exceptions. An exception in GB7
   1.b is the extension or alteration of an existing building, providing that it will not
   result in a disproportionate size compared to the original building. For the purposes
   of the Framework, the original building is a building that existed on 1 July 1948 or, if
   constructed after 1 July 1948, as it was built originally.
8. Neither local policy or the Framework define what constitutes a disproportionate
   addition and therefore this is a matter of planning judgement. In assessing whether
   an addition is disproportionate, it is well established that a comparison should be
   made between the size of the original building and the cumulative size of the
   building as extended, including any previous extensions. However, this is not simply
   a mathematical calculation and other factors are also relevant.
9. The Council has calculated that the existing extensions to the dwelling have
   resulted in an increase in volume of approximately 93.5% when compared with the
   original dwelling. The proposal would add a further 13%. Whilst this additional
   increase is relatively modest when viewed in isolation, the proposal must be
   assessed in the context of the cumulative enlargement of the dwelling. Taken
   together with the existing extensions, the proposal would result in the dwelling being
   more than double the volume of the original dwelling.
10. The appellant has not challenged the Council’s calculations or provided any
    alternative figures. Instead, they contend that the Council has placed undue weight
    on the cumulative increase in size rather than the limited scale of the proposal itself
    and that the proposal would not materially alter the scale or appearance and should
    be regarded as a proportionate addition. However, the comparison required by
    policy is with the original building, not the existing.
11. The above figures demonstrate that the original building has already undergone a
    substantial volumetric cumulative increase, and the proposal would add further to
    this built form. Although the property occupies a generous plot with an elevated
    position to the road, the proposal would increase its volume and add bulk at the
    first-floor level, notably increasing the scale and massing of the dwelling to the side
    of the property. As a result, despite the lower roof ridge and set back position, the
    proposal when combined with the existing extensions would not appear subservient
    to the original dwelling. Consequently, the proposal would constitute a
    disproportionate addition over and above the size of the original building and would
    not comply with Policy M12 of the LP or fall within the exception in Policy GB7 1.b of
    the Framework.
12. Policy GB7 g of the Framework sets out other circumstances where development in
    the Green Belt should also not be regarded as inappropriate, including where the
    development would utilise grey belt land, not fundamentally undermine the purposes
    of the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan, and meet all of the other
    criteria in sections i. to iv.
13. The Framework defines grey belt as land in the Green Belt comprising previously
    developed land and/or any other land that, in either case, does not strongly
    contribute to any of the Green Belt purposes (a), (b), or (d) set out in Policy GB2.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008745


    The relevant Green Belt purposes are to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-
    up areas, prevent neighbouring towns from merging, and preserve the setting and
    special character of historic towns.
14. The site comprises a single residential dwelling located on the edge of the village
    and therefore, would not make a strong contribution to Green Belt purposes (a), (b),
    or (d). As such, the site may meet the definition of grey belt land. However, even if
    criterion i. of GB7 g is satisfied, there is little detail or evidence before me to
    establish a need for the proposed development. Whilst I recognise that a larger
    dwelling may be desirable to the appellant, this does not, in itself, amount to
    evidence of a demonstrable unmet need. Therefore, criterion ii. of Policy GB7 g is
    not met.
15. The proposed extension would be sustainably located in relation to the existing
    dwelling and, therefore, criterion iii. is met. Nevertheless, as the policy requires all
    relevant criteria to be satisfied, the failure to meet criterion ii. means that the
    proposal does not comply with Policy GB7 g. Accordingly, the development cannot
    be regarded as not inappropriate development by reason of being grey belt land.
16. As such, the proposed development fails to meet any of the exceptions set out in
    Policy GB7 of the Framework and would therefore be inappropriate development,
    which is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except
    in very special circumstances.
Openness and purposes
17. The Framework explains that the essential features of Green Belts are their
    openness and their permanence. Openness has a spatial and visual aspect.
18. There is no dispute that the site does not contribute strongly to Green Belt
    purposes, and may be grey belt, however this does not weigh in favour of the
    proposal given that the other criteria required for grey belt are not met.
19. Due to their volume, the extensions would undoubtedly have a spatial effect on the
    openness of the Green Belt, however as it would only affect one property, the
    overall spatial effect would be limited. The proposal would be elevated from the road
    and only partially screened from public vantage points by existing trees and
    hedgerows along the road frontage. However, such vegetation cannot be relied
    upon to provide permanent screening, and the development would remain visible in
    glimpsed views from the road. Consequently, the proposal would have limited effect
    on the visual perception of openness. However, the fact that parts of the Green Belt
    are not readily visible does not in itself justify a reduction in openness since to do so
    would support a continual and cumulative loss. Overall, the proposal would result in
    limited harm to openness.
20. The Framework makes it clear that substantial weight should be given to the harm
    to the Green Belt, including harm to its openness. The harm to openness therefore
    adds to the harm as a result of inappropriateness.
Other Considerations
21. The appellant contends that the proposal would make more efficient use of the
   existing dwelling. However, the dwelling is already in residential use and there is no
   substantive evidence before me that the proposed additional accommodation is
   necessary to achieve an efficient use of the site. While the Framework states that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008745


    substantial weight should be given to the benefits of development proposals that
    meet one or more of the identified criteria in Policy L2, the proposal does not
    demonstrably fall within any of those categories, and therefore would not benefit
    from the weight offered by that Policy.
22. The Council has not identified harm with regard to the living conditions of nearby
    neighbouring occupiers, nor any issues relating to highway, parking provision, or the
    effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the host dwelling and
    surrounding area. However, the lack of harm in these regards is a neutral matter
    and does not weigh in favour of the scheme.
Green Belt Balance and Recommendation
23. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt, which is
    harmful by definition. No harm would arise to the Green Belt purposes however
    there would be a limited loss of openness which would be harmful to the Green Belt.
    The totality of the Green Belt harm attracts substantial weight. Very special
    circumstances will not exist unless the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of
    inappropriateness, and any other harm resulting from the proposal, is clearly
    outweighed by other considerations. There are no other considerations to clearly
    outweigh the harm I have identified. Consequently, the very special circumstances
    necessary to justify the development do not exist and the proposal would fail to
    accord with the Green Belt aims set out in Policy M12 of the LP and the Framework.
24. For the reasons given, my above findings bring the proposal into conflict with the
    development plan, read as a whole. There are no material considerations, including
    the Framework to indicate a decision should be made otherwise than in accordance
    with it. Therefore, I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Kirkaldy
APPEAL PLANNING

Inspector’s Decision
25. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
