Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by Toby Gethin BA (Hons), MSc, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008171
Land adjacent to Parkend Club, Castlemain, Parkend, Gloucestershire GL15 4JZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73A of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Hayes, Hayes Developments, against the decision of Forest of Dean
     District Council.
•    The application Ref P0048/23/FUL, dated 12 January 2023, was refused by notice dated 16 October
     2025.
•    The application sought planning permission for Erection of 3 No. detached dwellings and 2 No.
     detached garages with associated amenity area, parking, turning and hardstanding. (Revised
     Scheme) without complying with conditions attached to planning permission Ref P0983/20/FUL,
     dated 10 November 2020.
•    The conditions in dispute are Nos 2 and 6 which state that:
      • No 2: The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
      • approved plans listed in the table below.
      • No 6: Development shall be carried out in accordance with the Biodiversity Mitigation Strategy,
         Appendix 1 of the Ecological Appraisal REV 3, dated 10/10/2018, published 07/07/2020
         (ECOLOGICAL APPRAISAL), prepared by Clarke Webb Ecology and as shown in the updated
         drawing Proposed Site Plan, number T1181.08C, Rev C, dated 06/07/2020, prepared by Total
         Design Ltd. The approved compensation and enhancement measures shall be retained and
         maintained for their designed purpose as agreed.
•    The reasons given for the conditions are:
     • No 2: For the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper planning.
     • No 6: To safeguard biodiversity as set out by the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as
         amended) and provide net gains in accordance with Section 40 of the NERC Act 2006, NPPF
         Chapter 15 in, particular paragraphs 170 & 174, is clear that in pursuing sustainable
         development a core principle for planning is achieving net gains for biodiversity. The
         Governments 25 year Environment Plan, Polices CSP1 & CSP2 of the Core Strategy and, AP1,
         AP7 and AP8 of the Allocations Plan.


Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for 3 No. detached
      dwellings and 2 No. detached garages with associated amenity area, parking,
      turning and hardstanding (Revised Scheme) at Land adjacent to Parkend Club,
      Castlemain, Parkend, Gloucestershire GL15 4JZ in accordance with the terms of
      the application, Ref P0048/23/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached
      schedule.
Application for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by Hayes Developments against Forest of
      Dean District Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008171


Preliminary matters
3.    With the proposed development already begun, I was able to observe it on my site
      visit. I have dealt with the appeal on this basis.
4.    I note that the main parties agreed a revised description of development during the
      Council’s determination of the application. Nevertheless, given my below findings,
      my decision uses the original description in the application form as that suitably
      describes the development. However, as the dwellings and garages have already
      been built, my decision does not include reference to the erection of those.
5.    During the appeal timetable, the appellant submitted a Unilateral Undertaking (UU)
      made as a Deed (dated 18 June 2026) pursuant to section 106 of the 1990 Act
      and imposing obligations on the site. Following comments from the Council, an
      updated version and subsequently, following discussions between the parties, a
      final Deed was provided. I have had regard to the latest iteration (dated 4
      September 2026) in reaching my decision.
Background and main issues
6.    The application is for the removal and/or variation of conditions 2, 6, 8 and 11 of
      permission Ref P0983/20/FUL. This initially included proposed changes to the
      access road. However, the submitted evidence indicates that these were removed
      from the consideration of the application before the Council’s planning committee
      and have instead been dealt with through a separate application.
7.    The appeal proposal therefore aims to regularise the fenestration, boundary
      treatments, two side extensions and other associated works that have been
      carried out differently to the plans approved under condition 2; and, amongst other
      aspects, proposes revisions to on-site landscaping. To replace the approved but
      not provided on-site ecological measures (as secured by condition 6 and shown in
      approved Drawing No T1181.08D), alternative on-site and new off-site ecological
      mitigation and enhancement measures are also proposed. In addition, various
      details were submitted in relation to conditions 8 and 11.
8.    Consequently, the appellant seeks to have several of the approved plans (listed in
      the table associated with condition 2 of Ref P0983/20/FUL) substituted with
      updated plans to reflect the above proposed revisions. Related to the changes
      shown in proposed Drawing No T1181.08I, condition 6 is sought to be varied to
      allow for alternative biodiversity mitigation and enhancement. The appellant also
      seeks conditions 8 and 11 to be discharged based on the information submitted.
9.    The available evidence indicates that the submitted information is sufficient in
      relation to conditions 8 and 11; and I note that the Council’s list of conditions in its
      appeal statement does not include either of them. The evidence before me
      therefore indicates that both conditions are no longer necessary. Whilst the
      appellant was seeking the discharge of them, the type of application submitted
      means that the conditions, rather than being discharged, do not need to be
      reimposed on the new planning permission that is granted by this appeal.
10. The Council does also not identify any concerns with regards to the various
    changes to the dwellings and other associated works. Based on the submitted
    evidence and my site visit observations, I have no reason to disagree. Accordingly,
    the main issues are:


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008171


         •    the effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding area of the
              close boarded fence on the western boundary; and
         •    the effect on biodiversity from the proposed revisions to the development.
Reasons
Character and appearance
11. The appeal site is located on the edge of Parkend and there are fields beyond the
    footpath running along the site’s western boundary. However, the site is within the
    settlement and physically and visually relates to surrounding built form. There are
    also various examples of close board fencing in the locality, including for example
    at the adjoining property, Le Gaps.
12. Although contrary to the approved plans, the close boarded fencing which has
    been erected along the site’s western boundary does not therefore read as an
    incongruous or unexpected feature. Its orientation does not lead me to a different
    conclusion. Whilst the set back of the fence from the edge of the path is relatively
    limited, there is also sufficient space for a hedge to grow. Although it would take
    time to establish, the hedge (which appears to have already been planted) would
    soften the presence of the fence and provide a natural buffer between the site and
    the footpath (and fields beyond). This would ensure the development sufficiently
    integrates with its position on the edge of Parkend and the wider landscape.
13. For the above reasons, I conclude that the close boarded fence on the site’s west
    boundary does not harm the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
    Imposing a varied plans condition to include the submitted plans showing the close
    boarded fence would therefore be acceptable and would not conflict with Policy
    CSP.1 of the Core Strategy, Policy AP 4 of the Allocations Plan 2006 to 2026 (AP)
    and Policies 5 and 7 of the Forest Edge South Neighbourhood Plan 2022 - 2041
    (NP). Amongst other aspects, these expect development to be appropriate to its
    location and take account of and safeguard important characteristics of the local
    area. Allowing the revised scheme with its close boarded fence would also not be
    inconsistent with the policies and overall approach set out in chapter 14 of the
    National Planning Policy Framework (Framework, 2026).
Biodiversity
14. The approved site plan includes a hedgerow and ‘reptile receptor area/wildlife
    buffer’. According to the associated Ecological Appraisal, this area would have
    been at least 7 metres in width and covered around 380 square metres. It was to
    be provided to retain and maximise the site’s biodiversity value and to provide
    habitat for use by low numbers of slow-worms and common lizards.
15. However, the buffer area has been incorporated into the private gardens of the as-
    built development (which now include artificial grass, patios and outbuildings for
    example) and the remaining strip between the close boarded fence and footpath is
    much narrower than the approved hedge area. Much of the space beyond the
    fence on the site’s northern boundary is also now so narrow that it is unlikely to
    provide usable habitat of any note. Whilst the grass areas either side of the access
    are proposed to be turned into wildflower meadows, the area available for on-site
    mitigation (and biodiversity enhancement) is therefore now very limited and the as-
    built development has clearly resulted in a loss of habitat. Furthermore, with the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008171


      erected fence being close boarded, it limits the potential for animals to access any
      natural habitat available in the gardens. However, I observed some gaps beneath
      the fence on my site visit which appear to be sufficient to allow for the movement
      of some wildlife, including reptiles for example; whilst the hedge would remain
      accessible for various wildlife via the stock proof mesh fence. Nevertheless, the
      on-site wildlife habitat now proposed is significantly less than what was approved
      and, on its own, would be insufficient to provide adequate mitigation for reptiles
      and retain or enhance overall biodiversity value and connectivity.
16. Prior to the development, the site clearly had some value for wildlife, most notably
    for reptiles. Given the policy context and approach to biodiversity mitigation when
    P0983/20/FUL was granted, securing on-site mitigation was therefore appropriate
    and necessary at the time. However, the appeal is to be determined under the
    current context and approach to biodiversity mitigation and enhancement, which
    includes an understanding that in some circumstances such measures can be
    provided off-site and that this can deliver a better overall outcome.
17. Providing an off-site area for biodiversity mitigation and enhancement, to offset the
    reduced area for on-site habitat, as the appellant is now proposing, is therefore an
    acceptable approach in principle. The proposed off-site mitigation land (the
    mitigation land), to be managed for reptiles and other wildlife, is significantly larger
    than the approved on-site buffer area. Whilst it is some distance from the approved
    on-site reptile habitat and not within Parkend, the Council’s ecologist identifies that
    it would be of great benefit to reptiles in the wider area and offers district-wide
    ecological benefits. The Landscape and Ecological Management Plan (LEMP) in
    Schedule 3 of the Deed also demonstrates that, subject to various initial works and
    on-going management, the mitigation land would provide suitable features for
    reptiles and other wildlife; and the LEMP includes details regarding management,
    monitoring, remedial measures and long-term funding to implement it.
18. I recognise that providing the approved on-site wildlife buffer is obviously an option
    and the Council’s appeal statement suggests that this would be the most
    appropriate solution. However, such an approach would not necessarily result in
    the best outcome for biodiversity, especially given the approved on-site wildlife
    buffer area would, if it were provided as per the approved plans, be accessible to
    residents via the proposed stiles. Consequently, if the proposed off-site mitigation
    land is appropriately secured and managed, biodiversity would not be harmed
    overall and the appeal proposal would provide a net gain compared to the
    approved development under P0983/20/FUL. In coming to this view, I have taken
    into account that the off-site mitigation area is not like-for-like mitigation, is not
    especially close to the appeal site and wildlife in the vicinity of Parkend would not
    necessarily benefit from it. Whilst the development proposed would result in the
    loss of wildlife habitat in Parkend compared to the approved scheme, the proposed
    hedge with hibernacula and wildflower areas either side of the access road means
    that ecological mitigation and enhancement measures are also not entirely off-site.
19. Although the appellant intends to purchase the mitigation land if the appeal is
    allowed, the owners of that land are not party to the Deed. As identified by the
    Council, government guidance sets out that where a developer has only an option
    to purchase the land, the current landowners will need to be party to any obligation
    binding the land. However, this is guidance only and the relevant document is titled
    good practice advice; and the evidence before me does not indicate that a
    deviation from the advice necessarily leads to the UU being fundamentally flawed.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008171


20. Nevertheless, I acknowledge the Council’s concerns on this and other aspects of
    the UU, and that it also cannot enforce the option agreement. However, clause 4.1
    in the Deed is clear that if planning permission is granted, the developer
    (appellant) would serve a purchase notice – in-line with the appended option
    agreement – on the landowners (the sellers) within one month. The Deed therefore
    obligates the appellant to purchase the mitigation land if permission is granted,
    whilst the option agreement ensures that the appellant is able to do so and
    obligates the current owners to sell to the appellant.
21. Consequently, it seems to me that the owners of the mitigation land not being
    party to the Deed is not fatal and the obligations on the appellant, who is also a
    Registered Proprietor of part of the appeal site, are both sufficient to secure the
    mitigation land and enforceable. With the appellant (or any successor) also
    obligated by the Deed to implement the measures in the Schedule 3 LEMP, the
    UU would also secure the provision and future management of the mitigation land.
22. For the above reasons, I conclude that, with conditions securing the now-proposed
    on-site biodiversity measures and the Deed securing the provision and
    management of the off-site mitigation land, the proposed revisions to the approved
    development would not harm biodiversity. Consequently, it is reasonable to vary
    the plans condition to include the submitted (proposed) plans showing the revised
    on-site layout and to not reimpose condition 6 of P0983/20/FUL. However, new
    conditions securing implementation of the submitted landscape planting plan and
    submission of a management plan covering the on-site reptile mitigation strip and
    wildflower planting are necessary in the interests of maintaining and enhancing
    biodiversity. On this basis, the proposal would not conflict with AP Policy AP 7 and
    NP Policy 2. Amongst other aspects, these set out that development should
    respond positively to the natural environment of the parish, safeguard features and
    supporting habitats of ecological networks, and provide for net biodiversity gains.
    The revised scheme would also be consistent with the policies and overall
    approach set out in chapter 19 of the Framework.
Other matters
23. The available evidence and my findings above indicate that the obligations in the
    Deed are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms; are
    directly related to the development; and are fairly and reasonably related in scale
    and kind to it. Accordingly, I find that the obligations in the Deed meet the tests set
    out in the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulations 2010 (as amended).
    Collectively, they therefore constitute a reason for granting planning permission in
    accordance with Regulation 122 of the CIL Regulations.
24. It has been put to me that the hedge and mesh fence has reduced the width of the
    well-used footpath and that this is contrary to deed requirements. Be that as it
    may, the available evidence indicates that the proposed works are within the site’s
    redline boundary and any requirements from other deeds are not a matter for this
    appeal. Future maintenance of the hedge (which would for example prevent it
    growing across the path) and wildflower areas is also secured by condition.
25. Various concerns have been raised with regards to access and flooding issues
    associated with the as-built access, which was not constructed in accordance with
    the approved plans and flood risk assessment. However, with the Council’s appeal
    statement indicating that access and highways (and associated matters, including


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008171


      gates, accessibility and highway safety for example) are being dealt with through a
      separate application, these considerations are not before me as part of this
      appeal. Notwithstanding this, the Council’s sixth suggested condition, which I have
      imposed, covers drainage matters.
26. With the appellant correcting the redline boundary during the Council’s
    determination of the application, the available evidence indicates that issues with
    the redline boundary and landownership have been resolved and the proposed
    works on the appeal site fall within the redline boundary.
27. A number of other matters have been raised by various parties and I have taken
    them all into account. This includes: unauthorised works contrary to the approved
    plans and without compliance with the conditions; the number of amendments to
    the scheme; land contamination; general loss of biodiversity in the area; and
    precedent. However, whilst I take these representations seriously, I have not been
    presented with compelling evidence to demonstrate that the proposal would result
    in unacceptable effects in relation to any of these matters. Consequently, they do
    not lead me to a different overall conclusion that the appeal should be allowed.
Conditions
28. The Planning Practice Guidance makes clear that decision notices for the grant of
    planning permission under section 73 should restate the conditions imposed on
    earlier permissions that continue to have effect. However, the Council’s appeal
    statement helpfully includes a schedule of conditions in the event of the appeal
    being allowed and the suggested list includes some alterations to uncontested
    conditions which reflect, for example, that the development has been built and
    occupied. The list also excludes some other uncontested conditions which reflect
    the site’s planning history. With the appellant confirming its agreement to the
    Council’s schedule and the available evidence indicating that the suggested
    conditions are necessary, reasonable and relevant, I have imposed them and not
    reimposed the previous versions from P0983/20/FUL.
29. With regards to the contested conditions, I have imposed a varied plans condition
    – to include the relevant plans submitted with the appeal – in the interests of clarity
    and certainty. Whilst it is not necessary to reimpose condition 6 of P0983/20/FUL
    because the details secured in that condition have been superseded, two new
    conditions (Nos 7 and 8) are necessary to ensure that the now-proposed on-site
    mitigation and enhancement measures are provided and retained. However, given
    the information submitted by the appellant in relation to conditions 8 and 11 of
    P0983/20/FUL and my above findings, it is not necessary to re-impose these.
Conclusion
30. For the above reasons, the appeal is allowed. I will therefore grant a new planning
    permission, retaining those non-disputed conditions from the previous permission
    that remain relevant and, as set out above, varying, removing and adding
    conditions as necessary.

T Gethin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008171


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   following approved plans: Location Plan (Drawing No T1181.01B); Proposed Site
   Plan (Drawing No T1181.08I); Landscape Planting Plan (Drawing No LAPC M01C);
   PLOT 1 (Drawing No T1181.06B); PLOT 2 (Drawing No T1181.07A); PLOT 3
   (Drawing No T1181.05B); Proposed garage (Drawing No T1181.04B); PROPOSED
   DRAINAGE LAYOUT (Drawing No 02, Rev C); EXISTING SITE PLAN (Suggested
   compensation Ecology area at Pillowell) (Drawing No T1181.50B); and PROPOSED
   SITE PLAN (Suggested compensation Ecology area at Pillowell) (Drawing No
   T1181.51A).
2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town & Country Planning (General Permitted
   Development) Order 2015 (or any Order revoking or re-enacting that Order with or
   without modification), no windows/dormer windows or roof lights [other than those
   expressly authorised by this permission] shall be constructed.
3) The parking spaces and turning facilities shown on the approved drawings shall not
   be used for any purpose other than for the parking and turning of vehicles and
   cycles.
4) All external lighting shall be maintained in accordance with the details provided on
   Drawing No. T1181.15 received by the local planning authority on 20 April 2021 in
   association with application P0049/21/DISCON. No other external lighting shall be
   erected.
5) The electric vehicle charging points shall be retained for the lifetime of the
   development unless they need to be replaced in which case the replacement
   charging points shall be of the same or higher specification in terms of charging
   performance as those currently installed.
6) The development shall be carried out in accordance with the drainage details
   hereby approved (PROPOSED DRAINAGE LAYOUT, Drawing No 02, Rev C) within
   6 months of the date of this decision and shall thereafter be retained and maintained
   in accordance with the approved details for perpetuity.
7) The development shall be completed in accordance with the Landscape Planting
   Plan (Drawing No LAPC MO1C, prepared by Abbey Sanders Ecology). All of the
   biodiversity mitigation and enhancement measures identified on the plan shall be
   implemented in full within one year of the date of this decision. Mitigation measures
   within the application site include the proposed hedgerow planting, tree planting, the
   provision of the wildlife strip, wild flower planting, and reptile hibernculum. All
   mitigation features shall thereafter be permanently retained for the stated purposes
   of biodiversity conservation. The proposed hedgerow along the western and
   northwestern boundary of the site shall be maintained at a minimum height of 1.8
   metres for perpetuity.
8) Notwithstanding the submitted details, within three months of the date of this
   decision, a Landscape and Ecological Management Plan (LEMP), covering the on-
   site reptile mitigation (including the proposed hedge) and the wild flower planting
   areas, shall be submitted to the local planning authority for its written approval. The
   content of the LEMP shall include: i. Description and evaluation of features to be
   managed; ii. Aims and objectives of management (including those related to species
   and management of hedgerow at least twice yearly to ensure it does not encroach

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6008171


    upon the adjacent footpath); iii. Appropriate management options for achieving aims
    and objectives, including appropriate enhancement measures; iv. Prescriptions for
    management actions; v. Preparation of a work schedule (including an annual work
    plan capable of being rolled forward over a five year period); vi. Details of the body
    or organisation responsible for implementation of the plan; vii. Legal and funding
    mechanisms by which the long-term implementation of the plan will be secured by
    the developer; viii. Ongoing monitoring and remedial measures; ix. Timeframe for
    reviewing the plan; and x. Details of how the aims and objectives of the LEMP will
    be communicated to the occupiers of the development. The LEMP shall also set out
    how contingencies and/or remedial action will be identified, agreed and
    implemented so that the development still delivers the fully functioning biodiversity
    objectives of the originally approved scheme. The LEMP will thereafter be
    permanently implemented in accordance with the approved details.
END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
