 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 7 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6008438
 214-216 St James’s Road, Croydon CR0 2BW
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
      planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Kassam (Polychem Ltd) against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Croydon
 •    The application Ref is 25/03436/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is alterations and change of use of part of ground floor from Class E
      commercial development to a self-contained residential unit.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for alterations and change of use
   of part of ground floor from Class E commercial development to a self-contained
   residential unit at 214-216 St James’s Road, Croydon CR0 2BW is refused.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Council amended the description of development at the application stage and
   this is the description that the Appellant used at the appeal stage. I have therefore
   also used this description in the header above.
3. The appeal is against the failure of the Council to give notice within the prescribed
   period of a decision on an application for planning permission. At the appeal stage
   the Council has advised that had it been in a position to determine the application,
   it would have refused planning permission for three reasons, namely, the proposal
   would not provide a satisfactory quality of accommodation for future occupiers, the
   lack of sufficient and policy compliant refuse and recycling storage arrangements,
   and the failure to secure appropriate mitigation in respect of parking permit
   restrictions and sustainable development contributions arising from the
   development.
4. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
   2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December 2024 and all
   other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the Appellant and the
   Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal. No representations
   have been received.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6008438


Main Issues
5. As a result of my site visit and all the information before me, the main issues raised
   in this appeal are:
         •    Whether the proposal would provide satisfactory living conditions for future
              occupiers, with particular regard to light and outlook, as well as means of
              access;
         •    Whether the proposal would provide satisfactory arrangements for refuse
              and recycling, and
         •    Whether the proposal would provide satisfactory mitigation in respect of
              parking permit restrictions and sustainable transport contributions.
Reasons
Living Conditions

6. The appeal premises relates to the rear part of a ground floor commercial unit
   within an existing three storey building, fronting St James’s Road, within a mixed
   commercial and residential area. The rear of the property is accessed from
   Lansdowne Road. The site falls within the Croydon Opportunity Area.
7. The proposal would convert the current commercial space into a 1 bedroom flat,
   together with the installation of an entrance door and windows to serve the living
   space and the bedroom.
8. The bedroom would be served by two windows opening onto a small lightwell. The
   lightwell is of very limited size and the windows would face towards the rear of the
   commercial unit which includes a door and a window. Although the addition of
   windows onto the lightwell would provide some light to the bedroom, there is no
   technical assessment before me to confirm that the extent of light into the proposed
   bedroom would be satisfactory to provide a good standard of light for future
   residents. Moreover, given the limited size of the lightwell, the outlook from the
   proposed bedroom would be very limited and of poor quality. I consider that the
   living environment for the rear room, being the sole bedroom to serve the unit,
   would be constrained and would not be satisfactory in terms of both light and
   outlook.
9. The sole means of access would be from Lansdowne Road but this access would
   be circuitous and pass beneath the undercroft of a derelict building. Given these
   factors, I am not satisfied that the access route would provide an appropriate and
   safe route to the proposed dwelling for all future occupiers. In addition,
   representations from the neighbours in Lansdowne Road have advised that the
   access is chained overnight for safety reasons. It is not therefore clear on the very
   limited information before me, whether there would be full access to the property at
   all times.
10. Although in terms of internal floor space and the potential provision of amenity
    space, the proposed flat would be satisfactory against standards including in the
    London Plan (2021) and the Croydon Local Plan (2018) (Local Plan), this would not
    outweigh the harm I have concluded in terms of light and outlook as well as means
    of access to the property. The proposal would not provide satisfactory living
    conditions for future residents. This would conflict with Policy D6 of the London

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
 Appeal Decision 6008438


     Plan and Policy DM10 of the Local Plan which, amongst other matters, seek a high
     standard of design and to protect the amenities of existing and future occupiers.
     Refuse and Recycling Provision
11. There would appear to be adequate space for the storage of refuse and recycling
    facilities at the front of the proposed dwelling within the area marked for parking
    and amenity on the submitted plans.
12. The Council has referred to specific drag distances for refuse collection which the
    proposal would not appear able to comply with although the source of these
    requirements is not specified. Furthermore, the relevant consultation response from
    the Waste Management Technical Liaison Officer set out that the requirements for
    a bagged collection with the responsibility resting with the resident to present the
    bags on the pavement in an appropriate manner.
13. Notwithstanding the very limited information before me, I am not persuaded that
    this matter on its own would justify withholding planning permission. If no other
    matters were of concern and I were to allow the appeal, further details could be
    addressed by the imposition of an appropriate condition.
14. Subject to the imposition of an appropriate condition relating to the provision of
    refuse and recycling facilities to serve the new development, I am satisfied that the
    scheme would be capable of ensuring adequate refuse and recycling provision.
    There would be no conflict with Policy DM13 of the Local Plan which seeks to
    ensure that development makes adequate provision for refuse and recycling
    facilities.
Highways and parking
15. The Council’s third issue relates to the absence of a legal agreement to secure
    appropriate mitigation in respect of parking permit restrictions and sustainable
    transport contributions arising from the development. There is no such legal
    agreement before me and the Appellant has stated that no infrastructure
    contributions are required, including in respect of highways and transport given the
    small scale of the project.
16. Given the good public transport accessibility of the site, the Council has raised no
    issue with the absence of any parking being proposed on the site which accords
    with the maximum standards for parking for a site in this location in the London
    Plan under Policy T6.1. However, the Council advises that in such situations a legal
    agreement is required to remove future occupiers’ eligibility to apply for on-street
    parking permits and season tickets for council operated car parks.
17. The Council is also seeking contributions towards planned sustainable transport
    improvements, including monetary contributions towards car clubs with electric
    charging points to mitigate the impacts of the development.
18. The proposal would create only one new one bedroomed dwelling. However, Policy
    SP8.13 of the Local Plan sets out that new development will be required to
    contribute to the provision of electric vehicle charging infrastructure, car clubs and
    car sharing schemes. The supporting text to Policy DM29 at paragraph 10.29 also
    states that all development has an impact on traffic movements in the borough and
    that the Council will require new development to promote measures to increase the
    use of public transport, cycling and walking.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision 6008438


19. The details of such mitigation measures or required contributions have not been set
    out by the Council to enable me to address whether they would meet the required
    tests, notably that they would be necessary to make the development acceptable in
    planning terms, that they would be directly related to the development and that they
    would be fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.
20. However, in the absence of further information or a legal agreement in respect of
    these matters I cannot be satisfied that appropriate mitigation would be in place in
    respect of highways and parking impact arising from the proposed development.
    This would conflict with Policies SP8, DM29 and DM30 of the Local Plan in respect
    of such matters.
Planning Balance
21. The proposed development would contribute 1 additional housing unit with
    associated, albeit small scale benefits. However, the adverse impacts I have
    concluded from the proposed development in terms of the lack of a satisfactory
    living environment for future residents and the absence of appropriate mitigation
    towards traffic and parking impacts would substantially and demonstrably outweigh
    the benefits of permitting the scheme to proceed. The proposal is not therefore
    sustainable development for which there is a presumption in favour.
22. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, the
    proposals conflicts with the development plan as a whole and there are no
    considerations that would outweigh that conflict, including the Framework. The
    appeal is therefore dismissed and planning permission refused.



L J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
