Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by G Sylvester BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008855
7A Shorefield Cottage, Shorefield Road, Westcliff-on-Sea, Southend-on-Sea
SS0 7RH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by S Aisenthal against the decision of Southend-on-Sea City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01646/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the demolition of existing dwelling to create new dwelling house

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2.     In reaching my decision on this appeal, I have taken account of the main parties’
       comments on the relevance of the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       ("the Framework"), published 17 August 2026, to their respective cases in this
       appeal. All references to the Framework relate the revised document.
3.     For my banner heading above, I have taken the shorter description of development
       from the planning application form. However, I have had regard to the more
       detailed description on the decision notice.
Background and Main Issues
4.     The proposal would be within a settlement. Policy S4 of the Framework states that
       development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
       of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when
       assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
5.     The main issues in this appeal are:
           •    the effects of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area,
           •    the effects of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupants of
                nearby properties with particular regard to outlook, access to light and
                privacy,
           •    the safety and convenience of pedestrians using the public highway, and
           •    if there are any adverse effects, whether the benefits of approving the
                development would be substantially outweighed by those adverse effects
                when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
                Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008855


Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     The evidence before me indicates that Seafront Character Zone 4, identified in the
       supporting text to Policy DM6 of the Southend-on-Sea Borough Council
       Development Management Document 2015 (“the DMD”), is the one most closely
       associated with the appeal site.
7.     The development principles for Seafront Character Zone 4, which extends from
       Chalkwell Esplanade to San Remo, seek to preserve the area's vernacular form
       and fine urban grain, maintain the low-rise height of existing buildings, and resist
       large-scale buildings. It states that development will be supported where it
       responds appropriately to its context and enhances the overall quality of the area.
8.     Buildings on the eastern side of Shorefield Road, including the appeal site, are
       predominantly vernacular in form, and generally two storeys in height with pitched
       gabled roofs and projecting bays. By contrast, the western side is characterised by
       three-storey apartment buildings with flat roofs and simple geometric forms.
       Despite their varied architectural styles, Shorefield Road derives its character from
       the broadly comparable scale and height of its buildings.
9.     The buildings fronting this section of Shorefield Road are markedly smaller in scale
       than those to the south facing the seafront, including the substantial terraced
       buildings at St James Court/Cliff House on Shorefield Gardens, San Remo
       Mansions to the east, and those along Western Esplanade. The supporting text to
       Policy DM6 describes the seafront buildings as being characterised by heavily
       articulated facades, with prominent bays and balconies.
10. In contrast, the buildings fronting this section of Shorefield Road do not display
    those features nor do they have a strong orientation or visual relationship with the
    seafront. The existing dwelling on the appeal site is low-rise in scale with a pitched
    roof. Its scale, form and vernacular architecture reinforce the generally low-rise
    character of this section of Shorefield Road and the vernacular styles of buildings
    along its eastern side.
11. With four floors of living accommodation above an undercroft-style car parking
    facility the proposed dwelling would appear in the street scene as a substantially
    sized five-storey building. By projecting significantly closer to Shorefield Road than
    both the existing dwelling and the side elevation of St James Court, the proposed
    dwelling would disrupt the established building line and occupy a prominent and
    highly visible position.
12. Even with the upper storey stepped back from the floors below, the proposed
    dwelling would extend well above the height of the two-storey houses and three-
    storey apartment blocks that front Shorefield Road. The combined height, width
    and deep flank walls of the building would give it a substantially greater visual
    mass than those buildings, resulting in a comparatively bulky appearance.
13. The excavation of the roadside embankment between the existing dwelling and
    Shorefield Road would reduce the sense of spaciousness that currently exists
    between the buildings and the road. It would also diminish appreciation of the cliff-
    top landform as it rises from the shoreline, a characteristic that the other buildings
    on the eastern side of the road generally respect and preserve.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008855


14. Although planning permission has previously been granted for the removal of a
    substantial part of the embankment to provide parking in front of the existing
    dwelling, the approved scheme retained part of the embankment and incorporated
    additional soft landscaping between the parking area and the bungalow. It is
    therefore materially different from the proposal before me.
15. Its forward position within the street scene, together with its scale and massing,
    would make it a dominant and intrusive building. It would appear incongruous and
    out of keeping with the lower heights and modest proportions of the buildings
    fronting this section of Shorefield Road. In that context, the proposed dwelling
    could not reasonably be regarded as a low-rise form of development.
16. Those visual effects would be exacerbated by the detailed design of the building.
    The stacked balconies, extensive glazing and the combination of materials and
    finishes in a variety of colours and textures would create a visually complex
    appearance and a strong horizontal emphasis to the façade. This would contrast
    sharply with the vernacular character of the buildings on the eastern side of the
    road and the simpler, more restrained appearance of the three-storey apartment
    buildings opposite. It would also draw attention to the incongruously large scale
    and massing of the proposed dwelling.
17. Even if a more limited palette of materials and finishes was to be secured by a
    planning condition, this would not alter the building's scale, form, proportions or
    siting, nor overcome the resulting harm.
18. While the proposed dwelling would be no higher than the main roof ridge of St
    James Court/Cliff House to the south, that building is a seafront building and
    occupies a different setting. It fronts Shorefield Gardens close to its junction with
    Shorefield Road, stands prominently on the cliff top and faces the sea. It forms
    part of a group of similarly large seafront buildings, including San Remo Mansions,
    which are visible from Western Esplanade at the foot of the cliff.
19. Furthermore, St James Court/Cliff House reflects the vernacular forms found on
    the eastern side of Shorefield Road, with its upper floor largely contained within its
    largely sloping roof form. By contrast, the proposed dwelling would project well
    above the parapet of the rear wing of that building, and its five-storey scale and
    massing would rival that of the side elevation of St James Court itself.
20. As such, the building at St James Court/Cliff House exists within a materially
    different visual setting and it does not provide a context within the scale, form and
    design of the proposed dwelling could be satisfactorily accommodated.
21. Taking all the above into account, I conclude that the proposed dwelling would
    appear as a dominant and jarringly intrusive building within the street scene. It
    would unacceptably erode the broad consistency that exists in the scale and
    height of the buildings fronting this section of Shorefield Road, and the vernacular
    character of the buildings on its eastern side.
22. Accordingly, it would fail to preserve the low-rise height of existing buildings and
    the vernacular form and fine urban grain of Seafront Character Zone 4. It would be
    at odds with the Southend-on-Sea Design and Townscape Guide 2009, insofar as
    it advises that development which would add variety to the roof lines of buildings in
    the street should be appropriate to the building’s setting and context, and should
    avoid dominance. For the reasons given above, the proposal would not be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008855


       appropriate to its context nor add to the overall quality of the area, contrary to
       Policy DM6.
23. For those reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would cause
    significant harm to the character and appearance of the area. It would therefore be
    contrary to Policies CP4 and KP2 of the Southend on Sea Borough Council Core
    Strategy 2007 (“the CS”) and Policies DM1, DM3 and DM6 of the DMD insofar as
    they seek to ensure that all development respects the character of a site and its
    local context and surroundings, including in terms of its architectural approach,
    height, size, scale, form, massing, proportions, materials and townscape.
24. Those policies are consistent with Policy DP3 of the Framework, which amongst
    others, seeks to ensure that development proposals respond to their context (the
    history, character and features of their site and its setting), so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings, such as through the arrangement of
    development plots and buildings, the use of materials and architectural features.
    For the reasons given above, the proposal would not comply with paragraph 1 of
    Policy DP3 of the Framework.
Living conditions
25. The massing of the tall side wall of the proposed dwelling would be clearly visible
    at close range from the balconies and from the rooms served by the closest clear
    glazed windows/doors on all floors in the side facing wall of St James Court,
    including the rear facing roof window and roof terrace of the top floor flat. The
    evidence indicates that those windows/doors, balconies and roof terrace serve
    several flats. Seen in those views, the closeness of the side wall of the proposed
    dwelling would have an oppressively overbearing presence that would harm the
    outlook and living conditions of the occupants of those flats.
26. Given the relationship between the proposed dwelling and St James Court, and
    taking account of the position of the sun as it moves through the sky, there would
    be no harmful overshadowing to the rooms served by the windows/doors and
    balconies in the side wall of St James Court, or the top floor flat and roof terrace.
27. However, given the closeness of the side wall of the proposed dwelling to the side
    wall of St James Court, there is likely to be a marked reduction in daylight reaching
    the rooms served by the doors that open out onto the first and second floor
    balconies, and the room served by the ground floor window beneath the first-floor
    balcony. This would be expected to harm the living conditions of the occupants of
    those rooms. No technical evidence, such as a daylight assessment, has been
    advanced to demonstrate otherwise.
28. There is a first-floor sunroom on the eastern elevation of the St James Court
    building, with walls that are predominantly glazed. Occupants of the sunroom
    would have clear views of the proposed dwelling’s side elevation at close range.
    As a result, the proposed dwelling would appear oppressively overbearing and
    would harm the outlook of the occupants of the sunroom.
29. The proposed dwelling would be significantly taller than the existing bungalow and
    sited closer to Cliff House. There are several clear glazed windows in the rear
    north facing wall of Cliff House and what appeared to be a garden area close to
    that wall. As a result, when seen from the rooms served by those windows and
    from the garden, the considerable massing of the rear wall of the proposed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008855


       dwelling would have an oppressively overbearing presence to the detriment of the
       occupants’ outlook and living conditions.
30. Given the close relationship between them there is likely to be a reduction in
    daylight reaching the nearest rear facing rooms and garden area of Cliff House,
    including overshadowing during the late afternoon and evening when the sun
    would be low in the sky to the west. Consequently, this would be expected to harm
    the living conditions of the occupants of Cliff House. No technical evidence, such
    as a daylight or sunlight assessment, has been advanced to demonstrate
    otherwise.
31. Even if the appellant had submitted a technical assessment showing levels of
    daylight and sunlight reaching the nearby properties would not be unacceptably
    reduced by the proposed development, it would not have altered the outcome of
    the appeal.
32. There appears to be no dispute that the 3 clear glazed windows in the side
    elevation of Number 6 Shorefield Road serve an entrance hall, stairs and kitchen.
    Compared to a stairwell or hallway, it would be reasonable for occupants to expect
    a higher standard of privacy within a kitchen. Obscure glazing and privacy screens
    could be fitted to the windows and balconies in the side facing elevation of the
    proposed dwelling to prevent a harmful loss of privacy to occupants of Number 6.
33. However, it would result in the occupants of Bedroom 3 on Level 1 and Bedroom 4
    on Level 2 of the proposed dwelling having an unacceptably restricted outlook and
    poor-quality living conditions. As a result, there would either be harm to the
    existing occupants of Number 6 due to a loss of privacy or harm to the living
    conditions of the future occupants of those bedrooms.
34. Obscure glazing and privacy screens could also be fitted to the windows and
    balconies in the south facing side elevation of the proposed dwelling. This would
    prevent overlooking leading to a harmful loss of privacy for the occupants of the
    rooms served by the closest side facing windows/doors and balcony in St James
    Court.
35. However, it would also result in the occupants of the Office on Level 0 having an
    unacceptably restricted outlook and poor-quality living conditions. Given the
    prevalence of home working, the proposed Office is likely to be an important room
    for future occupants. As a result, there would either be harm to the living
    conditions of the occupants of St James Court due to a loss of privacy, or harm to
    the living conditions of future occupants of the proposed Office.
36. When assessed against the submitted drawings the proposed development would,
    for the reasons given above, harm the living conditions of the occupants of nearby
    properties with particular regard to their outlook, access to light and privacy.
    Consequently, it would conflict with Policies CP4 and KP2 of the CS and Policies
    DM1 and DM3 of the DMD insofar as they seek to ensure that development
    protects the amenity of immediate neighbours having regard to privacy,
    overlooking, outlook, visual enclosure, daylight and sunlight.
37. Those policies are consistent with Policy P3 of the Framework insofar as
    development proposals should be appropriate for their location, taking into account
    living conditions, and not give rise to, or contribute to, an unacceptable level of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008855


       access to daylight and sunlight for neighbouring residents and occupiers. The
       proposed development would be contrary to Policy P3 of the Framework.
Pedestrian safety and convenience
38. There appears to be no dispute that amended plans could have been secured to
    reduce the width of the proposed vehicular crossover and comply with the
    Southend-on-Sea Vehicle Crossover Application Policy and Guidance. In that
    scenario the proposal would be capable of complying with Policies CP3 and KP2
    of the CS and Policy DM15 of the DMD, insofar as they seek to ensure that
    development creates environments that are safe. For the same reasons, I find no
    conflict with Policy TR6 of the Framework insofar as it seeks to avoid severe
    adverse impacts on the transport network or an unacceptable impact on highway
    safety.
39. Whilst the proposed dwelling would have more parking spaces than the existing
    one, there is nothing of substance to show that the current level of parking is
    causing any harmful effects, including in respect of highway safety. Parking on
    nearby roads appears to be controlled by traffic regulation orders in any case. As a
    result, the provision of additional parking spaces carries very little weight in favour
    of the appeal.
Benefits
40. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in this Framework.
41. Modest economic benefits would be generated through construction of the
    proposed development. Although exempt from the national Biodiversity Net Gain
    objective, the proposal would appear capable of enhancing biodiversity. It could
    also generate at least 10% of its energy needs through on-site renewables in
    accordance with Council policy. Therefore, it would be expected to have a small
    beneficial effect on the environment.
42. Based on the drawings before me, even if occupied as holiday accommodation,
    the existing building would still be a dwellinghouse. Therefore, even if there is a
    substantial unmet need for housing in Southend, including for self-build housing,
    the proposal would not increase the supply or density of housing in the area.
    Accordingly, I do not find Policy L3 of the Framework to have a bearing on the
    outcome of the appeal. Even if Policy L3 was relevant, the proposal would conflict
    with its objectives of securing well-designed, attractive, and healthy places.
43. In accordance with Policy L2 of the Framework, the proposal would create a
    significant amount of additional floorspace within the settlement through the
    redevelopment of the plot. However, given my conclusions in respect of the main
    issues above, it would not be consistent with the overall street scene, and nor
    would it maintain acceptable living standards for neighbours in terms of access to
    daylight, sunlight, and privacy. Therefore, it would not be sensitive to its context,
    and it would not accord with any of the development types listed in Policy L2. For
    example, it does not occupy a corner plot.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008855


44. Even if I were to give substantial weight to the benefits of the proposal, including
    the opportunity that it would provide for people wishing to commission or build their
    own home, as referred to by Policy HO7 of the Framework, I have already
    concluded that it would conflict with Policies P3 and DP3 (paragraph 1) of the
    Framework. Paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 of the Framework states that development
    proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with
    paragraph 1 of Policy DP3.
45. In this instance the benefits of the proposed development would not amount to the
    clear justification for its harmful effects on the character and appearance of the
    area, and the living conditions of the occupants of nearby properties. Therefore,
    the appeal development fails to comply with Policy DP3 of the Framework which is
    a national decision-making policy which states that development proposals should
    be refused in specific circumstances.
46. Consequently, the harms arising from the proposed development, together with its
    conflict with Policies DP3 and P3 of the Framework, constitutes the circumstances
    in which the benefits of the scheme are substantially outweighed by its adverse
    effects. Accordingly, when applying Policy S4 of the Framework, I find that the
    benefits of approving the development would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects identified, when assessed against the Framework's national
    decision-making policies.
Conclusion
47. The proposal would be consistent with a number of development policies insofar
    as they relate to the principle of residential development with the City, highway
    safety, internal space, energy and water efficiency, ecology and biodiversity.
    However, for the reasons given above, the conflict with Policies CP4 and KP2 of
    the CS and Policies DM1, DM3 and DM6 of the DMD brings the development into
    conflict with the development plan as a whole.
48. The material considerations, including the benefits of the proposed development
    and the provisions of the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with the development plan. I therefore conclude
    that the proposal is unacceptable and the appeal should be dismissed.



G Sylvester
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
