Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008292
Land To The West Of (U6032) Underlane, Wendron, Carnkie, Cornwall
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Ms Aneta Staciwa against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•      The application Ref is PA25/06342.
•      The development proposed is an agricultural building for the growing and storage of mushrooms.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       This appeal relates to development that has commenced by way of the creation of
         a hardstanding and vehicular access. The application is therefore partially
         retrospective, and I have considered the submission accordingly.
3.       During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
         (the Framework) was published. The main parties have had the opportunity to
         comment on the implications of this change, and no parties will have been
         prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
Background and Main Issues
4.       Following the decision of the Council, the appellant has submitted further
         information in relation to ecology being a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal1 (PEA),
         Biodiversity Net Gain Plan, metric and baseline map. It is suggested that this
         information should be considered in the appeal decision to address the Council’s
         second and third reasons for refusal.
5.       The Procedural Guide to Planning Appeals – England states that the appeal
         process should not be used to evolve proposals and is clear that revisions
         intended to overcome reasons for refusal should normally be tested through a
         fresh application. I have had regard to the degree of engagement of all parties and
         the interests of fairness. Given the further information does not fundamentally alter
         the appeal proposal, and that the Council have had opportunity to comment on the
         additional information, I have accepted its submission and taken account of this
         evidence.
6.       The Council has confirmed that the PEA is sufficient to overcome the second
         reason for refusal, subject to the imposition of appropriate conditions and I see no
         reason to disagree. I therefore do not address this matter in the reasoning below.
1
    Arbtech 09/03/2026

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008292


7.     Consequently, the main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on biodiversity with particular regard to
                biodiversity net gain (BNG).
Reasons
Character and appearance
8.     Policy 1 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010-2030 (LP) outlines the
       Councils approach to sustainable development whilst Policy 2 provides the local
       spatial strategy. This directs that new development should provide a sustainable
       approach to accommodating growth, providing a well-balanced mix of economic,
       social and environmental benefits. The Policy further seeks to support the
       expansion of existing businesses and the indigenous businesses of agriculture,
       fishing and mining.
9.     Nevertheless, LP Policy 2, in conjunction with LP policies 12 and 23 also requires
       that development respects and enhances the quality of place, respecting the
       special character of Cornwall and ensuring that the design of development is high
       quality and demonstrates a cultural, physical and aesthetic understanding of its
       location.
10. Moreover, LP Policy 5 seeks to ensure a continued supply of employment land
    subject to certain criteria. In the countryside, the Policy requires that the proposal
    be of a scale appropriate to its location or demonstrate an overriding locational and
    business need to be in that location such as farm diversification.
11. The appeal site is in an open countryside location within the Cornwall Landscape
    Character Area CCA10: Carnmenellis (LCA). The character of the surrounding
    area accords with that of the LCA, being one of open undulating plateau, with a
    varied field pattern including small fields within a medieval landscape of anciently
    enclosed land bounded by Cornish hedges or hedgerow. The appeal site is an
    integral part of this open rural landscape where the LCA characteristics can be
    readily appreciated, with the site positively contributing to the surrounding
    landscape character.
12. The proposed building would have a simple utilitarian appearance, with a steel roof
    and timber clad elevations. Whilst the access and hardstanding are not unduly
    prominent, I observed that the proposal would be seen as a singular and eye-
    catching building within the exposed open landscape it is located, separate from
    any existing farmstead, in close proximity to, and clearly visible from the highway
    and an adjacent public footpath.
13. Even if modest in height and not requiring foundations, the scale of the building
    would be a visually intrusive and incongruous feature resulting in significant harm
    to the landscape value of the area. This harm would not be substantially lessened
    by the appellants orchard and hedge planting. Whilst it may provide some
    screening when mature, the building would still be visible through the access and
    gaps in foliage, and any future hedgerow maintenance and pruning would result in
    the proposal being further evident, particularly following leaf fall during the winter
    months.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6008292


14. To conclude, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the area
    and be contrary to LP policies 1, 2, 5, 12, 23 and Policy C1 of the Climate
    Emergency Development Plan Document 2023. As well as the purposes of which I
    have previously outlined, these policies seek to ensure development maintains
    Cornwall’s enduring distinctiveness and maintain and enhance its distinctive
    natural and historic character.
Biodiversity
15. BNG is a mandatory requirement of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country
    Planning Act 1990 (TCPA) (as inserted by Schedule 14 of the Environment Act
    2021). CEDPD Policy G2 also requires that all proposals must achieve a minimum
    10% BNG.
16. Whilst not submitted as part of the application, the BNG evidence submitted with
    the appeal provide for a baseline which does not include the hardstanding present
    on the site and as indicated in the submitted plans. It is stated by the Council, and
    not refuted, that the area of hardstanding was laid in 2024.
17. Furthermore, the baseline covers land over and above the appeal site, being that
    included within the blue outline. Taking into account the areas covered by the
    reports, there are inconsistencies between the BNG evidence and PEA in relation
    to location of watercourses and priority woodland.
18. Due to the lack of degradation information that is required due to the laying of the
    hardstanding, as well as inconsistencies with the habitats outlined in the PEA, I
    cannot be sure that the BNG documentation before me provides an accurate
    baseline. Therefore, it is not clear whether appropriate and sufficient BNG would
    be secured or to conclude that the BNG objective would be met and the BNG
    condition is capable of being successfully discharged.
19. Consequently, there is insufficient information before me to conclude that the
    proposal would have an acceptable effect on biodiversity with particular regard to
    BNG, or that it would be in accordance with Schedule 7A of the TCPA, as set out
    above. The proposal would be contrary to LP policies 1 and 23 and CEDPD Policy
    G2. These policies seek, amongst other things, to deliver sustainable development
    and ensure biodiversity thrives by providing sufficient and appropriate BNG.
Other Matters
20. Environmental and economic reasons have been outlined as to why the appellant
    is seeking to commence mushroom production in this specific location. Whilst
    utilising land that is already in the ownership of the appellant could lower overhead
    costs, I have no substantive evidence that such costs would render a business
    unviable, or indeed, whilst an estimate of value of annual fresh food produce has
    been provided, substantive details of contracts or agreements and therefore
    projected income.
21. Nor, aside from financial benefits to the appellant, has it been demonstrated that
    the particular location is operationally essential for the type of development
    proposed. Consequently, I have insufficient evidence to demonstrate there is an
    overriding locational and business need for the proposal to be in the location of the
    appeal site.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008292


22. Framework Policy S5 supports development outside of settlements for agriculture
    horticulture or forestry, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects. Moreover, the Framework at policies E2 and
    E4 supports rural business development and highlights substantial weight should
    be given to the benefits for domestic food production.
23. Some environmental, social and economic benefits would flow from the
    development. The proposal includes the use of a renewable energy source, could
    reduce levels of organic material sent to landfill, help conserve freshwater
    resources, result in shorter supply chains and produce nutrient-dense food. The
    proposal would also provide employment opportunities, strengthen local food
    security and supply local businesses and community groups, and potentially allow
    educational activities to take place.
24. Notwithstanding, I have not been presented with any substantive evidence of the
    breadth of such benefits and given the scope and scale of the development
    including associated likely level of employment, and in giving substantial weight to
    the benefits for domestic food production, I find such benefits are likely to be
    modest.
25. Against these benefits, the proposal would be contrary to the provisions of
    Framework Policy N2, which seeks to improve the natural environment. It would
    also be contrary to the development plan, when read as a whole, to which, given
    the relevant policies consistency with the Framework and the level of harm
    identified, I afford substantial weight.
26. Finally, even if the proposal would not result in highway safety concerns, or harm
    to any persons living conditions due to noise or odour, these are neutral factors
    which do not weigh in favour of the proposal.
Conclusion
27. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposed development would conflict
    with the development plan, read as a whole. No material considerations,
    individually or cumulatively, indicate that a decision should be taken otherwise
    than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



S Harrington
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
