Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 August 2026
by F Leung BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008247
18 Manland Way, Harpenden, Hertfordshire AL5 4QS
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr Earl Thomas against the decision of St Albans City & District Council.
    The application Ref is 5/2025/1609.
    The development proposed is the erection of one 1-bedroom detached dwelling house.

Decision
1.    The appeal is invalid, and no further action will be taken on it.
Preliminary Matters
2.    During the course of the appeal, I raised queries with the main parties concerning
      its validity. Both parties were given an opportunity to comment, and further
      correspondence was subsequently exchanged. I have taken all the comments
      received into account.
Reasons
3.    Under Article 7(1A) of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management
      Procedure) (England) Order 2015 (the DMPO), an application for planning
      permission must be accompanied by specified information relating to the
      biodiversity gain condition. This includes a statement as to whether the applicant
      believes that planning permission, if granted, would be subject to that condition
      and, where the applicant believes that it would not, the reasons for that belief.
      Where the applicant believes that the biodiversity gain condition would apply, the
      application must also be accompanied by a completed biodiversity metric
      calculation tool showing the biodiversity value of the onsite habitat, together with
      the other information specified in Article 7(1A)(c).
4.    In this case, the appellant originally indicated on the application form that the ‘de
      minimis’ exemption applied. However, the justification provided appears to have
      been incorrect. During the appeal, this matter was clarified with the main parties,
      and there is no dispute between them that the appeal proposal is not exempt from
      the biodiversity gain condition.
5.    As no relevant exemption applied to the appeal proposal, the application was
      required to be accompanied by the information specified in Article 7(1A)(c) of the
      DMPO. However, a completed biodiversity metric calculation tool and the other
      biodiversity information required by the DMPO were not submitted with the
      application.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008247


6.    I acknowledge that the Council accepted and validated the application. However,
      the Council’s position on its validity is not binding on the Secretary of State. As the
      application submitted to the Council did not meet the requirements of Article 7 of
      the DMPO, I consider that it was invalid.
Conclusion
7.    Section 79(6) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the Act) provides that
      if, before or during the determination of an appeal, the Secretary of State forms the
      opinion that, having regard to sections 70 and 72(1) of the Act, the development
      order and any directions given under that order, planning permission for that
      development could not have been granted by the local planning authority, the
      Secretary of State may decline to determine the appeal or to proceed with the
      determination.
8.    For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal is invalid. I am therefore
      not in a position to progress matters or proceed to consider the planning merits of
      the case. Accordingly, I find the appeal to be invalid and propose to take no further
      action.

F Leung
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
