Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 June 2026 by S Jamieson BA (Hons) MPlan MRTPI
Decision by S Brook BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008013
5 Marshalls, Rochford, Essex SS4 1SP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Madalina Koriasev against the decision of Rochford District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00055/FUL.
•   The development proposed is a loft conversion with front and rear dormers, new front porch and bay
    window.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The most recent iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published in August 2026. With regard to the main issues of the
   appeal, the relevant policies are not materially different from the previous iteration
   of the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further
   consultation with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective
   cases would not be prejudiced.
Main Issues
4. The Council considers that the proposed alterations to the front elevation,
   comprising the porch, bay window and front dormer, would have an acceptable
   effect on the character and appearance of the area. Given the design, scale and
   siting of these elements in the context of the host dwelling and surrounding
   development, I agree.
5. Consequently, the main issues are:
         •   the effect of the proposed rear dormer upon the character and appearance of
             the area: and
         •   whether the proposed development would be provided with adequate parking
             provision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008013


Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and appearance
6. The appeal dwelling is modest, semi-detached bungalow that is set back from the
   road by a lawn and driveway. There is much commonality in the age, style and
   scale of properties on Marshalls and the surrounding residential estate. There is
   also a predominance of roof level alterations, including the addition of dormer
   windows to the front and rear of properties. Such additions are however generally
   contained entirely within the roof slope of the host dwelling and set away from the
   ridge and eaves. This ensures dormers do not unacceptably dominate the host
   dwelling and gives order and consistency to the local roofscape.
7. The proposed rear dormer would be set in from the sides of the roof and set down
   slightly from its ridge. Nevertheless, it would occupy a substantial area of the rear
   roof slope, extending down to the eaves, including over a flat roof single storey
   extension. Consequently, it would appear excessive in height and depth resulting in
   a bulky addition to the roof that would be disproportionate compared to the modest
   size of its host. Notwithstanding the use of matching materials, the dormer would
   have a discordant appearance that would fail to suitably assimilate with the appeal
   dwelling and the wider area.
8. While this dormer would be contained to the rear of the site, it would be visible from
   the rear windows and gardens of neighbouring dwellings, as well as from the street
   through gaps between houses on Marshalls, Wheatley Close and Ashcombe. As
   such, its location to the rear with more limited public views does not negate the
   need for good design.
9. I do not have the full details of the examples of dormer windows and house
   extensions cited by the appellant and therefore I cannot be certain of the planning
   circumstances in each case. Nevertheless, none of these examples seem directly
   comparable to the appeal scheme. Despite some variation in the surrounding built
   form, these limited examples do not define the character of the area, nor do they
   justify the harm I have identified.
10. For these reasons, the proposed rear dormer would have a harmful effect upon the
    character and appearance of the area. In this regard it would be contrary to Policy
    CP1 of the Rochford District Council – Core Strategy Adopted Version (2011) and
    Policy DM1 of the Rochford District Council – Development Management Plan
    (2014) (DM) which require, amongst other things, that developments are of good,
    high-quality design and promote the character of the locality, including scale and
    form appropriate to the locality.
11. It would also be inconsistent with the design guidance contained in the Rochford
    District Council Supplementary Planning Document 2 – Housing Design (2007),
    which requires such windows to respect the scale, form and character of the
    existing dwelling, as well as the design principles of the Framework insofar as it
    requires that development proposals respond to their context so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings.
Parking provision
12. The proposal would result in a 3-bedroom dwelling. DM Policy DM30 requires car
    parking to be provided in accordance with the latest good practice guidance. In this


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008013


     case, this is the Essex Planning Officers Association Parking Guidance – Part 1:
     Parking Standards Design and Good Practice (2024) (the Parking Guidance).
     Appendix A of this document identifies the appeal site as having a ‘moderate’
     connectivity level, where a minimum of two car parking spaces should be provided
     for dwellings of two bedrooms or more.
13. The existing driveway is able to accommodate one parking space. While the
    appellant indicates that the appeal property has physical capacity to accommodate
    two parking spaces, this is not shown on the plans and no changes to the off-street
    parking provision are proposed. The proposed development would not therefore
    accord with the requirements of the Parking Guidance and, in turn, Policy DM30.
14. Nevertheless, from what I saw, there are no parking restrictions on Marshalls and
    there is ample on-street parking provision in the locality. Even if an additional car
    were to be parked on the road, in the absence of any evidence to suggest that
    there are any highway safety issues arising from on-street parking, or any issues
    relating to local parking stress, I am unconvinced that an additional car parked on
    the road would pose a risk to highway safety or result in harm to the living
    conditions of occupiers of neighbouring properties. Consequently, the proposed
    development would be provided with adequate parking provision.
Other Matters
15. I recognise that the proposal would result in a larger, family-sized dwelling.
    However, the same or similar benefits could be achieved through a less harmful
    scheme. A lack of harm with regard to neighbouring amenity is a neutral matter
    which does not carry weight for or against the appeal scheme.
Conclusion and Recommendation
16. The proposal would be provided with adequate parking provision. However, it
    would cause harm to the character and appearance of the area. The proposal
    would therefore conflict with the development plan when read as a whole and
    material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be reached other
    than in accordance with it. Consequently, I recommend that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Jamieson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
17. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

S Brook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
