Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by K Lancaster BA (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008707
1 Gould Road, Feltham, Hounslow TW14 8AB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Grewal against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Hounslow.
•    The application Ref is P/2026/0295.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of the existing family house (C3) to a House in
     Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis) with associated cycle and refuse storage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is whether the appeal site is a suitable location for a house in
       multiple occupancy (HMO), with particular regard to its accessibility to town centre
       facilities and public transport links.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site, 1 Gould Road, comprises a large, two-storey detached house,
       with an attached garage. It is located within a predominantly residential area,
       although it is close to Staines Road, which contains a parade of shops and other
       commercial uses.
5.     The proposal seeks planning permission for the change of use of an existing
       dwellinghouse into a House of Multiple Occupation (HMO) for a maximum of eight
       occupants.
6.     Policy SC10 of the London Borough of Hounslow Local Plan 2015–2030, adopted
       September 2015 (the Local Plan) requires that HMOs be located within convenient
       walking distance of town centre facilities and have good public transport links.
       Paragraph 3.4 of the London Borough of Hounslow Houses in Multiple Occupation
       Supplementary Planning Document 2017 (the SPD) states that HMOs should have
       at least a good Public Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL 4) and be within 400
       metres of town centre facilities. It defines town centre facilities as those found in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008707


       Metropolitan and District Centres, specifically Hounslow, Chiswick, Brentford, and
       Feltham.
7.     The appeal site has a PTAL Rating of 1b, which indicates very poor accessibility to
       public transport. Whilst I have had regard to the appellant’s statement which
       indicates it is well served by buses into Hounslow Town Centre (Metropolitan
       Centre), Heathrow Airport, West Middlesex Hospitals, Staines Town Centre and
       Railway Station, there is limited supporting evidence to demonstrate the location,
       frequency or routes of such services. Therefore, given the site has been given a
       PTAL Rating of 1b, I find that it has not been demonstrated that the appeal site
       would have access to good public transport links.
8.     The appellant also states that the appeal site is located within a convenient
       walking distance of shops and amenities along Staines Road which forms part of
       Bedfont Town Centre. Whilst I acknowledge that it is located close to a row shops
       and facilities on Staines Road, the appeal site is located approximately 1.4km from
       the nearest designated Metropolitan or District Town Centre. Accordingly, the site
       would not provide access to town centre facilities within convenient walking
       distance.
9.     I have found that the appeal site is not within convenient walking distance of
       designated town centre facilities and that it has not been demonstrated to benefit
       from good public transport accessibility. As a result, future occupiers would be
       likely to rely to a greater extent on private car journeys to access employment,
       shopping, services and other day-to-day facilities. This would conflict with Policy
       SC10 of the Local Plan and the objectives of the SPD, which seek to ensure that
       HMOs are located where residents can readily access services and facilities by
       sustainable modes of transport.
10. My attention has been drawn to the Council's decision to grant planning
    permission for the intensification of an existing HMO at 55 Burns Way1, as well as
    the appeal decisions relating to 112 Hogarth Gardens2 and 88 Greencroft Road,
    Hounslow3. The appellant states that these examples demonstrate that HMOs can
    be found to be acceptable in locations with relatively low PTAL ratings where there
    is access to public transport and local services. However, I have not been provided
    with the full details of these cases, including the site-specific circumstances.
    Consequently, I cannot be satisfied that these examples are directly comparable to
    the proposal before me. In any event, each proposal must be determined on its
    own merits.
11. For these reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal is not in suitable location
    for a house in multiple occupancy (HMO), with particular regard to its accessibility
    to town centre facilities and public transport links. Thus, the proposal is contrary to
    Policy SC10 of the Local Plan, the aims of which are set out above. It would also
    be contrary to the guidance set out in the SPD.
Other Matters
12. I acknowledge that the proposal would not result in an overconcentration of HMOs
    in the area and would generate activity comparable to that of a large family
    dwelling. I have also had regard to the evidence submitted in relation to parking
1
  Planning Application Ref: P/2016/1978
2
  Appeal Ref: APP/F5540/W/17/3168826
3
  Appeal Ref: APP/F5540/C/17/3187009


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008707


       demand, cycle and refuse storage provision. I acknowledge that the
       accommodation would meet the HMO space standards, and the extent of private
       amenity space to be provided. The Council has raised no specific concerns in
       relation to these matters. However, the absence of harm in relation to these
       matters neither weighs for or against the proposal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
13. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Within
    settlements, Policy S4 of the Framework indicates that development should be
    approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    of the Framework.
14. The proposal would contribute to the range of housing available within the
    borough. It would also make efficient use of an existing residential property with
    satisfactory provision of communal facilities, outdoor amenity space, cycle parking
    and refuse storage. These benefits weigh in favour of the proposal. However,
    given that no additional dwelling would be created and the development would
    comprise a relatively modest addition to the borough's housing choice, I attach
    limited weight to these benefits.
15. Against this, the proposal would not be in a suitable location with regard to its
    accessibility to town centre facilities and public transport links. As a result, future
    occupiers would be likely to rely to a greater extent on private car journeys to
    access employment, shopping, services and other day-to-day facilities, which
    would be at odds with the Council’s objectives to ensure that HMOs are located
    where residents can readily access services and facilities by sustainable modes of
    transport. This is contrary to the Framework’s principles for the creation of well-
    designed places by providing good connections to the wider settlement (or those
    nearby), and prioritise walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport, as set out in
    Policy DP3(2)(a) of the Framework. Furthermore, Policy DP3(3) of the Framework
    states that development proposals should be refused if they conflict with these
    principles. Therefore, I attach substantial weight to this harm.
16. There would also be conflict with Policy TR3 of the Framework which seeks to
    ensure development is located where it can support sustainable patterns of
    movement, enable good accessibility for different users and make the most of
    existing and proposed transport infrastructure. Therefore, I attach substantial
    weight to this harm.
17. Taking these points together, the benefits of granting planning permission would
    be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
18. In conclusion, the development would conflict with the development plan taken as
    a whole and there are no material considerations, of sufficient weight which
    indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the
    appeal is dismissed.

K Lancaster
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
