Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 September 2026
by J Smith MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008177
Land to the West of Leicester Road (B6047), Leicester Road, Market Harborough,
Leicestershire LE16 7QT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Seb Barnett of Revolver Construction against the decision of Harborough
     District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01154/PIP.
•    The development proposed is application for Permission in Principle for the erection of a minimum of
     5 and a maximum of 9 dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for application for
       Permission in Principle for the erection of a minimum of 5 and a maximum of 9
       dwellings at Land to the West of Leicester Road (B6047), Leicester Road, Market
       Harborough, Leicestershire LE16 7QT in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref 25/01154/PIP.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have utilised the description of development as found on the decision notice,
       rather than that provided on the application form. The reason for this is that the
       Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) sets out that the amount of development
       proposed must be expressed as a range, indicating the minimum and maximum
       net number of dwellings. The description of development given in the application
       form did not do this.
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
       stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
       is suitable in-principle and the second (technical details consent) stage is when the
       detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
       these two stages.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development. These considerations, whilst appearing
       as limited, can encompass various issues which relate to these matters. The
       Council’s decision notice provides two reasons for which permission in principle
       was refused.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008177


       In summary, these matters relate to:
       •   the effect of the proposal upon highway safety; and,
       •   the effect of a development upon the setting of the Gran Union Canal
           Conservation Area and its effect upon a Non-Designated Heritage Asset.
       It is not inappropriate for the Council to have considered these matters, which are
       fundamental to whether a development would be acceptable in principle, based on
       location, proposed use and the amount of development to be considered.
Main Issue
5.     This main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
       regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development,
       following the matters listed above.
Reasons
Highway Safety
6.     Whilst the application is made for permission in principle, the appellant advises
       that the proposed development would be accessed via Leicester Road (B6047).
       Leicester Road is a crucial arterial route that traverses Market Harborough and
       leads northwards from the settlement towards Melton Mowbray, in addition to
       meeting the spur north-westwards towards Leicester along the A6.
7.     Leicester Road is a single carriageway road which has a 50mph speed limit across
       the front of the appeal site. As previously noted, this is a crucial arterial route
       between Melton Mowbray, Market Harborough and Leicester which is therefore
       highly likely to be subject to high volumes of traffic moving past the appeal site at
       the high speed of 50mph.
8.     The appeal site is currently an undeveloped field that generates little, if any,
       vehicular traffic. The proposed development would introduce up to nine dwellings
       and, consequently, a noticeable increase in vehicle movements to and from the
       site. Given the scale of the proposal, the additional traffic generated would not be
       insignificant, particularly during peak travel periods, when compared with the
       existing situation. As a result, there would inevitably be greater interaction between
       vehicles and other road users, thereby increasing the potential for accidents to
       occur.
9.     During my site visit, I observed the highway layout and conditions along the
       B6047. In the vicinity of the appeal site, the road generally follows a straight
       alignment before curving gently to the left and rising slightly in a northerly direction.
       To the south, the carriageway descends and curves gradually to the left shortly
       beyond the point where the speed limit changes from 50mph to 40mph.
10. My attention is first drawn to access into the appeal site. For vehicles approaching
    from the direction of Market Harborough and turning left into the site, drivers would
    be required to reduce their speed in advance of the manoeuvre. In doing so, they
    would provide a clear indication to following traffic through progressive
    deceleration and braking, thereby allowing vehicles behind to adjust their speed
    accordingly and reducing the likelihood of rear-end collisions. The existing 40mph
    speed limit immediately prior to the site, before the transition to 50mph, further


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008177


       assists in this regard, as drivers would already be travelling at a relatively lower
       speed when approaching the access. Whilst I acknowledge that some motorists
       may exceed the posted speed limit, enforcement of such matters rests with the
       relevant highway and policing authorities.
11. In relation to right-turn movements into the appeal site, I observed during my site
    visit that a substantial right-turn filter lane is already provided to facilitate access to
    the neighbouring car dealership. This lane extends along much of the appeal site's
    frontage. Although the current proposal seeks permission in principle only, it
    appears likely that this existing lane could be utilised or, if necessary, extended
    northwards to accommodate right-turn movements into the site.
12. In such circumstances, vehicles waiting to turn right would be able to wait within
    the dedicated filter lane until a suitable gap in northbound traffic becomes
    available. This arrangement would remove waiting vehicles from the main
    carriageway, enabling through traffic to continue unimpeded. The principal
    exception would arise if the filter lane were to become heavily congested, causing
    queuing traffic to extend onto the main carriageway of the B6047. However, given
    the considerable length of the existing filter lane and the relatively limited number
    of vehicle movements likely to be generated by up to nine dwellings at any one
    time, such occurrences would be expected to be infrequent. Overall, the
    anticipated left-turn and right-turn movements into the appeal site would comprise
    routine and generally straightforward highway manoeuvres.
13. At this stage of my decision, I have had regard to the Personal Injury Collision data
    before me. This indicates that five incidents have occurred within 500 metres of
    the appeal site in either direction over the previous five years. Whilst all of these
    incidents are material considerations, most occurred at a significant distance from
    the appeal site. However, two incidents are of particular relevance.
14. The incident recorded in March 2022 is especially pertinent to my assessment of
    the proposed access from the right-turn lane into the appeal site, as it occurred
    immediately beyond the site frontage. The evidence indicates that the collision
    involved a vehicle travelling southbound within the right-turn lane and a vehicle
    travelling northbound from the direction of Market Harborough. Critically, the
    information provided does not establish whether the southbound vehicle had
    commenced its turning manoeuvre across the northbound carriageway or whether
    the northbound vehicle collided with it whilst it was waiting within the right-turn
    lane. In either scenario, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that the
    collision was attributable to an inherently unsafe access arrangement. Rather, it
    points towards the actions and judgement of the drivers involved.
15. A further incident was recorded in August 2025, approximately 80 metres south of
    the appeal site. This involved a collision between a vehicle and a pedestrian
    crossing the B6047. During my site visit, I observed that there is an absence of
    dedicated pedestrian infrastructure in this specific location. Consequently, the
    presence of a pedestrian crossing the carriageway at this point appears somewhat
    unusual and unexpected for a driver to encounter.
16. My attention now turns to the arrangements for vehicles exiting the appeal site.
    The evidence before me indicates that adequate visibility splays would be
    essential to ensure safe egress onto the B6047. This is due to the requirement of
    crossing two traffic lanes when turning right out of the appeal site in particular. In


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008177


       this regard, I have had regard to the representation submitted by Leicestershire
       County Council in its capacity as the Local Highway Authority.
17. A speed survey was undertaken along the B6047. This survey noted that to the
    north of the appeal site, vehicles travelled at approximately 47.7mph northbound
    and 49.7mph southbound. To the south of the appeal site, the 85th percentile
    speed was recorded as 47.4mph northbound and 46.2mph southbound. On the
    basis of these results, the Highway Authority advises that visibility splays of 2.4m x
    160m in both directions would be required. No substantive evidence has been
    provided to demonstrate that a lesser visibility requirement would be appropriate.
18. The evidence further indicates that the provision of these visibility splays would
    rely upon land outside the control of the appellant. No evidence has been
    submitted to demonstrate otherwise, nor is there any indication that the necessary
    land would be available for this purpose. Whilst the provision and maintenance of
    visibility splays can be secured by planning condition, it would be difficult to
    enforce and ensure compliance where the required land lies within third-party
    ownership.
19. In summary, there is no certainty that the splays could be provided in the first
    instance or maintained for the lifetime of the development. Taken together, these
    considerations lead me to conclude that the required visibility splays could not be
    secured with sufficient certainty. Consequently, this leads me the position that this
    would give rise to an unacceptable risk to highway safety for users of the B6047
    without the provision of adequate visibility splays.
20. However, the application was made for permission in principle. Whilst the
    representation made by the local highway authority at the appeal stage has been
    explored in depth, I note the response provided at the application stage. Critically,
    this response sets out the information that would be required at the technical
    details consent stage. These include a swept path analysis, a site access drawing
    with certain details provided, including an appropriate visibility splay, amongst
    other things.
21. In returning back to the matter of visibility splays and land ownership discussed
    above, these constraints do not appear to me to be so severe that there would be
    no possibility at all for this to be overcome as part of the future detailed site design
    at the technical details consent stage, given the points made by the Council with
    regard to the submission of certain information. The land which is owned by a third
    party could be acquired, or a detailed management agreement be provided prior to
    the submission of a technical details consent application in the future. I therefore
    conclude that the location is acceptable in principle with relation to highways
    matters at this permission in principle stage.
22. As previously noted in this decision, this location is absent of meaningful and
    dedicated pedestrian infrastructure. This matter is also acknowledged by an
    interested party in this appeal. However, the application is made for permission in
    principle. At this stage, commensurate with such an application, the details relating
    to highway matters is limited. Therefore, whilst such provision is limited, further
    details to explore this matter would be expected to form part of a technical details
    consent stage.
23. I therefore conclude that at this permission in principle stage, the development
    proposed would not conflict with Policies GD8 and IN2 of the Harborough Local

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008177


       Plan 2019 (LP). These policies seek for development to ensure safe, efficient and
       convenient movement of all highway users, amongst other things.
Heritage
24. The appeal site is bounded along its northern and western edges by the Grand
    Union Canal Conservation Area (CA). The appeal evidence includes a Character
    Statement, which explains that the CA extends in a linear form for approximately
    48 kilometres, running from the Northamptonshire and Leicestershire border to
    Leicester.
25. The significance of the CA lies principally in its historic role as part of the country's
    pre-railway transport network and in the survival of the physical features
    associated with that function. Constructed between 1793 and 1814, the canal
    facilitated the movement of goods across the United Kingdom and contributed to
    the economic and social development of the areas through which it passes. Within
    this locality, its historic importance is reflected in the transport of Welsh slate,
    which remains evident in the character of the surrounding built environment.
26. The conservation area's significance is also derived from its distinctive rural and
    historic setting within the Harborough District. The canal corridor retains a strong
    sense of historic character, formed not only by the waterway itself but also by
    associated features including towpaths, hedgerows, mature trees, embankments,
    cuttings and other engineered structures. Together, these elements illustrate the
    canal's historic function whilst contributing positively to its attractive agricultural
    landscape setting and its special architectural and historic interest.
27. Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires special attention to be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
    the character or appearance of that area. Policy HE9 of the National Planning
    Policy Framework (the Framework) notes that development proposals within or
    affecting the significance of conservation areas should retain the features which
    make a positive contribution to their character or appearance.
28. The appeal site also contains surviving ridge and furrow, forming part of a single
    furlong, which is identified as a non-designated heritage asset (NDHA). Ridge and
    furrow comprises a pattern of ridges and troughs created through historic
    agricultural ploughing practices. Its significance derives principally from the
    evidence it provides of the area's historic farming methods and rural character.
    Policy HE7 of the Framework states that proposals which conserve or enhance the
    significance of an NDHA should be supported. Where harm would arise, this
    should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal, with regard to the scale of
    any harm to, or loss of, the asset's significance.
29. The appeal relates to an application for permission in principle for between five
    and nine dwellings on the appeal site. The submitted plans are limited to a red line
    site location plan. As noted by the Council's Conservation Officer, there is potential
    for harm to both the CA and the NDHA through the loss of historic features.
    However, given the limited information submitted in support of a permission in
    principle application, it is difficult to undertake a detailed assessment of the extent
    of any such harm.
30. The Canal and River Trust also provided comments during the application
    process, supplementing those of the Conservation Officer. In particular, it identified

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008177


       the need for further information to enable a robust assessment of the proposal's
       effects. However, the Trust acknowledged that such matters would be more
       appropriately addressed at the technical details consent stage, where the detailed
       form, layout and design of the development would be required for consideration
       against heritage matters.
31. Therefore, having regard to the limited information submitted at the permission in
    principle stage, I find no substantive evidence that the proposed development
    would result in an unacceptable effect upon the setting, character or appearance
    of the CA, or fail to conserve the significance of the NDHA. Whilst I note the
    Council's concerns that development of between five and nine dwellings may be
    unlikely to preserve the setting of the CA and could result in harm to the remaining
    ridge and furrow, no detailed evidence has been provided that would enable a
    robust assessment of such effects at this stage. Such matters are more
    appropriately considered at the technical details consent stage. On the evidence
    before me, I therefore find no demonstrated harm to either heritage asset at this
    stage.
32. I have had regard to the appeal decisions submitted by the Council alongside its
    Statement of Case. Those decisions were provided principally to demonstrate that
    the Council's approach to determining the application was justified in relation to the
    matters that comprise the main issues in this appeal. As set out in the Preliminary
    Matters section of this decision, I am satisfied that it was not inappropriate for the
    Council to have considered those matters when reaching its decision.
33. Turning to the relevance of the cited appeal decisions to this main issue, a number
    involve heritage considerations. However, the material before me is limited to the
    appeal decisions themselves and does not include the supporting evidence that
    was available to the respective Inspectors. Consequently, I cannot be certain of
    what evidence was before each Inspector in those decisions.
34. Moreover, whilst some of the cited decisions suggest that the presence of
    development can give rise to unacceptable effects on heritage assets at the
    permission in principle stage, the heritage assets in this appeal are materially
    different from those before me. In particular, the Grand Union Canal and ridge and
    furrow elements are specific to this site and were not features of the cited cases.
    Appeal decisions are capable of providing useful guidance where similar issues
    arise. However, each case must be determined on its own facts and merits.
35. To conclude, the proposed development at this permission in principle stage would
    not harm the setting of the CA, or would fail to conserve the NDHA. As such, the
    proposal would not conflict with Policies GD8 and HC1 of the LP. Collectively,
    these policies require development which affects a heritage asset to be permitted
    where it protects, conserves or enhances the significance, character, appearance
    and setting of the asset, amongst other things. Critically, there is no evidence at
    this stage to demonstrate the proposal would not meet these requirements.
Other Matters
36. Comments have been received from an interested party on matters relating to
    wildlife and ecology. Critically, the Ecologist did not object to the proposed
    development. They noted that their comments are reflective of a permission in
    principle application and that further information would be required at the technical


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6008177


       details consent stage. I find no reason to disagree with this assessment. As such,
       these matters would be required to be provided at the next application stage.
Conditions
37. The PPG indicates that it is not possible to impose conditions as the terms of any
    permission in principle must only include the site location, type of development and
    amount. Without having to specify such by way of a condition, the default duration
    of permission in principle is 3 years, with any technical details consent application
    to be determined during this period.
Conclusion
38. For the reasons given and taking all material considerations into account, the
    appeal should be allowed.



J Smith
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
