Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026 by J Reed MPlan MRTPI
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008484
Woodlands, West Park Road, Bensham, Gateshead NE8 4SP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Ayaz and Saima Akram against the decision of Gateshead
    Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is DC/25/01230/HHA.
•   The development proposed is changes to front boundary wall and part of the lawn in the front garden
    to be replaced with a hard surface.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). It includes changes with respect to heritage matters
   with specific regard to the degrees of harm. That said, the actions of finding harm to
   a designated heritage asset is not materially different from the previous iteration of
   the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further
   consultation with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective
   cases would not be prejudiced.
4. From my site visit I saw that the development had been completed. The
   development appears to be in accordance with what is shown on the submitted
   plans, and I have dealt with the appeal on this basis.
5. S72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   requires when determining proposals in conservation areas that special attention
   shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
   appearance of that area.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are 1) the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the Saltwell Conservation Area; and 2) the highway impacts of the
   development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008484


Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and appearance
7. The appeal site is situated within the Saltwell Conservation Area (CA) and is also
   identified as a Non-Designated Heritage Asset (NDHA). The CA covers the 19th
   century leafy suburb which surrounds Saltwell Park. The area is distinctive through
   the diversity in its tree coverage as well as its variety of architecture. The area
   consists of large Edwardian sandstone villas and Victorian polychromatic brick
   houses in either semi-detached or terraced formations. The boundary treatments,
   including stone block walls, low brick walls, timber fencing, iron railings and
   hedges, further contribute to the strong sense of urban enclosure to the streets.
   Given the above, I find that the significance of the CA insofar as it relates to the
   appeal to be primarily associated with the architectural and historic importance of
   the cohesive front boundary treatments and the verdant gardens they enclose.
8. I observed on my site visit that original front boundary treatments have generally
   been retained with the original architecture and urban design of the area well
   preserved. Consequently, changes to an individual building may have a substantial
   impact on the collective character of the wider street scene. Moreover, given their
   architectural importance and the positive contribution they make to townscape
   character, the retention of original boundary treatments is key to maintain this
   character.
9. Although the CA is a densely developed townscape, the design approach allows
   properties to be individually read and results in a sense of spaciousness due to
   their verdant front gardens that are readily visible from the public realm. The
   modest openings in the boundary walls are part of this design approach and
   contribute positively to this ‘sense of place’.
10. The removal of a large portion of the boundary wall has eroded the historic fabric
    and uniform development pattern of the pairs of semi-detached dwellings in this
    part of the CA. The development has disrupted this original design and has
    diminished the local distinctiveness. This has been detrimental to the local
    character and history, including the surrounding built environment, failing to
    maintain the areas strong sense of place.
11. The development incorporates sleeper style timber lengths which run perpendicular
    with the retained section of the wall. Whilst the use of a traditional material such as
    this can often be successfully integrated within heritage assets, its use here
    adjoining the retained wall results in a jarring appearance where the timber is seen
    as dominant and incongruous. This would be particularly the case when there is no
    vehicle on the driveway. I note from my site visit that the boundary treatments
    which positively contribute are those which incorporate returns either in the same
    material, or a material to complement that used in the primary front boundary. In
    contrast the appeal development has disrupted the visual rhythm and has
    diminished the sense of enclosure to the street. This is further exacerbated by the
    additional hardstanding which has significantly reduced the verdant appearance of
    the front garden. Due to the prominence of the development in the street scene, it
    has resulted in harm to the CA as a whole. The harm to the character and
    appearance of the CA, and thereby its significance, is a matter to which I give great
    weight.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008484


12. I am mindful that there is a larger opening in the boundary treatment with
    accompanying hard standing serving the dwelling at the end of the grouping on
    West Park Road. However, there is little evidence to indicate that this double
    driveway was not part of the original layout due to its location in front of a double
    garage to the side of a dwelling.
13. In regard to the wooden fence boundary treatment serving the house on the corner
    of West Park Road and Saltwell Road. This fence clearly serves a side/rear garden
    in contrast to the front gardens of the other properties on West Park Road.
14. Furthermore, as outlined above, the front boundary treatments and verdant
    gardens on West Park Road retain their original form and appearance unlike the
    appeal development, and in order to prevent further erosion the Council introduced
    an Article 4 Direction to prevent this from happening.
15. Caselaw1 has established that a conservation area can be preserved if altered by
    development. However, this does not provide justification for inappropriate
    development which disrupts the conservation area’s character and appearance.
16. The appellants have contested that the appeal development enhances the
    grandeur of the appeal dwelling which the previous arrangement failed to do so.
    However, for the reasons set out the development fails to preserve or enhance the
    character and appearance of the CA.
17. I note the appellants case that the provision of additional parking at the appeal site
    will improve the visual amenity of the area by reducing the level of parking on the
    highway. However, as there are no parking restrictions to West Park Road there is
    nothing preventing individuals that do not reside at the appeal site from continuing
    to park on the highway.
18. I also acknowledge the appellants’ willingness to agree to conditions to amend the
    surface material of the driveway to something more appropriate. However, whilst
    this would improve the character and appearance of this element of the
    development it would not alleviate the harm I have identified in regard to the loss of
    the front boundary treatment.
19. In the context of the Framework, taking into account the nature and scale of the
    development, I consider the harm to be moderate, but nevertheless of considerable
    importance and weight. Policy HE6 of the Framework advises that where a
    development proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
    benefits resulting from the proposal. In undertaking this balance, I have taken
    account of the Planning Practice Guidance which outlines what constitutes a public
    benefit.
20. Policy HE6 also states that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a
    matter of considerable importance and weight. The appellants consider that the
    development represents the efficient use of urban land by increasing parking at the
    appeal site as well as promoting the sustainability credentials of the development. I
    am not, however, convinced that the use of this part of the site surpasses the
    previous arrangement in efficiency, and that the sustainability aspects are not
    achievable by less harmful means. The public benefits put forward therefore attract
1
    South Lakeland District Council v Secretary of State for the Environment [1992] UKHL 17



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  3
Appeal Decision 6008484


     limited weight and are not sufficient to outweigh the harm identified and the great
     weight I apply to the CA’s conservation in line with the Framework.
21. Therefore, I conclude that the development does not preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the CA. This is contrary to Policy CS15 of the Planning
    for the Future Core Strategy and Urban Core Plan for Gateshead and Newcastle
    upon Tyne 2010-2030 (2015) (the CS) and Policies MSGP24 and MSGP25 of the
    Making Spaces for Growing Places Local Plan Document for Gateshead (2021)
    (the LP). These require, among other things, that proposals preserve and enhance
    the character, appearance and setting of heritage assets.
Highway impacts
22. The appeal site is located midway along West Park Road and is separated from the
    highway by a footpath. The development has resulted in the removal of a large
    portion of the front boundary treatment which has, in some respects, resulted in an
    improved visibility from the appeal dwelling’s driveway than the previous
    arrangement. As a result, I am satisfied that the new arrangement is satisfactory in
    providing adequate visibility for highway users.
23. Therefore, even though the front boundary treatment exceeds the recommended
    height outlined by the Council, satisfactory visibility can be achieved and there is
    not an adverse effect on pedestrian safety as a consequence, as required by the
    National Planning Policy Framework.
24. I also note that the Council have stated they would not support a dropped kerb
    application if it was forthcoming. However, this is a matter outside the planning
    process.
25. The Council have referred to the conflict with Policy MSGP15 in relation to the
    apparent overprovision of parking for the development. The development has
    resulted in a net gain of one parking space serving the property. The policy seeks
    to provide a level of parking necessary to secure the safe and effective operation of
    the development and refers to the Council’s parking standards in Appendix 4a. The
    standard, however, relates to new residential development which is not the case
    with the appeal development. Using the language of the policy, I do not consider
    that the parking prohibits the safe and effective operation of the site. This does not
    lead to demonstrable harm to highway safety.
26. I therefore conclude that the development is not harmful to highway safety. The
    development is therefore in accordance with Policy CS13 of the CS and MSGP15
    of the LP. These seek amongst other things for development to connect safely to
    the existing transport network.
27. The development also accords with the Framework and its requirements for
    development to provide safe and suitable access to the site.
Other Matters
28. Turning to the appellant’s case that the development helps prevent the obstruction
    of the pavement from cables relating to on street electric vehicle charging, it is not
    clear why this was not possible under the previous arrangement at the appeal site.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008484


29. I note the appellant’s argument that parking a motorhome or a caravan on a single
    width driveway would have more of a visual impact. However, these are moveable
    vehicles whereas in contrast the development is a permanent addition to the CA.
30. Policy S4 of the National Planning Policy Framework (The Framework) states that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework. The
    appellant has set out the benefits of the scheme including but not limited to
    facilitating electric charging and removing vehicles from the highway. However, the
    benefits before me have limited weight and they are substantially outweighed by
    the adverse effects when considered against the decision-making policies of the
    Framework which include a requirement that developments respond to their context
    and integrate and enhance their surroundings.
Conclusion and Recommendation
31. Whilst I have found in favour of the appellant on the second main issue, this is an
    absence of harm and thus a neutral matter. There is conflict with the development
    on the first main issue and there are no material considerations which justify
    granting permission contrary to the development plan in this case. I therefore
    recommend the appeal be dismissed.

J Reed
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
32. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
