Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by N Duff BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008026
3 Kimberley Street, Wigan WN6 7AJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Adam Mohamoodally against the decision of Wigan Metropolitan Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is A/25/099971/FULL.
•    The development proposed was originally described as Change of use from a C3 residential dwelling
     to a C4 small HMO, providing accommodation for 5 single occupants. The proposed work will include
     internal layout modifications, with all new rooms featuring en-suite facilities and a shared kitchen and
     dining area for all occupants. The development will be carried out in compliance with all relevant
     building regulations and planning policies.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal site is within an area covered by an Article 4(1) Direction (A4D) for the
       removal of permitted development rights for the change of use from Use Class C3
       dwelling houses to C4 Small Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs), on a borough
       wide basis, which came into effect on 31st August 2025.
3.     Additional information relating to parking provision has been provided as part of
       the appeal by the appellant, the Council has confirmed in its statement of case that
       this information was not before the Council when it made its decision and that
       statutory consultees in relation to Highway Safety have not had the opportunity to
       comment. However, the Council had the opportunity to liaise with those parties
       before making comments, therefore I am satisfied that interested parties have had
       an opportunity to and have commented on the information and therefore would not
       be prejudiced by me taking it into account.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues of the appeal are:
           •    The effect of the development on the living conditions of neighbouring
                residents and on the wider area with particular regard to external space and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008026


                parking provision.

           •    Whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living
                conditions for future occupiers with regard to noise, odour, privacy and
                outlook.
Reasons
Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
6.     The appeal site is a mid-terrace property located on Kimberley Street, a residential
       terraced street which is not a through road, and is located near to the junction with
       Park Road.
7.     The appeal proposal is for the conversion of the property from a two-bedroom
       dwellinghouse to a 5 person 5-bedroom HMO, which from what I have seen and
       read has been carried out. The site has a certificate of lawfulness for the proposed
       use of the property1, however due to the change in circumstances following this
       regarding the implementation of the A4D the proposal seeks to regularise the
       change of use.
8.     Policy CP17 of the Wigan Local Plan Core Strategy (CS) seeks to ensure that new
       development is planned and designed so that it does not have an unacceptable
       adverse impact on amenity and quality of life. The Houses in Multiple Occupation
       Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) states that in order to help ensure
       mixed and balanced communities and to ensure that the development does not
       have an unacceptable adverse impact on amenity and quality of life, the Council
       will apply three measures: a concentration threshold; restricting the sandwiching of
       properties and restricting three adjacent HMOs.
9.     The Council is satisfied that it would meet all the above criteria in the SPD
       regarding the concentration of HMOs, which seeks to protect amenity and quality
       of life and that the proposal accords with development plan policies which support
       sustainable residential development and housing mix. However, several
       representations were received outlining concerns with HMOs in the area and some
       in relation to this property and the A4D report sets out the main concerns with
       HMOs in the Borough, which includes negative changes to the character of the
       area.
10. Due to a greater number of individuals living independently, each likely to maintain
    different schedules, I consider that the intensity of the use of the property would
    see an increase due to the number of comings and goings at a range of times,
    than would be expected from a typical two bedroomed dwellinghouse. Therefore, it
    is reasonable to assume that some increase in noise and disturbance may be
    experienced. However, the scale of the HMO is modest and given the small size of
    the property, it could not reasonably accommodate more than the number of
    residents proposed. Given that the proposal meets the concentration thresholds
    within the SPD, I am satisfied that it would not cause a cumulative harmful effect in
    combination with other HMOs on neighbouring residents or the character of the
    wider area in this case.


1
 A/24/098218/LUCP Certificate of Lawful Development for change of use from residential dwelling
(Class C3) to a 5 person, 5 bedroom HMO (Class C4) Granted 17th February 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6008026


11. Having regard to the external amenity space, the area is very modest in size and
    due to the type and style of housing has a close relationship with neighbouring
    properties. However, based on the plans before me, and my observations, the
    yard area is a predominantly functional space to include bins and cycle storage,
    and space for drying clothes. Therefore, there would be limited remaining space
    for multiple people to congregate comfortably in the external area, and much of the
    garden would be screened by the property itself and garden walls. Therefore,
    whilst there may be some noise and disturbance generated from the external living
    area, I consider that subject to a suitable management plan together with the
    modest size of the space, that this area would not cause significant harm to the
    living conditions of neighbouring residents.
12. Regarding car parking provision, due to the location of the appeal site, it does not
    benefit from off-street parking provision. Given the character of the area with many
    residential terraced streets, car users who are residents on Kimberley Street rely
    upon on-street, car parking. The evidence before me including interested party
    comments indicates that on-street parking demand is high due to the limited
    availability of off-street parking.
13. I consider that there would most likely be an increase in car ownership following
    the change of use, due to type of development housing 5 people living
    independently. However, due to the size of the proposed HMO, this is likely to be a
    modest increase above parking demand as a two bedroomed dwellinghouse.
14. Parking along Kimberley Street is unrestricted, and at the time of my site visit,
    which was a snapshot in time and during the day, I observed that Kimberley Street
    was not heavily parked, with availability along both sides of the street. The
    appellant’s statement indicates that based on a small survey the minimum number
    of available spaces was 3. Whilst the survey is a very limited snapshot of the
    parking situation, it nevertheless provides some indication of parking availability
    along Kimberley Street at different times on different days.
15. Having regard to parking pressure being exacerbated by the day nursery and
    dance studio located off Throstle Nest Avenue, I did not observe a vehicular
    junction in use connecting the two streets. Therefore, I consider that other streets
    would be more convenient for users of these premises, than Kimberley Street.
    However, I do note that if gates between Kimberley Street and surrounding streets
    were open, pedestrian access may be possible as a cut through to Throstle Nest
    Avenue, therefore I appreciate that some parking pressure may come from these
    nearby facilities during busy times.
16. The proposal includes provision for cycle parking, and I note the site’s convenient
    proximity to services and public transport which could reduce the reliance on
    private vehicles. In addition, the evidence indicates that there are footways and
    lighting provided along roads within the local area. I note that in the Council’s
    officer report, it considers that any increase in parking demand would not be
    significant enough to result in harm to highway capacity and safety within the
    vicinity of the site, and is of the view that the proposal is acceptable in this respect.
17. Given the above, I find that whilst there may be some increased competition for
    car parking spaces, due to the level of unrestricted on-street car parking near to
    the appeal site, I do not consider that it would be of a level of significance to
    adversely affect the living conditions of neighbouring residents.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008026


18. Therefore, for the above reasons, I conclude that the development would not have
    a harmful effect on the living conditions of neighbouring residents with particular
    regard to external space and parking provision, and that the development would
    not have a detrimental effect on the wider area. The proposal would therefore not
    conflict with Policies CP7 and CP17 of the CS and Policies JP-P1 and JP-C8 of
    the Places for Everyone Joint Development Plan (JDP) insofar as they relate to
    this main issue which in combination seek to ensure that there is appropriate
    parking for cars and that new development does not have an unacceptable
    adverse impact on amenity and quality of life.
Living conditions of future occupiers
19. Having regard to living conditions within the property, the SPD states that careful
    attention should be given to the internal layout of HMOs with particular attention
    given to the location of bedrooms in relation to communal living space, to ensure
    that residents have privacy and are not subject to unacceptable noise from
    communal areas.
20. Bedroom 2 is located on the ground floor and is located off the shared entrance
    hall. Due to the shape and small size of the bedroom, the bedroom wall, very close
    to where the bed is shown on the plans, is adjoining the communal
    kitchen/dining/lounge area. The dividing wall is shown as being thin on the plans,
    therefore I consider that noise could be experienced through the wall from the
    kitchen/dining/lounge area, by the occupant of bedroom 2.
21. Due to the restricted size of the bedrooms within the property, whilst they meet the
    minimum standards in the SPD for single occupancy bedrooms, they do not
    benefit from individual lounging, dining or cooking facilities. Therefore, the
    communal kitchen/dining/lounge area is the likely place where cooking, dining and
    socialising can take place inside the property, and is likely to be used frequently by
    the occupants of the property.
22. Therefore, the transfer of noise through the wall from the communal area from
    socialising, use of the kitchen and appliances would likely cause unacceptable
    noise to the occupier of bedroom 2 at a range of times during the day or night.
    Given the small size and shape of the room, I do not consider that the bed could
    be conveniently placed elsewhere in the room to be further from the wall adjoining
    the communal area, and I cannot be certain as to the effectiveness of a
    management plan in relation to the use of indoor communal areas and facilities by
    tenants.
23. The appellant’s evidence states that internal layout and insulation measures are
    capable of mitigating noise transfer to an acceptable level. However, I have no
    substantive evidence to demonstrate what level of mitigation would be required
    and crucially how effective such mitigation would be. Therefore, I am not satisfied
    that the relationship between bedroom 2 and the communal area is acceptable
    having regard to noise, and the harmful effect that this could have on living
    conditions.
24. The main door to bedroom 2 is located off the shared hallway, I am satisfied that
    whilst cooking odours may be noticeable, they are likely to be acceptable,
    especially if mechanical extraction is used.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008026


25. Bedroom 2 has one opening window facing directly into the garden of the property.
    Therefore, the occupant could feel obligated to either close curtains or blinds to
    make their accommodation feel more private which could affect outlook. However,
    the garden is limited in size, and due to this I consider its use is likely to be more
    irregular than internal communal spaces, for these reasons, whilst this could affect
    privacy to some degree, I do not consider this matter to be significantly harmful to
    the living conditions of the future occupant of bedroom 2.
26. The Council has raised the matter of the outlook of bedroom 2 onto the garden
    area and the proposed bin storage area, whilst the window does look onto the
    communal garden area. I do not consider the outlook to be to an unacceptable
    level to adversely harm the living conditions of the occupant, especially given the
    location within a terraced street in an urban environment.
27. Having regard to the living conditions of the future occupant of bedroom 4 in
    relation to noise and odour. The room is located above sections of several spaces,
    including the shared entrance hall, shared communal space and bedroom 2. Given
    this arrangement, with the bedroom being on a separate floor only partially above
    the main communal kitchen/dining/living area, I do not consider that effects from
    noise and odour from that space would cause an unacceptable level of harm to the
    living conditions of future occupiers of bedroom 4, and I have no substantive
    evidence to demonstrate otherwise.
28. For the above reasons, whilst I consider the proposal to be acceptable with regard
    to odour, privacy and outlook, the proposed development does not provide
    acceptable living conditions for future occupiers of bedroom 2 regarding noise.
    Therefore, the proposal is contrary to Policies CP10 and CP17 of the CS and JP-
    P1 of the JDP which in combination seek to ensure that development is planned
    and designed so that it does not have an unacceptable adverse impact on amenity
    and quality of life, and that development should be comfortable and inviting
    offering a high level of amenity.
Other Matter
29. The appellant has expressed general dissatisfaction with the Council’s handling of
    the application with reference to external factors. However, this is a matter
    between those parties, and it cannot have any bearing on my determination of this
    appeal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
30. The proposed development would provide a small HMO which can increase
    accommodation choice for residents which is supported by Policy JP-H3 of the
    JDP, together with affordability, which are recognised benefits of the development,
    however, I have not been provided with substantive evidence to demonstrate that
    there is an evidenced need for the type of accommodation and as this is for one
    small HMO this benefit attracts only modest weight.
31. The site is located with convenient access to services, shops and wider public
    transport options. In addition, the site would provide cycle storage, to encourage
    alternative modes of transport, which weighs in favour of the development.
32. Due to the absence of significant external alterations, the Council has raised no
    objections with regard to the appearance of the proposed development, based on


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008026


       the information before me, I see no reason to disagree, this benefit weighs in
       favour of the development.
33. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4 of the
    Framework should be applied when considering proposals within settlements.
    Policy S4 states that development proposals within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    this Framework.
34. The development would add housing accommodation choice to the area, in a
    sustainable location where it would not exceed HMO concentration guidelines as
    set out by the Council. In addition, would provide adequate waste and cycle
    storage, and would not have unacceptable effects with regard to living conditions
    of neighbouring occupiers. However, due to the unacceptable adverse effects of
    the development on the living conditions of future occupiers there would be conflict
    with Policy P3 of the Framework which states that development proposals should
    provide healthy living conditions for occupiers and users in terms of noise and
    other sources pollution which could have an unacceptable adverse effect on health
    and the quality of life. Therefore, I consider that these adverse effects of the
    scheme would be such that harm and related local and national policy conflicts
    would substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposal.
35. As a consequence, the scheme would conflict with the development plan and the
    material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. For the reasons given above
    the appeal should be dismissed.

N Duff
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
