Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by Richard Aston BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008881
The Old Post House, Mundesley Road, Trimingham, NR11 8DZ
      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
      The appeal is made by Philip Reeves against the decision of North Norfolk District Council.
      The application Ref is PF/25/2776.
      The development proposed is described as ‘change of use of single garage (usage class C3) to
       usage class E(b) - enabling the sale of food and drink on the premises’.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2.       The development proposed has taken place and on the evidence before me1 has
         been operating since 16 June 2025. I have determined the appeal on this basis.
         On 26 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
         Framework) was published. The parties were given an opportunity to comment on
         the significance of this for their case and I have taken any comments into account.
Main Issue
3.       The main issue in this appeal is whether the proposal is acceptable with regard to:
                   -     Its location and the adopted development plan spatial strategy;
                   -     the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to
                         noise and general disturbance;
                   -     parking provision, access and highway safety;
                   -     coastal change effects;
                   -     provision of suitable external amenity space for the occupiers of the host
                         property.

Reasons
Location and adopted development plan spatial strategy
4.       Policy SS1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan (NNLP) seeks to direct development
         into the district’s most sustainable locations. The site is located within the
         countryside for planning purposes but includes the conversion of an existing
         building. Policy SS2 of the NNLP lists the types of development that are deemed

1
    Planning application form.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008881


       acceptable in such locations, with conversions included. It is a permissive policy
       that seeks to manage the re-use of buildings in the countryside, requiring them to
       comply with the following list of criteria:
       1. It is demonstrated that the buildings are either redundant or disused;
       2. The proposal involves the conversion of existing buildings without significant
       rebuilding, alteration or extension. It should be demonstrated that a substantial
       proportion of the structural elements and existing fabric of buildings will be retained
       throughout the conversion;
       3. The proposal preserves or enhances the character and appearance of buildings
       and their setting, taking account of the provisions of the North Norfolk Design
       Guide SPD;
       4. The buildings have not been erected or altered in the preceding ten years for
       another purpose;
       5. It can be demonstrated that the proposal has no adverse impacts on protected
       species.
5.    I have no evidence before me to disagree with the Council’s conclusions that the
      proposal accords with criteria 2 to 5. In terms of criteria 1 an ancillary residential
      use could well be viable for the now bar building, whether the host property is an
      independent residential dwelling with rooms or a guest house. However, I
      observed the converted garage was not big enough to house a modern-day
      vehicle nor did it form any meaningful storage for the owners of The Old Post
      House. There also appeared to be other storage options for the needs of the
      property at the rear the building and the building was not therefore required by the
      appellant. The proposal has not required significant alterations or extension and
      could be reasonably regarded as redundant, satisfying that criteria.
Living conditions – noise and general disturbance
6.    The appeal property contains a large semi-detached dwelling located in a small
      ribbon development of residential/tourism and rural buildings on the northern side
      of Mundesley Road. It appeared to be in use as tourist accommodation but
      whatever may be the case with the lawful use or otherwise of the property, the
      appeal before me is for a change of use to form a ‘standalone’ Class E (b) use
      enabling the sale of food and drink to visiting members of the public where
      consumption of that food and drink is mostly undertaken on the premises.
7.    The bar building is a converted garage to the rear of the property. The side garden
      of the appeal property sides onto an access to the rear and a large, gravelled area
      of land. Named ‘The Cliffhanger’ due to its location the submitted planning
      statement states that outdoor seating is available for a maximum of 35 people,
      with a further 10 inside. I observed rear double garage doors on the bar building
      that opened onto a hard surfaced area with picnic benches and other stools. The
      bar and seating area has associated ‘Tiki’ bar style decoration and lighting.
8.    The bar is open to the general public and as applied for the hours of opening are
      Midday to 2230 hours Monday to Sunday including Bank Holiday, with 0100 hours
      on New Years Eve. No hot food is currently available and the opening times
      requested are the same as those approved under the necessary licensing regime.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008881


9.    The closest dwelling is an adjoining semi-detached dwelling and its rear garden.
      The bar and its associated area sits behind a rear single storey outrigger on both
      of the properties and I observed no rear facing windows in upper floor of the
      attached dwelling. It also contained a rear extension and side conservatory with a
      line of sight to the external areas of the bar. The rear garden is immediately
      adjacent sharing a standard boundary fence with the outdoor space and seating
      area and in proximity to the bar.
10. The music licence allows for background music and TV along with a DJ on New
    Year’s Eve. An acoustic report has been submitted by Venta Acoustics dated
    8 January 2026, which includes assessment and estimation of noise from
    customer voices. This is based on 20 people and speaking using normal voice
    noise levels. Whilst I acknowledge this appears to be the typical number of
    customers the proposal must be determined as applied for and its indicated overall
    capacity. I share the concerns of the Council’s Environmental Health Officer that
    using estimated noise data for typical customers voice levels is not likely to
    represent the number of customer voices and the realistic likely scenario of loud
    and raised voices and shouting that may arise on licensed premises which could
    include an element of music later in the evening. Given it is likely to be a
    destination, customers could also increase if for example food is available.
11. Standard customer management controls and a complaints procedure are
    proposed but in the absence of the necessary clarity on noise impacts I am unable
    to conclude that the proposal for the likely number of people and for the length and
    duration applied for, is not causing or likely to cause unacceptable effects at a time
    when reasonable enjoyment and quiet could be expected. It has not therefore
    been demonstrated that the proposal does not result in unacceptable effects on
    the living conditions of adjoining properties with regards to noise and general
    disturbance. The lack of objection from neighbouring occupiers is not
    determinative as I must consider the amenity of both existing and future occupiers.
    I have also received a representation that the bar is causing unacceptable noise
    and disturbance, to balance against those in support.
12. Consequently, the proposal before me is contrary to Policy ENV6 of the North
    Norfolk Local Plan (NNLP) insofar as it requires a high standard of amenity and
    prevention of disturbance from noise, amongst other things. That has not been
    proven to be the case in this particular appeal.
Parking provision, access and highway safety
13. On my reading, the main highway concern is that the proposal has displaced the
    former garage use for car parking for residents and guests, forcing vehicular
    access onto Mundesley Road. Further, the applicant has not demonstrated that
    that this arrangement is suitable with regard to turning provision within the site,
    adequate surfacing to enable tyre traction, and adequate visibility onto Mundesley
    Road.
14. I observed the garage was small and unlikely to have ever been suitable or used
    to garage a modern vehicle. Further, the on-site car parking shown on the
    submitted drawing (OPH/3) was laid to lawn and although it had an access from
    Mundesley Road it did not appear to have been regularly used for parking of
    vehicles associated with the host property. This was of no surprise given the open
    and spacious land to the side and because the access would not be suitable to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008881


       accommodate vehicles given lack of visibility onto Mundesley Road, a busy
       coastal road. It is therefore relevant how the use of the garage has affected
       parking arrangements for up to four cars associated with the appeal property.
15. Whilst the applicant has indicated that customers will arrive on foot, cycle or by
    bus, bus services are limited during the evening and it is likely that some will wish
    to use their own vehicle and park off site or get dropped off by Taxi on the adjacent
    land. No evidence of travel patterns by users has been submitted. I do not know
    the specific history of that land but it is close to pedestrian access to the clifftops
    and provides access to the rear of the appeal property. At my site visit I observed
    a number of vehicles parked in the area along and a number of vehicles stopping
    for a brief period to eat lunch, make a phone call, enjoy the view or access the
    clifftops and shore. The access was large and parking, turning areas generous
    allowing for even large vehicles to manoeuvre, park and turn.
16. It is ultimately unknown to me in this appeal who owns or has rights to use, pass
    and re-pass on this land or who has established or agreed rights to park and use
    this land. There is also no guarantee or mechanism to secure its use in association
    with the proposal. Such uncertainty means that in allowing the appeal it could
    result in access and parking issues that could cause harm in terms of highway
    safety, for example if ad-hoc parking were to be withdrawn and enforced by the
    landowner. This proposal would therefore be in conflict with Policies CC8, CC9
    and HC7 of the NNLP, insofar as they require consideration of proposals beings
    served by safe and suitable access to the highway network, without detriment to
    the amenity or character of the locality and providing safe access for all. Again,
    that has not been adequately demonstrated in the submissions before me.
Coastal change
17. On the evidence before me the proposal is sited on the border of Epoch
    2 (indicative erosion up to 2055) and Epoch 3 (indicative erosion up to 2105) of the
    Coastal Change Management Area (CCMA), as defined by the Shoreline
    Management Plan (SMP6 – adopted in 2012) and the NNLP. Policy CC5 of the
    NNLP states that applications in the CCMA must be supported by a Coastal
    Erosion Vulnerability Assessment (CEVA) to demonstrate that the proposal will not
    result in an increased risk to life or property.
18. The appellant contends that the use does not worsen either coastal erosion nor
    flooding and yet the bar could accommodate up to 35 visitors with a number of
    vehicles accessing and using the land to the east. This is land that is in proximity
    to the coastal erosion zone, informally used in association with the proposals but
    ultimately outside of the appellants ownership or control. In the absence of a
    CEVA the effects cannot therefore be properly determined. The proposal is
    therefore in conflict with Policy CC5 of the NNLP insofar as it requires such an
    assessment to be submitted and the appellant’s evidence has not demonstrated
    otherwise.
Living conditions - external amenity space
19. Turning to amenity space I observed a modest area to the side of the property was
    laid to lawn and with a bistro table and chairs. It did not appear to be used for
    parking of vehicles in association with the tourist accommodation use. This area, in
    combination with the rear outdoor space, which could still be used, appeared
    adequate for the living conditions of the owners and the number of guests staying

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008881


     in the accommodation. Any effects are also mitigated by the proximity of the cliffs
     and shore providing accessible and quality open space and recreation. Accordingly,
     there is no conflict with Policy ENV6 of the NNLP or paragraph 3.3.10 of the North
     Norfolk Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document insofar as they require
     the provision of adequate areas of useable and secluded private amenity space to
     serve their intended purpose reflecting the likely number of occupants.

Planning balance and conclusion
20. Drawing everything together, despite my findings in relation to its location and
    external amenity space for existing occupiers, overall I regard the proposal as
    being unacceptable in terms of the main issue. The harm and policy conflicts that I
    have identified are such that the proposal should be regarded as being in conflict
    with the development plan, when read as a whole.
21. Turning to other material considerations Policies S3 and S5 of the Framework are
    applicable as the site lies outside settlement limits where only certain forms of
    development should be approved. This is unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in this Framework. In applying this policy
    approach, the circumstances in which the benefits of approving development
    proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include, but
    are not restricted to, situations where the development proposal would fail to
    comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
22. The proposal is supported in terms of being tourist development and the re-use of
    a building S5 (1. b and c) and by Policies E2 and E4, as rural business
    development. I have also had regard to the views from third parties in support of
    the proposal, which include the Council’s Business Development Officer and I
    acknowledge the economic benefits that the use generates. Given I have no
    specific details of these other than it is a new use I am unable to give this anything
    more than modest weight. Representations and a petition in support of the
    proposal from existing customers have been received and I acknowledge the
    social and community benefits the bar appears to have delivered for a limited
    number of members of the local community, including the elderly.
23. However there is conflict with the Framework as this proposal does not comply
    with the requirements of Policies P3 in terms of noise and living conditions impacts
    and TR3 and TR4 in terms of its highway and parking effects. It would also conflict
    with Policy F9 because it has not been demonstrated through up to date evidence
    that such development in a CCMA would be safe over its planned lifetime; reflect
    the provisions of the relevant Shoreline Management Plan and not have an
    unacceptable impact on coastal change processes; and provide wider
    sustainability benefits. This latter policy states in such circumstances such
    development should not take place.
24. These are the prevailing considerations and in this case the benefits would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision making policies of the Framework. The proposal would therefore
    conflict with Policy S3 and S5 of the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008881


25. Drawing everything together the proposal is in conflict with the development plan,
    when read as a whole. Material considerations, including the Framework do not
    indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan.
26. Having considered all other matters raised, I therefore conclude that the appeal
    should be dismissed



Richard Aston
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
