Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by MG Garrard LLB (Hons), PGDip.LP, Solicitor
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008022
11 Kingswood Avenue, Hitchin, Hertfordshire SG4 0PA
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Joseph Campion & Georgia Napper against the decision of North Herts
     Council.
    The application Ref is 26/00109/FP.
    The development proposed is demolition of the existing semi-detached dwelling and erection of a
     replacement two-storey detached dwellinghouse with associated amenity space, landscaping,
     revised vehicular access/driveway and parking, and associated drainage works.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of the
      existing semi-detached dwelling and erection of a replacement two-storey
      detached dwellinghouse with associated amenity space, landscaping, revised
      vehicular access/driveway and parking, and associated drainage works at 11
      Kingswood Avenue, Hitchin, Hertfordshire SG4 0PA in accordance with the terms
      of the application, Ref 26/00109/FP, subject to the conditions in the attached
      schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The description of development in the Council's decision notice differs slightly from
      that in the application form. As there is no clear evidence of a formal amendment
      to the application, I have used the application form description in my formal
      decision save for removing reference to the use class as that does not describe an
      act of development.
3.    The appeal has proceeded on the basis that the development would qualify for the
      self-build exemption from the Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) statutory condition. As
      no mechanism before me secured the development as self-build, I invited
      comments from the main parties. Following those submissions, an executed
      unilateral undertaking under section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act
      1990 (1990 Act) has been provided, and the Council has had the opportunity to
      comment on it. Its effect is considered below.
4.    During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given
      an opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the
      appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching my decision.
      References to the Framework in my decision are to the August 2026 version.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008022


Main Issues
5.    The main issues are:
               the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the area; and
               whether the proposal would qualify for the self-build exemption from the
                statutory Biodiversity Net Gain condition.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
6.    The appeal site lies within a street that remains predominantly characterised by
      semi-detached dwellings on one side facing a wide verge and open fields beyond.
      Many properties have been altered through extensions and remodelling, resulting
      in variation in their form, appearance and materials. Taken together, these
      changes have significantly reduced the degree of visual uniformity within the street
      scene.
7.    The proposed replacement of the existing semi-detached dwelling with a detached
      dwelling would alter the form of development on the plot in contrast to the
      dwellings to either side. The proposal would follow the established building line
      and broadly reflect the height of the roofline of surrounding properties. It would
      retain gaps to the site boundaries on either side, and the plot has generous
      amenity space to the front and rear. The site would therefore accommodate the
      proposal without appearing cramped or contrived.
8.    The appeal site occupies a position adjacent to a wider break in built development
      created by the electricity substation. Beyond this point, the street scene becomes
      more varied as it approaches a road junction, including the presence of a
      bungalow and properties of differing form and appearance. In this context, the
      detached form of the proposed dwelling would not unduly interrupt the existing
      rhythm of the street scene and would assimilate satisfactorily into the existing
      streetscape.
9.    For these reasons the proposal would respect the character and appearance of
      the area. It would therefore accord with Policies D1, D2 and SP9 of the North
      Hertfordshire Local Plan 2011-2031 (Adopted November 2022) which support
      proposals that respond positively to the site’s local context, and do not harm or
      have an adverse impact on the character and appearance of the site or the street
      scene and area.
10. It would also comply with Policy DP3 of the Framework with regard to its
    expectation, amongst other things, that development proposals should respond to
    their context so that they integrate and enhance their surroundings.
Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG)
11. Article 7 of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management
    Procedure) (England) Order 2015 requires an application for planning permission
    to state whether the statutory BNG condition would apply and if not, the reasons
    why. Where BNG applies, further information is required to enable the statutory
    BNG condition to be applied and later discharged.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008022


12. The application stated that the BNG condition would not apply because the
    proposal was for self-build and custom build development. That exemption can
    only be relied on where there is sufficient certainty that the proposal represents
    self-build or custom build development.
13. A unilateral undertaking dated 19 August 2026 has been submitted in relation to
    the appeal. The undertaking has been executed by the owner as a deed and is
    expressed to take effect as a planning obligation under section 106 of the 1990
    Act. It secures the dwelling as a self-build dwelling and requires evidence of
    compliance to be provided following completion and occupation. I am satisfied that
    this provides sufficient certainty that the proposal would be self-build development
    for the purposes of the exemption relied on. Accordingly, the proposal would
    qualify for the self-build exemption from the statutory BNG condition, and I
    conclude that no conflict with the BNG statutory framework would arise.
Other Matters
14. An interested party has raised concerns regarding two trees within the open area
    adjoining the electricity substation. The movement of construction vehicles, plant
    or materials in that area could be appropriately controlled through the demolition
    and construction method statement condition. This matter does not therefore alter
    my findings on the main issues.
Conditions
15. I have reviewed the conditions suggested by the Council having regard to the tests
    in the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). I have amended
    some of the Council’s suggested wording in the interests of clarity. Conditions
    addressing the statutory implementation period and listing the approved plans are
    necessary to provide certainty. However, I have removed reference to plans
    showing existing matters as compliance with those is unnecessary.
16. A demolition and construction method statement condition is necessary to ensure
    the orderly management of construction activities in the interests of safeguarding
    the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, maintaining highway safety and to
    protect the adjacent open area and trees during demolition and construction. As
    these measures need to be agreed before any works commence, the condition is
    necessarily pre-commencement. A separate condition requiring the widened
    access to be constructed before occupation, and preventing surface water
    discharging onto the highway, is necessary in the interests of highway safety.
17. Notwithstanding the Council’s suggested condition requiring approved landscaping
    details to be carried out, no landscaping details are before me, and it is not
    necessary or reasonable in this instance to require such details for the proposed
    single replacement dwelling on this existing residential site. Having regard to the
    advice in the Framework and the PPG regarding the removal of permitted
    development rights, there is no justification to remove the rights suggested by the
    Council in this location simply because the proposal is for a replacement detached
    dwelling.
18. The Council suggested a condition relating to contamination. However, as there is
    no substantive evidence before me that contamination is likely to be present, I am
    not satisfied such a condition is necessary or reasonable and I have not imposed
    it.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008022


Conclusion
19. Drawing these matters together, I conclude that the proposal accords with the
    development plan when read as a whole. Policy S3 of the Framework indicates
    that proposals which accord with an up-to-date development plan and the policies
    of the Framework should be approved without delay. No other material
    considerations warrant a different conclusion.
20. Therefore, the appeal is allowed.

MG Garrard
INSPECTOR
SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
   of this decision.
2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   following approved plans: HD235506 D01 REV09; HD235506 D03; HD235506 D05
   REV 09; HD235506 D07 REV 09; HD235506 D09.
3) No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until a
   Demolition and Construction Method Statement has been submitted to, and
   approved in writing by the local planning authority. The Demolition and
   Construction Method Statement shall provide for:
     i) the parking of site operatives’ and visitors’ vehicles;
     ii) loading and unloading of plant and materials;
     iii) storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development;
     iv) wheel washing facilities;
     v) measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during construction;
     vi) a scheme for recycling/disposing of waste resulting from demolition and
         construction works;
     vii) delivery, demolition and construction working hours;
     viii) measures to protect trees within the adjacent open area during demolition and
         construction activities, including any necessary protective fencing or exclusion
         zones.
     The approved Demolition and Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to
     throughout the demolition and construction period for the development.
4) Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted, the widened vehicular
   access shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans. Surface water
   from the site shall be intercepted and disposed of separately so that it does not
   discharge onto the public highway. The access shall thereafter be retained in
   accordance with the approved details.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
