Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by G Sibley MPLAN MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008570
Land at OS 8023 5997, Monkwood Green, Hallow WR2 6NX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
    (GPDO).
•   The appeal is made by S Gunnel against the decision of Malvern Hills District Council.
•   The application Ref is M/25/01241/GPDQ.
•   The development proposed is conversion of disused agricultural building to 2no. residential
    dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. Under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO, development is permitted for a
   change of use to a dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) of (a), (i) a building that is part of
   an established agricultural unit and any land within that building’s curtilage, or (ii) a
   former agricultural building that was (but is no longer) part of an established
   agricultural unit and any land within that building’s curtilage, together with (b), the
   extension of the building, and (c) building operations reasonably necessary to
   convert the building, subject to limitations and conditions.
Main Issues
3. The main issues relevant to this appeal are whether the proposal would constitute
   permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q. In particular:
           •    whether the appeal building is part of an established agricultural unit and
                complies with the conditions and limitations of Paragraph Q.1; and
           •    whether the proposed building operations would be reasonably necessary
                to convert the building to a dwellinghouse.
Reasons
Agricultural Unit
4. Paragraph Q1 does not permit development (a), in the case of a site that is part of
   an established agricultural unit, the site was not part of the established agricultural
   unit (i) on 24 July 2023, or (ii) where the site became part of the established
   agricultural unit after 24 July 2023, for a period of at least 10 years before the date
   development under Class Q begins. It also provides that (b)(iii) where the site is no


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008570


     longer part of an established agricultural unit, it must not have been used for non-
     agricultural purposes since ceasing to be part of such a unit.
5. For Part 3, paragraph X of the GPDO states that ‘“agricultural building” means a
   building (excluding a dwellinghouse) used for agriculture and which is so used for
   the purposes of a trade or business; and “agricultural use” refers to such uses’. An
   ‘established agricultural unit’ for the purposes of Part 3 is defined in paragraph X as
   ‘agricultural land occupied as a unit for the purposes of agriculture’.
6. It is not disputed between the parties that the appeal building was originally granted
   planning permission to be used for agricultural purposes in 2006 and, based on the
   information before me, I find no reason to disagree. However, the Council notes the
   modest extent of land associated with the building, and the absence of evidence of
   any formal agricultural business operating from the land. It also referred to a
   previous 2021 appeal decision relating to a proposed dwelling on the appeal site, in
   which that Inspector identified that there was no clarity on the intensity or nature of
   activities on the wider site. Whilst I have limited information on that appeal and the
   evidence that underpinned it, it is consistent with there having been limited detailed
   evidence regarding the agricultural activities on the wider site. The submitted
   Animal Health registration letter indicates only that sheep may have been kept in
   connection with the land. It does not identify the extent of any agricultural unit, the
   number of livestock kept, the nature, scale or intensity of any agricultural activity, or
   whether such activity occurred on 24 July 2023. Nor is there financial, tenancy,
   cropping, grazing, stocking, business or other operational evidence to show that the
   site is part of an established agricultural unit, or that the building is or was used for
   agriculture for the purposes of a trade or business.
7. The Council has identified storage containers and building materials around the site
   and building, previous enforcement matters, and photographs showing the building
   being used for storage. That description was consistent with what I saw on my site
   visit. The appellant’s case is that the photographs show that the building is no
   longer required for agricultural purposes, which may be the case. The appellant
   also refers to the enforcement history as arising from the applicant living on site to
   look after livestock. However, the enforcement investigations were a significant
   time before the submission of this appeal and, on the evidence before me, the
   storage use identified by the Council appears materially different from an
   agricultural use and is occurring on site.
8. I therefore find that it has not been shown, on the balance of probability, that the
   appeal building formed part of an established agricultural unit at the relevant time
   for the purposes of Class Q, or that the building was used for agriculture for the
   purposes of a trade or business. In any event, even if the building had formerly
   been part of such a unit, the evidence indicates that it has since been used for
   storage for non-agricultural purposes. On either basis, the proposal would not be
   permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO.
Building Operations
9. Class Q permits building operations to the extent that they are reasonably
   necessary to convert the building to a use falling within Class C3. The question is
   therefore whether the existing building would provide the structural basis for the
   proposed dwellings, or whether the works would go beyond conversion and
   amount, in substance, to the rebuilding of the pre-existing structure.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008570


10. Paragraph Q.1(j)(i) of the GPDO permits the installation or replacement of
    windows, doors, roofs or exterior walls, and water, drainage, electricity, gas or other
    services, to the extent reasonably necessary for the building to function as a
    dwellinghouse. The proposed works would include new openings and replacement
    wall cladding. Such works are capable, in principle, of falling within paragraph
    Q.1(j)(i), provided that they are reasonably necessary.
11. The Planning Practice Guidance explains that Class Q assumes that the
    agricultural building is capable of functioning as a dwelling. It is not the intention of
    the permitted development right to allow rebuilding work which would go beyond
    what is reasonably necessary for conversion to residential use. It also indicates that
    internal works are not generally development. For a building to function as a
    dwellinghouse it may be appropriate to undertake internal structural works,
    including to allow for a floor or internal walls, which are not prohibited by Class Q.
12. The structural survey describes a metal-clad barn with steel portal frames and
    timber purlins supporting the roof. It concludes that the building is capable of
    conversion to a dwelling. The report was prepared by a suitably qualified and
    experienced professional and I have no good reason to doubt its veracity.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the
    building would not require structural works to enable the building to be converted. I
    therefore attach significant weight to the survey’s conclusion that the existing
    structure is capable of forming the basis for the proposed residential use.
13. The proposal includes a new mezzanine floor. However, that element would be
    installed internally and there is no evidence before me that it would involve external
    building operations or require the existing building to be substantially rebuilt. Having
    regard to the PPG, I do not find the internal mezzanine floor, on the evidence
    before me, to amount to building operations that are prohibited by Class Q.
14. The structural survey indicates that other structural work may be required, but it
    does not state that such work is required in order for the building to function as a
    dwellinghouse. The evidence does not appear to suggest that such works would be
    necessary in order to provide the required structural integrity for the proposed
    conversion. If works were to go beyond those reasonably necessary for that
    purpose, the development would not be permitted by Class Q. However, on the
    evidence before me, it is not evident that the proposed scheme would involve
    works beyond that limit. I therefore find that the building operations proposed would
    be reasonably necessary to carry out the conversion of the building to two
    dwellinghouses and would not be so extensive as to constitute a rebuild of the pre-
    existing structure.
Other Matter
15. The appellant has referred to the Council’s housing land supply position. However,
    whether or not the Council can demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites is not determinative in this appeal. The appeal concerns whether the
    proposal is permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
    GPDO. That is a matter to be assessed against the relevant limitations and
    conditions of the GPDO, rather than by reference to the planning balance that
    would apply to an application for planning permission. Consequently, the housing
    land supply position does not alter my findings on whether the proposal would be
    permitted development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008570


Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposed building operations would be
    reasonably necessary to convert the building to two dwellinghouses and would not
    be so extensive as to constitute a rebuild of the pre-existing structure. In that
    respect, the building operations would comply with the relevant limitations of
    Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO. However, it has not been shown, on the
    balance of probability, that the appeal building is, or was at the relevant time, part
    of an established agricultural unit for the purposes of Class Q, or that it was used
    for agriculture for the purposes of a trade or business. In any event, the evidence
    also indicates that the building has been used for storage for non-agricultural
    purposes. The proposal would therefore not satisfy the relevant limitations of the
    GPDO and would not be permitted development under Class Q. As a result, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

G Sibley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
