Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by Chris Mayes CMLI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008062
Land to North of Helm Lane, Mill Bank, Sowerby Bridge, Calderdale,
West Yorkshire HX6 3DU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Wetherall against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan Borough
    Council.
•   The application reference is 25/00736/FUL.
•   The development proposed is temporary rural workers dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Since the appeal was lodged, the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) has been updated. I have determined the appeal on the basis of the
   current Framework. The parties, through the evidence submitted with the appeal,
   have had the opportunity to address the planning merits of the proposal, including
   matters relating to rural workers’ dwellings, development outside settlements and
   development in the Green Belt. I am satisfied that the changes to the Framework
   do not alter the substance of the main issues in this appeal or prejudice either
   party.
3. Although the decision notice refers to Policies WA1 and GN3 of the Calderdale
   Local Plan 2018/19-2032-33 (March 2023) (the LP), those policies do not underpin
   the Council's reasons for refusal and have not been relied upon by either party
   during the appeal. In the circumstances of this case, they do not give rise to a
   separate matter requiring determination and do not affect my assessment of the
   main issues. I have therefore not undertaken a separate analysis of those policies.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
                having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies,
                including any relevant effects on the openness of the Green Belt;
           •    whether the site would be a suitable location for the proposed dwelling,
                having regard to its countryside location, accessibility to services and
                facilities, opportunities for travel by sustainable modes of transport, and the
                development plan strategy for housing on non-allocated sites;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008062


           •    the effect of the proposal on highway safety, with particular regard to the
                suitability of the site access and visibility for users of the highway;
           •    whether satisfactory foul and surface water drainage, and an adequate
                potable water supply, can be secured for the development; and
           •    whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm,
                would be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the
                very special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether Inappropriate Development and Openness
5. The appeal site lies within the Green Belt. The appellants contend that the
   proposed dwelling should be considered in the context of its agricultural function
   and temporary nature. While I accept that the proposal would support the operation
   of the existing smallholding, it would nevertheless provide residential
   accommodation.
6. Policy GB6 of the Framework provides that development in the Green Belt is
   inappropriate unless it falls within one of the exemptions identified in Policy GB7.
   Having regard to the evidence before me, I find that the proposed development
   would not fall within any of those exceptions. Consequently, the proposal would
   constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Inappropriate development
   is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in
   very special circumstances. Substantial weight should be given to any harm to the
   Green Belt, including harm to openness.
7. In addition to the definitional harm, the proposal would introduce a new residential
   building and associated domestic activity onto land that is presently open in
   character. The building would not be visually prominent due to its siting and the
   screening provided by existing vegetation. Nevertheless, openness is not solely a
   matter of visibility. Although modest in scale and located adjacent to the existing
   agricultural building, the proposal would add built form where none currently exists.
   Consequently, the scheme would reduce the spatial openness of the Green Belt at
   the site and, to a lesser degree, its visual openness.
8. For these reasons, I conclude that the appeal proposal would be inappropriate
   development in the Green Belt and would harm its openness. It would therefore
   conflict with Policy GB1 of the LP, and the Green Belt policies of the Framework
   referred to above.
Location
9. The appeal site lies outside any defined settlement, within the countryside and
   Green Belt, and is not allocated for residential development. Policy HS1 of the LP
   supports residential development on non-allocated sites where proposals are
   located sustainably, complement the spatial strategy and objectives of the LP, and
   accord with other relevant LP policies. The supporting text to the policy makes clear
   that residential development on non-allocated sites within the Green Belt will be
   subject to strict control and assessed against Green Belt policy.
10. As set out above, the proposal would conflict with Policy GB1 of the LP by reason
    of inappropriate development in the Green Belt and the harm it would cause to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008062


     openness. Consequently, it would not accord with an important component of the
     development plan strategy for this location.
11. The site occupies an isolated rural location. Future occupants would be heavily
    reliant on the private car for access to education, healthcare, shopping and other
    day-to-day services. Although the appellants argue that occupation of the proposed
    dwelling would reduce journeys currently made between their existing home and
    the smallholding, a residential use would also generate its own travel demands.
    Consequently, notwithstanding any reduction in existing management trips, the
    proposal would introduce a residential use in a location where opportunities for
    travel by sustainable modes of transport are limited.
12. Moreover, the appellant's case rests principally on the contention that there is an
    essential need for a rural worker to live permanently at or near the smallholding. In
    that regard, Policy HO11(1)(a) of the Framework states that isolated homes in the
    countryside should only be supported where there is an essential need for a rural
    worker to live permanently at or near their place of work in the countryside. This is
    a material consideration of considerable relevance given the nature of the proposal.
13. I do not doubt that the smallholding requires regular attention, nor that certain
    husbandry operations may occasionally require attendance outside normal working
    hours. The evidence before me also demonstrates that lambing and farrowing can
    give rise to time-sensitive situations requiring intervention. Nonetheless, those
    activities are intermittent and seasonal in nature. While the livestock losses referred
    to are acknowledged, I have not been provided with sufficient objective evidence
    regarding the frequency of such events, the extent to which intervention would
    ordinarily be required, or why the existing arrangements are incapable of meeting
    the operational needs of the enterprise.
14. I have also had regard to the evidence relating to theft and vandalism at the site.
    While the recorded incidents are noted, they appear to be isolated events occurring
    over a period of time rather than substantive evidence of an ongoing need for a
    permanent residential presence at the site. Furthermore, I have not been provided
    with evidence that alternative or additional security measures have been
    considered or implemented at the site. Consequently, the incidents referred to do
    not, in themselves, demonstrate a need for a permanent residential presence.
15. Likewise, I have considered the business information submitted in support of the
    appeal, including the appellant's aspirations to expand and further develop the
    enterprise. However, the issue before me is not whether further expansion may be
    desirable or achievable, but whether the evidence demonstrates an essential need
    for a rural worker to live permanently at or near the holding. While the business
    information indicates an intention to increase the scale of operations in future, I am
    not persuaded that the current scale and operation of the enterprise demonstrate
    such a need.
16. Drawing these matters together, I am not persuaded that the evidence
    demonstrates an essential need for a rural worker to live permanently at or near the
    holding. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with Policies HS1,
    IM4 and IM5 of the LP. These seek, among other things, to direct residential
    development to sustainable locations, reduce reliance upon private car travel,
    promote sustainable travel choices and ensure that development accords with the
    wider spatial strategy of the development plan. For similar reasons, the proposal
    would also fail to satisfy the circumstances described in Policy HO11(1)(a) of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008062


     Framework and would introduce a new dwelling in an isolated countryside location
     without the justification expected by national policy.
Highway Safety
17. The existing access serves the established agricultural use of the site. I
    acknowledge the appellant's contention that occupation of the dwelling could
    reduce certain management journeys currently undertaken between the appellants'
    home and the smallholding. However, the grant of planning permission would
    authorise a residential use which would generate its own pattern of vehicle
    movements in addition to those associated with the existing agricultural use.
18. The evidence indicates that the access emerges onto Helm Lane at a constrained
    location where visibility is restricted by the curvature of the road, topography and
    existing boundary features. The carriageway is narrow and opportunities to
    manoeuvre are limited. Consequently, vehicles entering and leaving the site would
    experience restricted visibility of approaching traffic and other highway users.
19. I have also had regard to concerns relating to the unbound surface of the access
    track and the potential for debris or runoff to be deposited onto the highway. Whilst
    this matter is not determinative on its own, it reinforces my concerns regarding the
    suitability of the access arrangements.
20. Taking these factors together, I conclude that residential use of the site would
    materially intensify use of an access that does not meet appropriate standards and
    would have an unacceptable effect on highway safety. The proposal would
    therefore conflict with Policy BT4 of the LP which seeks, among other things, to
    ensure the safe and free flow of traffic in the interests of highway safety and to
    provide suitable access for users of the highway, including emergency, refuse and
    service vehicles.
Drainage and Water Supply
21. The appellants have submitted information relating to ground conditions and
    drainage, including evidence intended to demonstrate the feasibility of a surface
    water infiltration-based drainage solution. While this provides some assistance, I
    have not been provided with sufficient evidence to demonstrate that satisfactory
    foul drainage infrastructure can be secured and maintained over the lifetime of the
    development. In addition, while the appellants refer to the use of spring water and a
    proposed borehole, the evidence before me does not satisfactorily demonstrate
    that a reliable potable water supply would be available to serve the dwelling.
22. I therefore conclude that adequate drainage and water supply arrangements have
    not been demonstrated. The proposal would conflict with Policy CC3 of the LP
    which seeks, among other things, to ensure that new development has an
    adequate water supply, sufficient foul and surface water drainage, and the
    necessary wastewater infrastructure capacity to serve the development.
Other Matters
23. I have had special regard to the desirability of preserving the setting of the grade II
    listed Spout Field Farmhouse (List Entry No. 1134546), as required by section
    66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
    However, having regard to the separation distance between the appeal site and the
    listed building, the absence of intervisibility, and the fact that the building is


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008062


     designated principally for its architectural and historic interest, I find that the
     proposal would preserve its setting and would not harm its significance.
Other Considerations and Green Belt Balance
24. The appellants rely on several considerations in support of the proposal. These
    include the welfare of livestock, the desire to expand and develop the rural
    enterprise, the temporary nature of the dwelling, and concerns regarding security
    and crime at the site.
25. For the reasons already given, the evidence does not demonstrate an essential
    need for residential occupation of the site. Consequently, the weight that I can
    attach to these matters is limited. I therefore attach limited weight to the benefits
    associated with supporting a rural enterprise and improving the management of
    livestock. I also attach limited weight to the temporary nature of the proposal and
    the potential security benefits arising from a residential presence on the site.
26. The appellants also refer to other developments and decisions that are presented
    as supporting their case. However, I have not been supplied with the details
    necessary to demonstrate how these are comparable with the scheme before me.
    In any event, I am required to determine the appeal on its own planning merits.
27. I have also considered the appellant's concerns regarding the Council's handling of
    the application. However, the appeal before me is against the planning merits of the
    proposal and not against the procedures followed by the Council. Those matters do
    not alter my conclusions on the substantive planning issues.
28. Set against the above considerations is the substantial weight that must be
    attached to the harm arising from inappropriate development in the Green Belt and
    the additional harm to openness. There is also harm resulting from the unsuitable
    location of the dwelling, its effect on highway safety, and uncertainty surrounding
    drainage and water supply.
29. Taken together, I conclude that the considerations advanced in support of the
    proposal do not clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt and the other harm
    that I have identified and, therefore, the very special circumstances required to
    justify a grant of planning permission have not been demonstrated.
Conclusion
30. The proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt. It
    would reduce the openness of the Green Belt and would introduce an unjustified
    dwelling in an isolated countryside location. It would also have an unacceptable
    effect on highway safety, and satisfactory drainage and water supply arrangements
    have not been demonstrated. The other considerations advanced in support of the
    proposal do not clearly outweigh the identified harm.
31. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan
    when read as a whole. There are no material considerations, including the
    Framework, which indicate that a decision should be made otherwise than in
    accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Chris Mayes
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
