Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by Andrew Fuller BSc (Hons), Dip TP, MA, MRTPI, IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008693
Land known as The Pigs, at Leesthorpe Road, Pickwell, LE14 2RA
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal of permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Jack and Freddie Allen against the decision of Melton Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/01286/PIP.
•      The development proposed is for up to two self-build dwellings.

Decision
    1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
    2. The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
       the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
       suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the
       detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
       these 2 stages.
    3. The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
    4. In terms of the amount of development, the application form indicated that
       permission in principle is sought for up to two dwellings and I have considered the
       appeal on that basis.
    5. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
    6. A new Melton Local Plan Partial Update to 2036 (Local Plan Partial Update) was
       submitted for examination on 27 March 2026. With regard to this appeal, there are
       changes to Policies SS3 and C8, but the changes do not alter their general aims.
       Considering the scope of the plan and its role in clarifying the strategy for housing
       delivery in this appeal I afford the Local Plan Partial Update very limited weight as
       advised by Policy DM4 of the Framework.

1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008693


Main Issue
•    The main issue is whether the site would be a suitable location for housing, with
     regard to local and national policies.
Reasons
    7. The strategy for new housing across the Council area is set out in Policies SS2
       and SS3 of the Melton Borough Local Plan 2011-2036 (2018) (Local Plan).
       Together they seek to direct housing firstly to the Borough’s main settlement of
       Melton Mowbray, then sequentially to smaller service centres and rural hubs.
       Finally, some provision for housing is supported, but limited to ‘windfall’ sites within
       and adjoining rural settlements. Where new development is proposed in rural
       areas, Policy SS3 requires development to be served by sustainable infrastructure.
    8. Policy HR2 of the Somerby Parish Neighbourhood Plan 2018-2036 (2021)
       (Neighbourhood Plan) directs development to within the Limits of Development of
       settlements such as Pickwell. In doing so, it seeks to carefully control development
       outside the defined Limits of Development in the open countryside.
    9. The appeal site comprises a paddock in the open countryside, adjacent to, but
       beyond the Limits of Development of the village of Pickwell. It comprises a linear
       plot forming a gentle hollow in the landscape, with the land rising up above it as it
       extends away from the village. Other than a single gated access, it is largely
       enclosed by trees, including a bank of hedging separating it from Leesthorpe
       Road, which forms the main road running into the village from the north.
    10.The appeal proposal is for up to two self-build houses. Indicative access from the
       site would be along Leesthorpe Road, at the furthest point away from the village
       and along a section of the road that is narrow and in the absence of a footpath. On
       my site visit I found this section of highway to be busy and, as a pedestrian, I was
       forced to stand in the hedge to allow vehicles passing one another to enter and
       exit the village. I note that the submitted layout plan is only indicative and that the
       appellant is not tied to that scheme, and that it is a technical requirement of
       submission. I also acknowledge that any number of alternative schemes may
       come forwards in the future. Be that as it may, it is the only evidence before me of
       how up to two dwellings, and the access, could realistically be achieved at this
       site.
    11.The village is served by very limited local facilities, consisting mainly of a church
       and village hall. Once within the village, there are a number of footpaths along
       which I walked to the bus stop. From here there is only a restricted, bookable
       service, albeit to the main settlement of Melton Mowbray. I continued along the
       footpath adjacent to the road to the neighbouring village of Somerby. Whilst
       adequate, the footpath was unlit and runs for some considerable distance to reach
       Somerby. Here, Pickwell’s limited facilities are slightly supplemented by a GP
       surgery, primary school and local shop.
    12.Policy TR3 of the Framework seeks for the sustainable location of development
       including forms of transport in rural areas. Whilst not a significant development, the
       future occupants of the proposal would nonetheless still remain heavily reliant on
       the car. Whilst I acknowledge that in rural areas greater dependency on the private
       car is a reality, this site is not well connected to the immediate village or services
       and facilities in the wider area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008693


  13.Policy SS3 of the Local Plan also requires proposals to meet a proven local need,
     that is identified by substantive evidence. Furthermore, Policy H07 of the
     Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the benefits towards meeting
     housing need. The housing needs of Pickwell are set out in Policy HR4 of the
     Neighbourhood Plan. It identifies up to three dwellings on windfall sites, within the
     Limits of Development, and where they meet a proven need.
  14.The Council’s Self-build and custom housebuilding register identifies a demand for
     Self-build and custom housebuilding (SBCH) across the Council area, including
     some demand within Pickwell itself. Moreover, two households within the Parish
     expressed an interest in building their own homes locally, as identified in The
     Somerby Parish 2017 Household Questionnaire (conducted as part of the
     Neighbourhood Plan process).
  15.The Council acknowledge an identified SBCH shortfall. Due to numerous SBCH
     permissions not being secured through legal agreements, I do not have an
     accurate figure for the supply of SBCH plots in the Council area, but it is likely less
     than the 35 plots cited. In light of this, I consider that substantial weight should be
     given to the fact that up to two self-build dwellings would contribute towards
     meeting the significant demand for SBCH in the borough but also locally to
     Pickwell.
  16.The site is identified in the Neighbourhood plan as the ‘Old quarry site’, forming an
     ‘important open space’ as defined under Policy ENV3 (PNR-3 ‘natural/semi-natural
     green space’). Loss of this site and its amenities to development is not supported
     by the policy in the absence of its replacement by equivalent provision in a not less
     convenient location. It is clear from the text supporting Policy ENV3 that it is not
     the intention of the policy to prevent development, only guide it.
  17.During my site visit, I walked around and across the site, and whilst I found it to be
     pleasant, there was no public access, no public use, or any other public function.
     Whilst I note that the scoring used in the Neighbourhood Plan policy for the Local
     Space Criteria is vague in defining the nature of ‘important open space’, it is
     nonetheless of some value. Despite the Pickwell Conservation Area Appraisal
     (CAA) being silent on the sites significance, there is a value to its beauty and
     tranquillity. In the absence of any built form, save that in association with stabling
     horses, it serves the village as an open space with visual amenity and no
     equivalent replacement is offered.
  18.For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that whilst the proposal would meet
     some local identified need in respect of SBCH, it would not constitute a suitable
     location for residential development due to the poor accessibility and impact on
     open space. The proposed development would conflict with Policy SS3, of the
     Local Plan and Policies HR2, HR4 and ENV3 of the Neighbourhood Plan, which
     together and amongst other things, seek to limit development in the open
     countryside and ensure it is served by sustainable infrastructure and protects
     important open spaces.
Other Matters
  19.The proposed development would not cause harm to character and landscape
     appearance. However, a lack of harm is effectively neutral in my determination of
     the appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008693


Planning balance and Conclusion
20. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development outside settlements, this means that policy S5 of
    the Framework should be applied.
21. Policy S5 sets out that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements, these are listed under criteria (a)-(j). In this case criterion (j) is
    relevant as both parties acknowledge that there is a shortfall in the supply of
    SBCH plots in the Council area. However, criterion (j)(i) goes on to state that
    developments should be physically well-related to an existing settlement. For the
    reasons set out above, the indicative access from the site would be at the furthest
    point away from the village and along a section of the road that is narrow and in
    the absence of a footpath. The development would thus not be physically well-
    related to the existing settlement. Accordingly, the proposal is not supported by
    criterion (j)(i), nor does it fall within any of the other listed criteria.
22. Where a development proposal does not fall within one of the categories set out in
    Policy S5, it should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects. As set
    out above, the contribution to the housing supply and economic benefits would be
    modest with the Council being able to demonstrate 7.6 years of housing supply.
    These benefits would not substantially outweigh the identified adverse effects of
    the location and there are therefore no exceptional circumstances in this case.
23. Where neighbourhood plans have formed part of the development plan within five
    years of a decision and allocate housing requirements, Policy S6 of the
    Framework weighs in favour of the benefits of housing proposals over any conflict
    with that plan. With the Neighbourhood plan being adopted more than five years
    ago I limit the weight I afford its policies in outweighing the housing benefits of the
    proposal. However, this does not diminish the weight I afford Policy SS3 of the
    Local Plan or the tests set out under Policy S5 of the Framework.
24. Consequently, the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out within Policy S3 of the Framework.
25. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore,
    the appeal is dismissed.

Andrew Fuller
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
