Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008883
15 Brethergate, Westwoodside, North Lincolnshire DN9 2AU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr S Hardacre against the decision of North Lincolnshire Council.
•   The application reference is PA/2025/1413.
•   The development proposed is a dormer bungalow.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a dormer bungalow at
   15 Brethergate, Westwoodside, North Lincolnshire in accordance with the terms of
   the application, reference PA/2025/1413, and the plans submitted with it, subject to
   the conditions set out in the attached schedule of conditions.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are the effect on the character and appearance of the area; and
   the effect on the living conditions of the existing residents of 15 Brethergate and the
   future residents of the proposed dwelling.
Procedural Matters
3. The appellant confirmed that the correct address is as set out above and does not
   include a reference to Post Office Flat.
4. The description of the proposal within the application form includes a descriptive
   paragraph of information, much of which does not constitute development. I have
   extracted the development referenced within that description. Whilst it refers to a
   dormer bungalow, the plans show a dwelling with bedrooms in the roof space and
   windows in the gables rather than having dormer windows.
Reasons
5. The existing bungalow has a front and rear garden. The land to the side has
   historically been used for parking associated with use of part of the dwelling as a
   post office. It appears that there has also been a more recent commercial use. No
   planning history has been provided relating to these uses. The area, although
   largely surfaced, appears to be accepted by both parties as being part of the
   curtilage of the dwelling.
6. The council accept that the site lies within the settlement boundary; and that there
   is not an accepted 5 year supply of housing land.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6008883


Character and appearance
7. The proposal is for a bungalow, with rooms in the roof. It would sit back from the
   frontage of the existing dwelling and be relatively central within the plot. Bungalows
   are common in the vicinity. The building would be set away from the existing
   bungalow by 3.8 metres and away from side boundary with Gollands Lane. With
   appropriate boundary details to Gollands Lane, the proposed building, particularly
   given the low eaves, would site relatively comfortably within this large plot.
8. Although there are examples of bungalows set in large plots in the area, there are
   also numerous properties that are built close to the road or have only a limited set
   back. This proposal would make an efficient use of this area of land and would not
   be out of keeping with the general arrangement of development in this particular
   area. Subject to the use of appropriate materials and boundary treatments, it would
   not result in harm to the character or appearance of the area. It would not conflict
   with the design expectations of Policies DS1 or H8 of the North Lincolnshire Local
   Plan 2003 (LP); or Policy CS5 of the North Lincolnshire Core Strategy 2011 (CS).
Living conditions
9. The officer report refers specifically to overshadowing of the host property and the
   suitability of the rear garden space. The existing bungalow relies predominantly on
   an outlook over its front and rear gardens. It has a garage to its rear which will be
   partially removed. The proposal would have no impact on the outlook from its front
   or back. It does have a side window that appears to have been part of the
   commercial use. This would retain an outlook over the proposed fence given the
   set back of the proposed bungalow.
10. A side window towards the rear of the property would have a reduced outlook
    towards the side fence and the side of the proposed dwelling. This would result in a
    reduction in outlook and some loss of light to that room in the mornings. Floor plans
    of the existing property have not been provided so it is not clear what the use of the
    room is. It will however be set 3.8 metres from the proposed dwelling. The
    reduction in outlook and light could result in some harm to the living conditions of
    the residents of 15 Brethergate but I am not persuaded that this would be
    unacceptably harmful in these particular circumstances.
11. The remaining concern of the council relates to the outdoor space that would be
    available to the residents. The host dwelling would retain a relatively spacious rear
    garden. The proposed property would have a garden that the appellant has
    measured as being in excess of 10 meters at its deepest and around 8 metres
    deep close to the boundary with Gollands Lane. It appears that it would be in the
    region of 12 metres wide at its narrowest. This represents a rear garden that would
    be suitable for this three bedroom dwelling. The space available would not result in
    unacceptable living conditions for existing or future residents.
12. Given the above, the proposal would not result in conflict with the amenity
    requirements of LP Policy DS1; CS Policy CS5; and would satisfy the requirements
    of LP Policy H5.
Other matters
13. Reference has been made to the site being within the Area of Special Historic
    Landscape Interest of the Isle of Axholme. LP Policy LC14 seeks to protect this


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision: 6008883


     area. The council’s specialist advisor has recommended that the proposal would
     not conflict with this policy. Little information has been provided in this regard but
     given the consultation response and the nature of the designation, there is no
     reason to consider that the proposal would conflict with the heritage requirements
     of the LP or the National Planning Policy Framework 2026.
14. The appellant has claimed exemption from biodiversity requirements due to the
    proposal being a self-build property. Given the size of the site, it would not now be
    required to meet the statutory biodiversity requirements. No further detail has been
    provided by the appellant regarding the self-build status other than that the owner
    may seek to build the dwelling for family members. Conditions are not appropriate
    mechanisms to secure self-build requirements and no unilateral undertaking or
    legal agreement has been submitted. I have therefore assessed the proposal as an
    open market dwelling and not afforded any weight to the benefits of a self-build
    dwelling.
Conclusions
15. The council consider that the principle of residential development is broadly
    acceptable on the site as it lies within the development limit of the settlement. CS
    Policy CS1, in relation to rural settlements, advises that development will be limited
    and should take into account levels of local service provision, infrastructure
    capacity and accessibility. Any development that takes place should be in keeping
    with the character and nature of the settlement. The proposal would satisfy this
    policy. Policy CS2 accepts small scale developments within the defined
    development limits of rural settlements to meet identified local needs. As this is
    more restrictive than the Framework; and given the housing supply position, this
    element of the policy can be afforded very little weight.
16. The council’s decision had regard for the presumption in favour of new
    development set out in the former Framework. The requirement is updated by the
    revised Framework with Policy S3 setting out that development proposals should
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development and accord with policy
    S4 in relation to development within settlements. This is clear that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
17. The Framework sets out the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects. The only
    relevant circumstance in this case, would relate to Policy L2(1)(d)) regarding
    development within residential curtilages but the proposal satisfies the three
    requirements of part d. The benefits of approving this proposal would not therefore
    be substantially outweighed by adverse effects. It should therefore be approved.
18. Whilst I have considered the concerns of the council and the Haxey Parish Council,
    I have not found these to be sufficient to justify a different conclusion. I therefore
    allow the appeal.
19. I have imposed conditions relating to the commencement of development and the
    details of the approved plans for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of
    proper planning. The council have suggested a number of conditions. The details of
    the materials to be used and boundary treatments should be agreed by the council
    to ensure that the proposal has a satisfactory appearance.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision: 6008883


20. A condition has been suggested requiring the removal of all permitted development
    rights within Classes A, B, C, D, E and G in order to protect the historic landscape.
    Having regard to the Framework Policy DM6(2)c which requires clear justification
    for restricting national permitted development rights, I am satisfied that only
    development that would be prominent from outside the site would be justified. I
    have therefore restricted the condition to Class B which relates to additions to the
    roof, including dormer windows.
21. Although some details of drainage have been provided, a condition has been
    imposed to require the details are agreed to accord with sustainable drainage
    principles and to reduce flood risk. I have also required that the access and parking
    areas are installed to ensure that adequate provision is made; that the surfacing
    does not contribute to run-off or result in loose materials entering the highway; and
    to ensure that appropriate visibility is achieved and maintained. I have also included
    a pre-commencement, contaminated land condition, as agreed by the appellant, to
    ensure that the development is safe for future residents.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR


Schedule of conditions
1)    The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
      date of this decision.
2)    The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
      following approved plans: Drawings 2 (rev 1), 3, 4, 5, 10 and 11.
3)    Notwithstanding the provisions of Class B of Part 1 of Schedule 2 of the Town and
      Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order (2015), or any order re-
      enacting that order with or without modification, no addition or alteration shall be
      permitted to the roof.
4)    No development shall take place until an assessment of the risks posed by any
      contamination, carried out in accordance with British Standard BS 10175:
      Investigation of potentially contaminated sites - Code of Practice and the
      Environment Agency‚ Land Contamination Risk Management (LCRM) (or
      equivalent British Standard and Model Procedures if replaced), has been
      submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. If any
      contamination is found, no development shall take place until:
      i. a report specifying the measures to be taken, including the timescale, to
      remediate the site to render it suitable for the development hereby permitted has
      been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority;
      ii. the site has been remediated in accordance with the approved measures and
      timescale; and
      iii. a verification report has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
      planning authority.
      If, during the course of development, any contamination is found which has not
      been previously identified, work shall be suspended until:
      i. additional measures for the remediation of the site have been carried out in
      accordance with details that shall first have been submitted to and approved in
      writing by the local planning authority; and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
Appeal Decision: 6008883


      ii. a verification report for all the remediation works has been submitted to and
      approved in writing by the local planning authority.
5)    The dwelling shall not be occupied until a detailed surface water drainage scheme
      has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
      scheme shall be based on sustainable drainage principles of infiltration as the
      primary method of discharging surface water with the use of permeable paving to
      manage surface water to and from the highway. The scheme shall ensure that run
      off rates and volumes do not exceed the equivalent greenfield rates (or such
      alternative rate as may be agreed in writing with the local planning authority). The
      scheme shall identify exceedance flow routes, attenuation arrangements and
      discharge points, and demonstrate that the system has the capacity to manage
      surface water from the site for the 1% AEP peak storm event plus an appropriate
      allowance for climate change in line with NLC SuDS guidance, current
      Environment Agency guidance and North Lincolnshire Council’s standing advice
      for SuDS. The approved scheme shall be implemented before the development is
      first occupied and shall thereafter be managed and maintained in accordance with
      the approved details
6)    No development above ground level shall take place until details of the materials
      to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the dwelling hereby
      permitted have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
      authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
      details.
7)    Prior to the occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted, details of the positions,
      height, design, materials and type of boundary treatments shall be submitted to
      and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The boundary treatments
      shall be completed in accordance with the approved details before the dwelling is
      occupied.
8)    The dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the vehicle access,
      parking and manoeuvring areas have been provided in accordance with the
      approved plans. These areas shall be retained at all times for their intended use
      only.
9)    The new dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the existing access
      has been improved to include visibility splays of 2m by 2m. The splays shall
      thereafter be permanently retained and kept free of all obstacles to visibility over
      0.6m in height above the level of the adjacent footway.
10) No loose material shall be placed on any driveway or parking area within 10
      metres of the adopted highway.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        5
