Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by A James BSc (Hons) MA MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


Appeal A: 6008105
Dane Cottage, Hogg Lane, Petham, Kent CT4 5PJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Wayne Campbell against the decision of Canterbury City Council.
•    The application reference is CA/25/02065.
•    The development is proposed front porch including W/C.


Appeal Ref: 6008107
Dane Cottage, Hogg Lane, Petham, Kent CT4 5PJ
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Wayne Campbell against the decision of Canterbury City Council.
•    The application reference is CA/25/02066.
•    The works relate to a proposed front porch including W/C.


Decisions
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     As the appeals relate to a listed building, I have had special regard to sections
       16(2) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (the Act).
4.     Since the Council issued its decision notices, a new National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Both main parties
       have been given the opportunity to comment on it and I have taken all comments
       received into consideration.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve a Grade II listed building,
       known as ‘Dane Cottage’ (Ref: 1085508), and any of the features of special
       architectural or historic interest that it possesses.
Reasons
6.     Dane Cottage is a Grade II listed building, which dates back to around the 18th
       century. The building was extended in the late-20th century and then subdivided
       into two dwellings. The appeal property is single storey in height, with

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6008105 and Appeal B: 6008107


         accommodation in the roof. It has a timber frame and is predominately constructed
         of red brick, with some burnt headers. Flint is also present on part of the front and
         rear elevations. The appeal property has a half hipped, clay tiled roof with gabled
         dormer windows. The front and rear elevations have a consistent eaves line. There
         is a porch on the front elevation, which was constructed at the beginning of the
         21st century. The existing porch is modest in size. It has a pitched roof and is
         constructed of timber and brick, with glazing present on the side elevations.
7.       Based on my site visit and the evidence before me, I find that the listed building’s
         special interest, insofar as is relevant to these appeals, is derived from its historic
         and architectural interests as an illustration of domestic architecture from the 18th
         century. The building’s surviving historic fabric, presence of traditional materials
         and its pleasing architectural composition make important contributions in these
         regards.
8.       The proposal seeks to demolish the existing porch, which was constructed in the
         early 21st century1. While the existing porch is a modern addition, it is modest in
         size and height and appears subservient to the listed building. Its pitched roof form
         complements the design of the gabled dormer windows and does not interfere with
         the eaves line of the host building.
9.       The proposed porch would incorporate a small entrance area and downstairs W.C.
         It would be constructed of traditional materials that would complement those found
         on the host building. However, the proposed porch would be larger in size than the
         existing porch. Given its size and its roof form, it would be a far more prominent
         feature on the front elevation of the building than the existing porch. The proposed
         catslide roof would interrupt the building’s consistent eaves line. The proposed roof
         slope would also fail to respect the gradient of the main roof. Despite the large
         area of glazing that is proposed on the side elevation, the proposal by reason of
         the extent of brickwork and catslide roof form would be more solid in its
         appearance than the existing porch. Although timber joinery is proposed, I find that
         the design and the extent of the proposed fenestration fails to respect the more
         modest and traditional style fenestration found on the historic part of the building.
10. The proposed porch would be sited next to part of the building that has already
    been altered and contains some more modern fabric. The proposal would not
    result in the loss of any historic fabric. However, it would partially obscure a
    section of the front elevation of the building and would erode the building’s
    simplistic form. The proposal would also partially obscure a small section of the
    building’s historic timber frame, which is currently visible externally.
11. Overall, I find that the proposed porch would fail to be subservient to the listed
    building. It would result in a discordant feature on the front elevation, which would
    fail to respect the architectural composition of this historic building. Accordingly, I
    find that the proposal would fail to preserve the special interest of the listed
    building.
12. It appears that a larger structure was once present on the front elevation of the
    building; however, this was removed some time ago. While full details of the
    previous structure are not before me, it appears that it had a materially different
    roof form. I therefore give it limited weight in my decision and I do not find that the
    appeal scheme better reflects the building’s historic character.
1
    Application ref: CAL/00/00046


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6008105 and Appeal B: 6008107


13. The appellant argues that the appeal scheme is less intensive than an earlier
    scheme. However, that scheme was dismissed at appeal2 and therefore does not
    establish an acceptable benchmark or fallback position. While the current proposal
    may be reduced in scale, I must assess it on its own merits.
14. The appellant has provided examples of porches elsewhere in the district that
    have received listed building consent. However, those porches differ materially
    from the appeal proposal in their design and roof form. Consequently, their effects
    on their respective listed buildings are not directly comparable to the appeal
    scheme. I therefore give them limited weight in my decision.
15. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would fail to preserve the
    special interest of the Grade II listed building. Policy HE6 of the Framework
    advises that when considering the effect of a proposal on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation. In this case, I find that the proposal would cause harm to the special
    interest of the listed building, albeit the harm would be at a low level. Nonetheless,
    a low level of harm does not equate to a low planning objection and the
    Framework is clear that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of
    considerable importance and weight. Where harm is identified, the Framework
    requires that the effect on the asset and its significance be weighed against any
    public benefits from the proposal.
16. The proposal would result in investment into the property, which would have a
    small economic benefit. I give this limited weight in my decision as a public benefit.
    The proposal would improve the accessibility and functionality of the dwelling and
    provide improved living conditions for occupants. It would also provide a
    downstairs W.C. which would be easier for older and less mobile individuals to
    access, particularly given the steep staircase. However, this is primarily a private
    benefit. Nonetheless, there is no clear and convincing justification before me that
    the proposal represents the least harmful way of achieving these benefits.
17. It is clear that the benefits which would accrue would primarily be of a private
    nature. There is no compelling evidence before me to suggest that the use of the
    listed building as a dwelling would cease in the absence of the proposal. As a
    result, I do not find the proposal necessary to secure the viability and long-term
    conservation of the listed building.
18. Overall, I give the public benefits limited weight in my decision. Consequently,
    there would be insufficient public benefits arising from the proposal to outweigh
    this harm.
19. Given the above, I conclude that, on balance, the proposal would fail to preserve
    the special interest of the listed building. The proposal would also fail to satisfy the
    requirements of the Act and Policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework. In addition,
    the proposal would conflict with Policies DBE3, DBE6, HE1, HE4 and HE5 of the
    Canterbury District Local Plan, July 2017. These policies, among other things,
    seek to protect, conserve and enhance the historic environment and that
    alterations and extensions to listed buildings preserve and enhance their character
    and appearance and the special features for which they are designated.



2
    Application refs: 20/01841 and 20/01842


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6008105 and Appeal B: 6008107


Other Matters
20. I acknowledge the support for the proposal by the Parish Council; however, this
    does not alter my findings set out above.
Conclusion
21. Appeal A: The appeal scheme conflicts with the development plan as a whole and
    there are no other material considerations, including the Framework, that would
    outweigh that conflict. Therefore, for the reasons given above, Appeal A is
    dismissed.
22. Appeal B: For the reasons given above, Appeal B is dismissed.

A James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
