    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 25 July 2026
    by A. J. Boughton MA (IPSD) Dip.Arch. Dip.(Conservation) RIBA MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 28 August 2026

    Appeal Ref: 6008361
    9 The Spinney London N21 1LL.
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr Aleksejs Mincenko against the decision of Enfield Council.
    •   The application Ref is 25/02531/FUL.
    •   The development proposed is to convert the existing HMO into a larger HMO for seven persons (Sui
        Generis), including a self-contained letting room with kitchenette.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to convert the existing
   HMO into a larger HMO for seven persons (Sui Generis), including a self-contained
   letting room with kitchenette at 9 The Spinney London N21 1LL in accordance with
   the terms of the application, Ref 25/02531/FUL and the plans submitted with it,
   subject to the following conditions:
   1) No more than seven persons shall at any time occupy the development hereby
        permitted as a sole or main residence.
   2) Within 6 months of the date of this decision, a scheme for long-stay cycle
        parking which has been previously submitted to and approved in writing by the
        local planning authority, shall be installed and thereafter maintained for the life of
        the development hereby approved.
Preliminary Matters
2. The revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026, to which I have had regard in determining this appeal.

3. The description of development appearing on the application form is unduly lengthy
   and contains unnecessary information. The description of development used on the
   Appeal form mirrors that adopted by the Council in their decision notice. However,
   that description does not adequately describe the development in that it omits
   reference to House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) which is key to the appellant’s
   intentions for a change of use to a larger HMO requiring the specific ‘sui generis’
   permission sought in this appeal. I have therefore adopted an abbreviated version of
   the appellants original description in the interests of clarity and concision.

4. Various terms have been used to describe the sixth letting bedroom to be
   incorporated into the enlarged HMO including reference to a ‘bedsit/flat’1. However,

1
    In the Council’s officer report under the heading ‘Analyses’

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6008361


      although the description of the development refers to the accommodation as ‘self
      contained’ in that it has some cooking facilities, the submitted application is
      consistent with other documents in explaining that the proposal is to convert the
      existing House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) into a larger HMO for seven persons,
      falling within the Sui Generis use class, and that this is to be achieved without any
      additions to the existing building. From this and other parts of the submission it is
      clear that the development does not intend the creation of a separate planning unit
      nor that occupiers of the additional letting room are restricted in their access to, or
      use of, the common parts of the HMO which include a kitchen, dining room and an
      outdoor amenity area.
Main Issues

5. The main issues are:
      • the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
         surrounding area including upon residential amenity, and
      • whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for
         occupiers.

Reasons

Character and Appearance

6. The appeal site (No.9) is a generously sized two-storey semi-detached house in a
   quiet suburban street of similar housing dating from the middle decades of the
   twentieth century. Although notable characteristics of the area are its tranquillity and
   the relatively low level of activity, my observations at the time of the site visit were
   that although already in use as an HMO, No.9 was visually indistinguishable from
   neighbouring houses with a well-maintained appearance and a single ‘front door’
   entry. Nor was there anything that would suggest, to the passer-by, that the house
   was not in single-family occupation. The proposal intends a change of use2 to a
   seven-person HMO incorporating a first-floor bedroom as an additional self-
   contained letting room.

7. The nature of Use is a matter of planning judgement. In this case the quality of the
   accommodation internally and its seemingly high standard of maintenance was
   suggestive of occupancy by younger working people not in need of multi-roomed
   accommodation but able to afford a better standard than might be generally found. It
   is likely, notwithstanding its status in planning terms, that such accommodation
   would be described as a room ‘in a shared house’ in preference to the term ‘HMO’,
   which, notwithstanding its technical accuracy, has pejorative implications that go to
   the matter of character of use. I consider these observations material to the effect of
   the proposal on the character of the area and the reduced likelihood of there being
   unacceptable noise or disturbance arising from the development.

8. The subject letting room is incapable of occupation separately from the rest of the
   building, being on the upper floor of No.9 and lacking its own direct access from the
   street. Consequently, the application of space standards intended for new dwellings
   is inappropriate. It is also clear that the appellant intends a limit on occupancy of the
   whole building by seven residents as a 7-person sui generis property. Although the
2
    From permission ref 23/00259/FUL for a 5 person HMO.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
    Appeal Decision 6008361


      inclusion of a kitchen within the letting room has led to the description ‘self
      contained’ there is nothing to indicate that occupiers would not use the other
      facilities of the property from time to time such as the outdoor area or living/dining
      rooms. The nature of use by the occupier of the subject room would be very little
      different to that of other letting bedrooms except that its occupier might, possibly for
      dietary or health reasons, wish to take particular care as to the preparation of food
      and therefore spend more time in their own room.

9. The Council refer to a number of policies in their refusal reasons, including
   references to the National Planning Policy Framework and the London Plan.
   However, the appropriate starting point in this matter is Policy DMD5 of the Enfield
   Development Management Document (November 2014) (Enfield DMD). This policy
   directly addresses residential conversions to Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO)
   with a requirement at (a) to provide high quality accommodation and accord with
   internal space standards of the London Plan also, at (b) to prevent clustering of
   HMO or harm to the residential character of the area. The remainder of the policy
   addresses matters such as parking, noise and disturbance.

10. It is not suggested that there are other HMOs nearby nor, in relation to DMD5(c) is
    there robust evidence to suggest that the cumulative effect of increasing occupation
    from five persons to seven would result in an ‘unacceptable level of noise and
    disturbance’ for neighbours. For the reasons I give, I consider the change proposed
    is unlikely to create a notable increase in disturbance. The appellant indicates there
    have been no complaints in this regard for the existing use. I also note that it is not
    uncommon for accommodation of a higher standard, such as that at No.9, to set out
    a charter for the behaviour of occupiers in order to maintain those standards.

11. The location benefits from a moderate accessibility rating for public transport and
    on-street parking is available in the general area, consequently, although only one
    car can be parked on site, the appellant would provide cycle parking; also the
    Council’s transport officers have raised no objection to the proposal. I observed
    there are sections of The Spinney and adjoining streets where parking is available
    and which were, at the time of my visit, lightly used. Also, within their concerns on
    this point objectors acknowledge that no ‘technical evidence’3 exists with regard to
    the suggested problems with on-street parking. In any event, such problems can
    arise for a number of reasons bearing in mind that the surrounding houses are
    generously proportioned and larger single households may include a number of car-
    owning adults.

12. Character is not limited to visual considerations, and I have already referred to the
    tranquil environment of the area. Policy DMD5 at (b) and other measures are
    directed at concerns as to the effect of HMO clusters in any one area. Concerns that
    the addition of one room to an existing HMO thereby increasing occupancy by up to
    two persons would significantly change the character and appearance of the area or
    create unacceptable levels of noise and disturbance are not, for the reasons I set
    out, justified. I therefore find no conflict with Policy DMD5 of the Enfield DMD or with
    the other policies referred to in the Councils second refusal reason.




3
    As referred to by objecting residents in email to the Council dated 17 September 2005


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                      3
    Appeal Decision 6008361




Living Conditions of Occupiers

13. The Council’s report refers to a ‘bedsit/flat’ and to Nationally Described Space
    Standards (NDSS) for new dwellings whilst also acknowledging the subject room
    could4 be classed as a “comparatively larger” HMO room, a statement which is
    inconsistent with the first refusal reason. Their reference to ‘over- intensification of
    use’ and a limited floorspace in the proposed letting room, appears to be based on
    an assessment that the room has a ‘floorspace of 10.3m2’, a calculation which the
    appellant disputes as a point of fact and relevance. Even if the Nationally Described
    Space Standards were applicable to individual rooms, it would not be appropriate to
    ignore fittings and storage such as wardrobes from that calculation as the Council
    appear to have done. This aspect of the Council’s reasoning therefore attracts little
    weight.

14. Taken as a whole, the property appears to exceed the minimum gross internal floor
    area of 132m2 for a two-storey 6-bedroom 8-person dwelling as set out in the
    NDSS5. Consequently, notwithstanding that the way a single family occupies a
    dwellinghouse necessarily differs from that of a shared house or HMO, I consider
    No.9 provides generously proportioned accommodation sufficient to accommodate
    up to seven people. The subject room, identified as ‘Bedroom 06’ on the existing
    plans, was at the time of my visit fitted with an en-suite shower room and a
    kitchenette which was more compact than shown on the drawn submission. It was
    furnished with a wardrobe, double bed and a desk area with space to sit. The room
    was well lit with a good outlook from a wide bay window and was of a good size for
    occupation by (up to) two people within the enlarged HMO.

15. According to the plans supplied the remainder of the building is laid out with 5 other
    bedrooms and shared facilities on the ground floor including a kitchen and dining
    room (conservatory). There was also access to outdoor amenity space.
    Considering the proposal as a whole the resulting HMO would contain 4 bedrooms
    with ensuite facilities6 and two others with access to a shared bathroom and a
    separate ground floor shower/WC. The insertion of the additional letting room would
    not affect occupiers of the remainder of the building to any material extent. Although
    this is not referred to in the application, I also note that one good-sized room on the
    ground floor has no designation on the ‘existing’ plan but is shown as a proposed
    additional Kitchen-Dining Room. Overall, the shared facilities of the HMO offer a
    good level of provision whether or not they are used by two additional residents.

16. I therefore conclude the development would provide high quality accommodation
    and would not conflict with the provisions set out in Policy DMD5 of the DMD 2014.
Conclusion and Conditions

17. The Council refer to a previous appeal7 for a similar development at the site but for
    two ‘studios’ in addition to the 5-person HMO then existing, suggesting a total
    occupancy of 8 persons. The Inspector’s reasoning is consistent with my own
    conclusions with respect to the availability of parking and adequacy of living
4
  Officer report
5
  Stated in appeal ref APP/Q5300/W/25/3360248
6
  Including the subject room which also has its own kitchen.
7
  Appeal Ref: APP/Q5300/W/25/3360248


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                       4
 Appeal Decision 6008361


    conditions for occupiers. The decision to dismiss turned largely upon the potential
    for disturbance to neighbours arising from the addition of these rooms, a matter to
    which significant weight was attached. I have not been provided with the evidence
    upon which that matter was determined, but in this case the proposal is to bring only
    one additional room within the existing HMO such that the occupancy would be less
    than in the previous appeal. As my reasoning explains. and as a matter of planning
    judgment, I attach less-than-significant weight to the likelihood of disturbance such
    that the particular circumstances of the case, which I have identified in my
    reasoning, merit a different conclusion. Whilst I note the concerns expressed by
    other residents as to a change in the character of the area or of creating a
    precedent, the adopted Local Plan has policies that address these issues and I
    have taken these into account in my decision.

18. I have concluded that the development would cause no harm to the residential
    character of the area and would not result in unacceptable noise or disturbance for
    adjoining occupiers. Noting that the result of the development would be a 7-person
    house in multiple occupation with 6 letting rooms, variously equipped, I have also
    concluded the accommodation would meet the reasonable needs of its occupants.
    Consequently, taking into account all matters raised, the proposal would accord with
    the Development Plan taken as a whole and therefore the appeal should succeed
    subject to conditions. As the development is a change of use and has already taken
    place, a time limit is not appropriate. No material changes to the external
    appearance of the building are intended and the interior re-ordering necessary for
    the change of use has already taken place, consequently no ‘plans’ condition is
    necessary. However, a condition to limit occupancy to a maximum of seven persons
    is required to accord with the basis of my reasoning and also, to support sustainable
    transport, a scheme for long-stay cycle parking.


Andrew Boughton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       5
