Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6008362
16 Dalton Avenue, Manchester M14 7NR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Selvin Sagayam against the decision of Manchester City Council.
•   The application reference is 145209/FO/2026.
•   The development proposed is change of use from a dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a House in
    Multiple Occupation (Use Class C4) for a maximum of four occupants.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026. It does not change the planning policy context in
   respect of the main issues, and I have determined the appeal accordingly.
3. In support of the appeal, the appellant has submitted amended plans (Proposed
   Floor Plan – 19 April). These plans more accurately show the existing window
   positions at the property. In deciding whether it is appropriate to accept the
   amended plans, I have had regard to the Procedural Guide: Planning Appeals -
   England, which states that the appeal process should not be used to evolve a
   scheme. As the amendments relate only to the accurate depiction of existing
   windows and do not alter the nature or scope of the proposal, I am satisfied that no
   party would be prejudiced by their acceptance. I have therefore determined the
   appeal on the basis of the amended plans.
4. The description on the application form is long and contains references which are
   not acts of development. I have therefore used the description of development
   taken from the Council’s decision notice, as opposed to the application form as it
   more accurately describes that for which permission is sought. However, in doing
   this I have also had regard in my reasoning to the description on the application
   form.
5. Reference to ‘retrospective’ in the description of development is not a form of
   development, therefore I have removed the reference to this in the banner heading
   above.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are:
       •   the effect of the proposal on the mix and balance of housing in the area, with
           particular regard to the supply of family housing; and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008362


         •   whether the proposal would harm the character of the area and the living
             conditions of neighbouring residents, with particular regard to the effects of
             noise and disturbance.
Reasons
Housing Mix and Balance
7. The appeal property is 16 Dalton Avenue, a two-storey end-terrace dwelling house
   in Class C3 use1. It is located within a predominantly residential area of Moss Side.
   The proposal seeks to change the use of the appeal property from a dwelling house
   to a House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) in Use Class C4 for a maximum of four
   occupants.
8. MCS Policy SP1 sets out the spatial principles that guide the strategic development
   of Manchester. It seeks, amongst other things, to ensure that development makes a
   positive contribution to neighbourhoods, including the health, safety and wellbeing
   of residents.
9. MCS Policy H5 sets out that in Central Manchester, priority will be given to family
   housing and other high value, high quality development. This reflects the findings of
   the Housing Needs Assessment 2010 (Arc4). Whilst the proposal would not
   contribute towards the provision of family housing envisaged by Policy H5, the loss
   of a single dwelling would have only a limited effect on the overall housing mix and
   balance. Moreover, the policy supports the provision of housing capable of
   attracting and retaining graduates and economically active residents. Taking these
   factors together, I do not find that the proposal would, in itself, conflict with MCS
   Policy H5.
10. MCS Policy H11 relates specifically to HMOs. The policy sets out different
    approaches for different parts of the city, depending on the extent to which HMOs
    are already concentrated and seeks to manage changes of use from C3
    dwellinghouses to HMOs. The aim is to prevent further loss of Class C3 dwelling
    houses, which generally provide accommodation for families. The policy's first
    criterion requires consideration of whether the proposal would contribute to an
    existing concentration of HMOs. It states that a change of use from a
    dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a small HMO (Use Class C4) will not be permitted
    where there is a high concentration of HMOs within the surrounding area. The
    Council has provided information regarding the concentration of HMOs in the
    surrounding area, including details of licensed HMOs in the vicinity of the appeal
    site. Whilst this indicates the presence of some HMO accommodation locally, the
    evidence before me does not demonstrate that there is a sufficiently high
    concentration of HMOs such that conflict with this element of Policy H11 would
    arise.
11. However, Policy H11 is not only concerned with concentrations of HMOs but also
    with the protection of family housing in areas where regeneration initiatives have
    sought to increase its provision. In particular, the policy resists the loss of dwellings
    suitable for family occupation where regeneration activity has been undertaken to
    support sustainable communities through the retention and expansion of family
    housing stock and supporting services. The Council has advised that the appeal
    property is located within an area influenced by the Maine Road regeneration
    initiative. The evidence before me indicates that the regeneration activity was
 1
     The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6008362


     undertaken with the specific objective of increasing and retaining family housing in
     order to support sustainable communities. Accordingly, I am satisfied that this
     element of Policy H11 is engaged. The loss of the appeal dwelling to HMO use
     would therefore be at odds with that objective. Consequently, I find that the
     proposal would conflict with this element of Policy H11, to which I attach significant
     weight.
12. Consequently, I find that the proposal would conflict with Policy H11 of the
    Manchester Core Strategy, which seeks amongst other things to manage changes
    of use to HMOs and protect the supply of family housing in specified areas. For the
    same reasons, it would also be at odds with the objectives of Policy SP1 insofar as
    it seeks to support sustainable, balanced and mixed communities.
Character and living conditions
13. The Council considers that the proposed use would increase activity, noise and
    disturbance to the detriment of neighbouring occupiers and the character of the area.
    The submitted plans indicate that the property would comprise a four-bedroom HMO
    occupied by four individuals. Taking account of the potential for occupiers to maintain
    different daily routines, receive separate deliveries and entertain visitors
    independently, the use is likely to result in a degree of increased activity when
    compared with occupation by a single household. However, I consider that any such
    intensification would be modest. Consequently, any associated increase in noise and
    disturbance arising from comings and goings would be limited.
14. Furthermore, no objection has been raised by the Council's Environmental Health
    officers, and no representations have been received from neighbouring occupiers.
    Given the absence of objections, I attach moderate weight to the appellant’s
    argument that the change of use would not result in an unacceptable impact on the
    neighbouring residential occupiers.
15. Taking these matters into account, I find that the proposed HMO would not
    represent an over-intensive use of the property and would not harm the character
    of the area through increased levels of activity, noise or disturbance. Consequently,
    the proposal would accord with Policies SP1 and DM1 of the Manchester Core
    Strategy (MCS) which, in so far as they seek to protect residential amenity and
    secure high quality neighbourhoods.
Planning Balance
16. Whilst the proposal would not harm the character of the area or neighbouring
    residential amenity, it would conflict with Policy H11 through the loss of a dwelling
    suitable for family occupation in an area where regeneration initiatives have sought
    to increase and retain family housing. As a result, it would also be contrary to the
    strategic objectives of Policy SP1 relating to the creation of sustainable, balanced
    and mixed communities. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would conflict
    with the development plan when considered as a whole.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
