Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by S Sharp BSc(Hons) BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008475
4 Prospect Street, Reading RG1 7YG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr J Scott against the decision of Reading Borough Council.
•    The application reference is PL/25/1803.
•    The development is described as replacement of deteriorated and leaking roof tiles.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The description of development on the application form includes reference to the
      application being retrospective. I noted on site that new tiles were in situ rather
      than natural slate. Both main parties agree that the plans before me show that the
      tiles that have been laid, which I understand are fibre cement based, are those
      shown on the proposal plans before me. I have therefore determined the appeal
      on this basis, albeit I have omitted the word “retrospective” from the description.
3.    The application form states that the applicant was Mr J Scott. Details of further
      names had been provided in the same section of this form. However, I have taken
      the name of the appellant as being solely Mr J Scott as the other names appear to
      be owners of the site rather than additional applicants.
4.    During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
      appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
      consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework. References hereafter are to
      the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
5.    The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
      of the Russell Street/Castle Hill Conservation Area.
Reasons
6.    The appeal site (the site) lies within the Russell Street/Castle Hill Conservation
      Area (CA), specifically the Oxford Road character area as defined by the Council’s
      Conservation Area Appraisal (CAA). The northern end of Prospect Street,
      including the site, shares much of its character and appearance with Oxford Road.
      There is evidence of loss of architectural features from buildings, as reflected in
      the CA’s inclusion within Historic England’s list of “Heritage at Risk”. However,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008475


      roofs remain almost entirely of natural slate. The predominance of this material
      and its associations with the late eighteenth and nineteenth century buildings that
      characterise the area, is of great aesthetic and historical value, contributing to the
      CA’s significance.
7.    Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act (1990)
      (LBCA) requires that, in my decision, special attention shall be paid to the
      desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a
      conservation area.
8.    The building’s roof at the site was covered in natural slate. This covering remains
      on the adjoining buildings, and the juxtaposition highlights the visual differences
      between it and the new tiles that now cover the roof. The new tiles are materially
      more uniform in appearance, the courses are more even, and, by their very nature,
      patination will be materially different to the natural slate. Such differences are
      apparent from street level and any designed variation in finish and attempted
      replication of natural slates’ visual character is not apparent from such public
      vantage points. As such the new tiles do not possess the aesthetic values of slate
      and are visually jarring against the adjoining, retained natural slate.
9.    Furthermore, the removal of the natural slate results in the loss in the legibility of
      the building’s history. The loss is part of a wider incremental diminishing of the
      CA’s history. The value to future generations of understanding the CA’s past is
      compromised.
10. For these reasons I find that neither the character nor the appearance of the CA is
    preserved. This results in conflict with policies EN3 and EN6 of the Reading
    Borough Local Plan (2019) (LP). Both policies state that the special interest,
    character and architecture of conservation areas will be conserved and enhanced.
    Policy EN6 also states, amongst other things, that the historic environment will
    inform and shape new development. In reaching this finding I have had regard to
    policies HE4, HE5 and HE6 of the Framework and find that policies EN3 and EN6
    of the LP are consistent with them.
Other matters
Harm v public benefits
11. I have already found that the development does not preserve the character and
    appearance of the CA and, as a result, conflicts with development plan policy.
    Policy HE6 of the Framework states that, when considering the impact of a
    proposed development on the significance of a designated heritage asset such as
    a conservation area, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation. This is irrespective of whether any effect of the development on the
    asset’s significance amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total
    loss of that significance.
12. In this instance the development results in harm. This is because of the overall
    identified risk to the CA, how incremental loss affects its significance, and how
    important natural slates are to the historic and aesthetic values of the designation.
13. Policy HE6 of the Framework then states that, where a development harms the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, this effect should be weighed against
    the public benefits arising from the development. The tiles are described by the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008475


      appellant as having enabled an affordable roof replacement in preference to more
      piecemeal repairs. The appellant also references public benefits including the
      reduced embodied carbon of fibre cement tiles relative to natural slate, avoidance
      of material waste, the reduced structural loading on the building, long-term
      durability, and weather protection. However, there is little evidence before me in
      relation to these qualities. There is also no evidence of a net benefit to fire safety,
      as the standards met are described in the appellant’s evidence as comparable to
      the performance of natural slate. Overall, such public benefits do not outweigh the
      harm that I have identified.
Listed buildings
14. I have noted from the Council’s evidence that the site is within the wider setting of
    the grade II listed terrace at 199 to 203 (odds) Oxford Road. Section 66 of the
    LBCA states that special regard must be had to the desirability of preserving such
    listed buildings or their setting or any features of special architectural or historic
    interest which they possess. In the context of this duty and the evidence before
    me, including my observations on site, I find that the setting of the terrace is
    preserved with no harm to its significance, because of the separation distance to
    the site.
Precedent
15. I acknowledge the appellant’s comments that new, non-natural slate roof
    coverings, including fibre cement tiles, have been accepted in settings within
    conservation areas and/or near listed buildings. I do not have the specific details of
    the examples they have cited at Hawkshaw Lodge, Hawkshaw (Greater
    Manchester), The Cedars, Malvern (Worcestershire), a site in Derbyshire, and a
    renovated house in the Ranmoor Conservation Area (South Yorkshire).
16. However, in this instance, I have afforded great weight to the historic and aesthetic
    value of natural slate to the significance of this particular CA. The examples cited
    are not within this designation and, therefore, are not comparable. I afford them
    very limited weight as a material consideration.
17. The appellant has also cited an example of using fibre cement tiles for new
    development in a conservation area in Reading. I do not know whether this is the
    same conservation area as the appeal site. In any case, I note that the example is
    apparently for a new development where the loss of the historic value of the
    natural slate would not have been a consideration. As such, this case is not
    comparable, and I afford it very limited weight as a material consideration.
Procedural matters
18. I acknowledge that the appellant engaged with the Council prior to submitting the
    application which accords with the emphasis for proactive engagement to resolve
    issues as advocated by the Framework. I also acknowledge their comments that
    the proactive engagement was not reciprocated by the Council.
19. However, this is not a matter that I can consider under a Section 78 planning
    appeal and does not alter my findings, in which I have had regard solely to the
    planning merits of the proposal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008475


Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

S Sharp
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
