Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 June 2026
by R Dickson BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16TH September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008719
34 Banwell Road, Odd Down, Bath, BANES BA2 2UJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mrs Meenu Manro against the decision of Bath and North East Somerset
    Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/04545/FUL
•   The development proposed is change of use of 3 bedroom dwellinghouse (use Class C3) to dual use
    as a 4 bedroom dwellinghouse or House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) (Use Class C3/C4).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of 3
   bedroom dwellinghouse (use Class C3) to dual use as a 4 bedroom dwellinghouse
   or House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) (Use Class C3/C4) at 34 Banwell Road,
   Odd Down, Bath, BANES BA2 2UJ in accordance with the terms of the application,
   Ref 25/04545/FUL, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location Plan and Proposed Plan.
     3)       Prior to first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation hereby approved
              an Energy Performance Certificate showing that the property has an EPC
              rating of C, B or A shall be submitted to the local planning authority and
              approved in writing and shall be maintained thereafter.
     4)       Prior to first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupation hereby
              approved, a secure, covered bicycle storage for at least 4 bicycles shall be
              provided in accordance with details which have been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The bicycle storage shall
              be retained permanently thereafter.
Applications for costs
2. A separate application for costs is made by Mrs Meenu Manro against the decision
   of Bath and North East Somerset Council. This is the subject of a separate
   decision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008719


Preliminary matters
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026, during the consideration of the appeal. I have taken account of this in
   making my decision. As the changes are not material to the issues before me and
   would not alter my conclusions, it has not been necessary to seek further
   comments from the main parties.
4. I have used the description of development used on the Council’s decision notice,
   which more accurately reflects the proposal before me.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers
   of 36 Banwell Road, with specific regard to noise.
Reasons
6. Banwell Road is a residential street comprising semi-detached two storey
   dwellings. A small area of incidental open space with established trees is on the
   corner of Banwell Road where it meets Cranmore Place. A footpath bounds the
   grass, providing access to a footpath behind the rear gardens of Banwell Road and
   Cranmore Place, such that the rear gardens of dwellings on these streets do not
   share the same boundary.
7. The appeal site, 34 Banwell Road (No 34), is one half of a semi-detached pair at
   the end of Banwell Road. Its neighbour, 36 Banwell Road (No 36) sits near to the
   corner, sited adjacent to the square of grass. Another HMO, 98 Cranmore Place
   (No 98), also sits adjacent to the open space, perpendicular to No 36. While the
   rear elevations and gardens are within close proximity to one another, the footpath
   runs between them, therefore they do not share a common boundary.
8. The existing property is a single-family dwelling. As such, for a family dwelling of
   this size, it might be expected that there would be a modest degree of noise and
   disturbance from the comings and goings of the occupants to attend work and
   school, as well as visitors, tradespeople and deliveries. The proposal would result
   in a 4 bedroom HMO.
9. I appreciate that the number of comings and goings to and from the property may
   increase slightly compared to the existing situation, given that occupants of HMOs
   are likely to be unrelated and have different patterns of movements to one another.
   However, the existing family dwelling may be occupied by families with adult
   children, and therefore have less coordinated movements. Given the size of the
   HMO proposed, the noise and disturbance would be unlikely to be much different
   from that of a family home.
10. Policy H2 of the Bath and North East Somerset Council Core Strategy and
    Placemaking Plan incorporating the Local Plan Partial Update Volume 1 District-
    wide Strategy and Policies (2023) (Local Plan Partial Update) sets out the criteria
    against which HMOs are assessed. The Bath and North East Somerset Council
    Houses in Multiple Occupation Supplementary Planning Document (2023) (SPD)
    expands on Policy H2, to include the sandwich test, to prevent HMOs having a
    negative impact upon existing dwellings, and to ensure there is balance at street
    level. No 98 is an HMO, therefore the proposal would result in No 36 being
    sandwiched between two HMOs.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008719


11. Although the proposal would result in the sandwiching of No 36 between two
    HMOs, given that the proposal would have limited harmful impact on the
    neighbouring occupiers as a result of the change of use, and taking into account
    the separation created by the open space and perpendicular angle of No 98, the
    proposal would not result in an unacceptable impact on the occupants of No 36,
    with regard to noise. As such, the proposal would support the aims of Policy H2 of
    the Local Plan Partial Update, and the SPD.
12. As such, the proposal would not harm the living conditions of the occupiers of No
    36, with specific regard to noise. The proposal is therefore in accordance with
    Policy H2 of the Local Plan Partial Update, and Policy D6 of the Bath and North
    East Somerset Local Plan 2011-2029 Core Strategy and Placemaking Plan District-
    wide Strategy and Policies Volume 1 (2014 and 2017), which together seek to
    ensure that proposals do not cause harm to the living conditions of existing
    occupiers by reason of increased noise or other disturbance.
Conditions
13. In addition to the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to impose a condition
    specifying the approved plans, in the interests of certainty.
14. A condition requiring bicycle storage to be provided prior to occupation is also
    necessary to ensure that future occupants have access to sustainable transport
    options.
15. A condition requiring an Energy Performance Certificate to be submitted to and
    approved by the Council is necessary to ensure that the property achieves an
    acceptable energy rating and is energy efficient, even if the appellant intends to fit
    low-level energy bulbs in all fixed lights.
16. Finally, the Council suggested a condition specifying that the proposal is used for
    Class C3 or C4 use. However, given that I have concluded that the development is
    acceptable, this condition would not be necessary or relevant to the proposal
    before me.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above, the proposal is in accordance with the development
    plan when read as a whole. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

R Dickson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
