Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008497
2 Westparkside, Goole DN14 6XN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mrs Maureen Mckone against the decision of East Riding of Yorkshire
    Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/03187/PLF.
•   The development proposed is described as “erection of boundary fence (1.52 m in height)
    (retrospective)”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters and Main Issue
3. I have used the description from the decision notice as the application form
   contains a large amount of additional information which, whilst I have taken it into
   account, is superfluous for identifying the development to which the appeal relates.
   My use of this does not alter anything fundamental in the proposals nor affect the
   ability of any of the main parties to make their respective cases.
4. I am also aware of the most recent version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework. The substantive changes thereto do not materially affect the matters at
   appeal, nor would proceeding without further consultation with the main parties
   prejudice their ability to make their cases in regard to the main issue. This is the
   effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. Boundary treatments within the surrounding area, along Airmyn Road and
   Westparkside are predominantly characterised by low brick walls and soft
   landscaping in the form of hedges. This gives the street scene an open and verdant
   feel which contributes positively to the character and appearance of the area. The
   appeal site occupies a prominent corner plot, and the appeal development
   comprises a timber fence enclosing part of the site. Whilst a section of the fence
   forms the boundary with the neighbouring property at Number 1, another section is
   positioned adjacent the highway.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008497


6. There is some ambiguity as to whether the remainder of the fence as it returns to
   the side of the dwelling between the appeal site and Number 1 is lawful, the length
   facing the road frontage nonetheless forms a tall and visually prominent feature in
   the street scene. Its solidity creates an enclosed form of development that is
   uncharacteristic of the area, unacceptably jarring with the quality of the area’s
   openness in the public realm sense. The prominence of the corner siting of the plot
   exacerbates the visual effects of the fence.
7. Whilst other plots do not present lengths of more private garden to road frontages,
   this does not justify the height and length of the fence in this case. Planting is
   present in front of sections of the fence, but a substantial proportion of the structure
   projects above it and remains readily visible from the public realm. Although timber
   will weather over time and its appearance may soften, its height and length would
   remain. In contrast to the prevailing pattern of low and open boundary treatments,
   the appeal fence would continue to appear incongruous in this prominent corner
   plot location.
8. The development has a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the
   area. Therefore, it is contrary to Policy ENV1 of the East Riding Local Plan Strategy
   Document which requires all development proposals to achieve a high quality of
   design that optimises the potential of the site and contributes to a sense of place
   by, amongst other things, having regard to the specific characteristics of the site’s
   wider context and the character of the surrounding area.
Other Matters
9. I appreciate that the fence provides additional security but am unclear as to
   whether there may be other, less harmful means to achieve the same outcome. It
   also seems the case that there used to be a substantial hedge which may have
   provided precisely that function. The fence does not sit any closer to the highway
   than the previous planting, but neither this nor the lack of harm or objection in other
   regards justifies the height, design and length of the fence as it stands.
10. Although a timber fence exists at the property opposite, the boundary adjacent the
    highway is formed by a low hedge. Furthermore, from my observations during the
    site visit, I did not identify any comparable boundary treatments on other corner
    plots in the area. The removal of some dead trees might have improved safety and
    been beneficial for maintenance purposes, but that does not provide acceptable
    compensation for the harm to the character and appearance of the area caused by
    the appeal scheme.
Conclusion and Recommendation
11. With the above in mind, any benefits of the proposed development would be worthy
    of only very limited weight. As such, they would be incapable of outweighing the
    substantial weight I would attach to the harm I have found, which would be obvious
    and enduring and conflict with the design related decision-making policies of the
    Framework. The appeal scheme conflicts with the development plan and material
    considerations do not indicate a decision other than in accordance. I therefore
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008497


Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
