Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026 by J Kirkaldy BSc (Hons) PGDip MRTPI
Decision by Paul Thompson DipTRP MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008896
11 Beechwood, Crawley Down Road, Felbridge, Surrey RH19 2NT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mrs Shelley Freear against the decision of Tandridge District Council.
•   The application Ref is TA/2026/122.
•   The development proposed is for the erection of a detached garage in front garden to serve existing
    house and associated landscaping works including soil infilling (approx 450mm) to rear of the
    building.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a
   detached garage in front garden to serve existing house and associated
   landscaping works including soil infilling (approx 450mm) to rear of the building at
   11 Beechwood, Crawley Down Road, Felbridge, Surrey RH19 2NT in accordance
   with the terms of the application, Ref TA/2026/122, subject to the following
   conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved plans: A101 Rev D, A102 Rev D, A200 Rev D, A300 Rev D,
              Location Plan.
     3)       Prior to the above ground construction of the building hereby approved
              details and/or samples of the materials to be used in the construction of the
              external surfaces of the building shall be submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. Development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved details and thereafter retained.
     4)       Prior to the above ground construction of the building hereby approved a
              detailed landscaping scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. The scheme shall include planting plans,
              species, sizes, densities, implementation programme and management
              arrangements. All planting shall be carried out in the first planting season
              following completion or first occupation of the development. Any trees or
              plants which die, are removed or become seriously damaged or diseased
              within five years shall be replaced with others of similar size and species.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Planning Officer 6008896


Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   surrounding area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
4. The appeal site comprises a two-storey detached dwelling set back from the road
   behind a deep front garden, which lies at a lower level than the road. It is located in
   a Green Belt settlement in a residential area characterised by an eclectic mix of
   dwelling types, sizes and architectural styles. Opposite the site, on the other side of
   the road, is a large parcel of open space planted with trees, which makes a positive
   contribution to the open, verdant character of the area.
5. Given the varied dwelling types there is no consistent pattern to the form or siting of
   garages in the vicinity of the site. Whilst the proposed garage would project forward
   of the host dwelling, garages in a similar relationship to their host dwellings are
   visible across the open space on Copthorne Road. Consequently, the proposal
   would not appear incongruous within its surroundings in this part of Crawley Down
   Road.
6. Although timber cladding is not a material typically found in the surrounding area,
   the visual impact of the proposed garage would be limited. Despite its siting close
   to the front boundary of the site, views of the side and rear elevations would be
   largely screened by a combination of the existing and proposed boundary planting
   and the variation in land levels. Therefore, the proposed garage would appear as a
   discreet feature within the street scene and would not result in harm to the
   character or appearance of the area.
7. For the reasons given above, the proposal would not have a harmful effect on the
   character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would therefore accord with
   Policy DLP12 of the Tandridge Local Plan Part 2: Detailed Policies 2014-2029 (July
   2014) (LP), which supports ancillary domestic outbuildings within the curtilage of
   dwellings in Green Belt settlements where they are in keeping with the character of
   the village. The proposal would also accord with Policy DP7 of the LP and Policy
   CSP18 of the Tandridge Core Strategy (2008) (CS) which seek high quality design
   that responds positively to its surroundings.
Conditions
8. Standard conditions relating to the commencement of development and a condition
   requiring the development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans
   are necessary to provide clarity.
9. As limited details have been provided a condition requiring details of external
   materials is necessary in the interests of the character and appearance of the area.
10. I have had regard to the Parish Council’s request for a condition relating to
    vegetation screening. The submitted plans indicate additional planting within the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Planning Officer 6008896


     raised beds, which over time, would provide further screening of the proposed
     garage. However, only limited details of the proposed planting have been provided.
     Consequently, I consider it necessary to impose a condition requiring the
     submission and approval of a planting scheme, in the interests of the character and
     appearance of the area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
11. The proposal would accord with the development plan when read as a whole. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

J Kirkaldy
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

Paul Thompson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
