Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by S F Barnes MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008122
Milan Villa, Hyde Wood Lane, Canewdon, Essex SS4 3RR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Daniel Hilton of Rushton Homes Ltd against the decision of Rochford
     District Council.
•    The application Ref is 24/00600/FUL.
•    The development proposed is a revised scheme to demolish the existing property and garages on
     the site and construct a 4(min) bedroomed Georgian style house, workshop and garage, utilising an
     existing crossover for access through private gates onto a private driveway with 2 car parking spaces
     and 2 garage parking spaces.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the Act) introduced a
       statutory framework for biodiversity net gain (BNG). Unless exempt, planning
       permissions are subject to a statutory condition requiring at least a 10% increase
       in biodiversity value over the site's pre-development biodiversity value. Where the
       statutory condition applies, national information requirements require information
       on the site's existing habitats and biodiversity value to accompany an application.
3.     As the proposal was submitted as self-build and custom-build (‘self-build’)
       development, it was understood to be exempt from the statutory BNG condition.
       Consequently, there is no evidence before me of the site's pre-development
       biodiversity value. Given the reliance on the self-build exemption, I sought the
       parties' views on whether a planning condition suggested by the Council securing
       the development as self-build development would satisfy the relevant policy tests
       for conditions. I have considered the representations received below.
4.     On 17 August 2026, a revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. I have considered the comments made by the
       main parties on this matter.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
       • whether the statutory BNG requirements would apply to the proposal and, if
           so, whether they would be met; and
       • whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
           having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008122


Reasons
         Requirement for BNG
6.       The main parties agree that the proposal would constitute a self-build development
         for the purposes of section 1(A) of the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act
         2015. To ensure this, the Council suggests a condition (Condition 16) that requires
         the dwelling to be first occupied by a person who had a primary input into its
         design and layout and who would live in it for at least 3 years following completion.
7.       The main parties agree that the proposal could be secured as self-build through
         that suggested condition and that, if secured in this way, the relevant exemption
         from the statutory BNG condition would apply. I also recognise that the proposal
         includes biodiversity enhancements. However, absent evidence of the site's pre-
         development biodiversity value, there would be no basis upon which compliance
         with the statutory BNG requirements could be assessed were the requirements of
         the suggested condition unable to be met.
8.       Even if the suggested condition’s wording would allow a breach to be detected,
         compliance with it would depend on the continued occupation of the dwelling by a
         particular person. If for any reason that person ceased to occupy the dwelling
         before the end of the specified period, the self-build exemption would no longer
         apply. Despite this, the scheme’s permanent effects on biodiversity would clearly
         endure that change in circumstances.
9.       Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) on the use of planning conditions states that
         planning permission usually runs with the land and that it is rarely appropriate to
         provide otherwise1. It goes on to identify exceptional occasions where
         development that would not normally be permitted may be justified on planning
         grounds because of who would benefit from the permission. In this regard, the
         PPG gives examples of situations where the benefits of a planning permission
         might be limited to particular classes of people. However, no compelling evidence
         has been presented to demonstrate that such an exceptional occasion applies in
         this instance. In the absence of such a justification the suggested condition would
         be in conflict with the PPG and would therefore fail the tests of reasonableness
         and enforceability set out in Framework policy DM6.
10. For these reasons, the development would not be secured as self-build and the
    proposal would therefore not benefit from the relevant exemption to the statutory
    BNG condition. In the absence of evidence of the site's pre-development
    biodiversity value, there is no basis upon which compliance with the statutory BNG
    requirements could be determined. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would
    fail to comply with the statutory requirements set out in Schedule 7A of the Act.
         Whether inappropriate development
11. The appeal site contains a previously extended, 2-storey dwelling and single-
    storey garage outbuildings set roughly in the centre of a spacious garden plot. The
    site’s perimeter is largely enclosed by, variously, fences, tree planting, hedges and
    vegetation, with openings for separate entrance and exit points at the Hyde Wood
    Lane frontage. The buildings on the site and those adjoining are largely well-
    screened from this part of the Lane, and beyond this it turns quickly to open fields.

1
    Paragraph: 015 Reference ID: 21a-015-20140306


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6008122


12. Policy DM21 of the Rochford District Council Local Development Framework
    Development Management Plan (2014) (‘DMP’) seeks to limit increases in the
    massing, bulk and floor space of replacement dwellings in the Green Belt. The
    proposal would replace the existing dwelling and detached garages with a 2-storey
    dwelling and a detached single storey garage/workshop outbuilding to its side. The
    proposed dwelling would be less than 1 metre higher than the existing building’s
    ridge height which would be necessary to achieve satisfactory proportions
    consistent with the intended design. The Council’s finding that the proposal is
    acceptable in design terms, which I share, reinforces my view on the acceptability
    of this aspect.
13. The proposal would effectively consolidate much of the existing spread of built
    form into a taller, single mass alongside a subordinate outbuilding. As a result, the
    proposed dwelling would appear bulkier at first-floor and roof level when viewed
    from within the site, notwithstanding the opening up of land currently occupied by
    built form and the tighter clustering of the proposed buildings. Accordingly, and
    despite the modest reduction in built volume and footprint, the proposal would
    conflict with Policy DM21 by reason of its increased bulk and massing when
    compared with the existing development.
14. The Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to
    the Green Belt. National decision-making policy GB7 sets out categories of
    development that are not inappropriate in the Green Belt, and which therefore
    should not be regarded as harmful to it or be required to demonstrate very special
    circumstances.
15. The Council considers that the proposal would not fall within Policy GB7(1)(b),
    which relates to the replacement of existing buildings. The appellant instead relies
    on Policy GB7(1)(e), which applies to the redevelopment of previously developed
    land (PDL) which would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green
    Belt. Whilst the proposal would replace an existing dwelling, it would also
    redevelop PDL. Neither the detailed evidence before me nor the caselaw2 referred
    to suggests that a proposal falling within one category of Policy GB7 cannot also
    be considered against another.
16. Although the proposal would appear bulkier when viewed from within the site, its
    effect on openness would be limited by the site's enclosed nature and the
    negligible change in built footprint. Any resulting harm to openness would therefore
    fall short of the high threshold of substantial harm. Consequently, the proposal
    would fall within Policy GB7(1)(e).
17. Whilst the Framework seeks to maintain Green Belts and their openness, it also
    supports the redevelopment of PDL in circumstances such as these. Policy DM21
    of the DMP does not contemplate that exception. It is therefore materially
    inconsistent with Framework policy GB7 as it applies to this proposal. Although the
    proposal would conflict with DMP Policy DM21, that conflict attracts very limited
    weight in accordance with Framework Annex A, paragraph 2.
18. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would not comprise
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt having regard to the Framework and
    relevant development plan policies.

2
 Turner v Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government and another [2016] EWCA Civ 466; and R (on the application
of Samuel Smith Old Brewery (Tadcaster) and others) v North Yorkshire County Council [2020] UKSC 3.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              3
Appeal Decision 6008122


Other Matters
19. The proposal follows a previous refusal of planning permission, which it sought to
    overcome. However, little detail of that scheme is before me, and I have therefore
    determined the case on the basis of the evidence presented.
20. The Council has not identified harm in respect of the character and appearance of
    the area, living conditions of either future or neighbouring occupiers, nor in regard
    to highways, flood risk, drainage and arboriculture matters, subject to conditions.
    The absence of harm in these respects is a neutral factor and does not weigh in
    favour of the appeal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
21. Although the proposal would not comprise inappropriate development in the Green
    Belt, it would fail to comply with the statutory BNG requirement. As the site lies
    outside a settlement, Framework policy S5(5) is engaged.
22. Given my findings on the suggested self-build condition, this would not be secured
    as a benefit of the proposal. Whilst the proposal may better meet the appellant's
    design and accommodation preferences, this would principally amount to a private
    benefit rather than a benefit to the public at large. As an open market dwelling, it
    could contribute towards meeting the accommodation needs of the community
    which would ordinarily attract substantial weight in line with Framework policy
    HO7. However, in the absence of detailed evidence of such need, the replacement
    of a single dwelling would reasonably have a limited effect in this regard. The
    proposal's construction would be likely to generate economic benefits through
    employment and expenditure, but these too would be limited given the scale of the
    scheme and their short-term nature. Accordingly, I attach limited weight to each of
    these matters.
23. As it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would contribute positively to
    the natural environment through the conservation or enhancement of biodiversity,
    there would be conflict with Framework policy N2(1)(a), to which I attach significant
    weight. The benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by its
    adverse effects when assessed against the Framework's national decision-making
    policies. Consequently, the test at Framework policy S5(5) does not indicate
    permission should be granted.
24. Whilst I have not found conflict with the development plan as a whole, the material
    considerations, including the Framework, indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be
    dismissed.

S F Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
