Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by L Gardner MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008563
529 Roman Road, Tower Hamlets, London E3 5EL
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
     •     The appeal is made by John Gilroy against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
           of Tower Hamlets.
     •     The application Ref is PA/25/01901.
     •     The development proposed is rear balcony to existing second floor flat.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     It has been brought to my attention that the existing plans submitted to support the
       application are inaccurate insofar as they do not include the positioning of an
       existing door or correctly indicate the extent of the roof terrace at first floor.
       Notwithstanding that the Council has confirmed that the door is the subject of
       separate enforcement action, I observed the presence of the door and the extent
       of the neighbouring roof terrace during my site visit.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the
       occupiers of the first floor flat below.
Reasons
4.     Policy D.DH8 of the Tower Hamlets Local Plan (2020) (the Local Plan) states that
       development is required to protect the amenity of existing buildings and their
       occupants, including through ensuring that existing habitable rooms have an
       acceptable outlook, not resulting in an unacceptable level of overshadowing to
       surrounding private outdoor space, and maintaining good levels of privacy.
5.     The proposed balcony would project partially over the existing roof terrace which
       serves the first floor flat below. It would also be directly above the existing window
       and door at first floor level, which I understand to be the only natural light sources
       for the habitable room which these serve.
6.     The positioning of the balcony would impose an overshadowing effect to both the
       roof terrace space directly below it, and the internal space within the habitable
       room at the rear of the first floor flat. This would be to the detriment of the living
       conditions of neighbouring occupiers.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008563


7.     In addition, the use of the balcony would afford users the opportunity to directly
       overlook the roof terrace below, further compounding the harm to the living
       conditions of the neighbouring occupiers, through a loss of privacy.
8.     Whilst there is an existing window which would already allow some overlooking to
       the terrace below, the very nature of a balcony is that occupiers are likely to dwell
       in the space for prolonged periods of time, something less likely to occur at the
       window. I have considered whether the harm could be overcome through a
       condition requiring obscure glazing, but given the height of the balcony, this is
       unlikely to mitigate all opportunities for overlooking from the balcony.
9.     The appellant suggests that the terracing of amenity spaces is not an uncommon
       feature in an urban landscape. However, this in itself does not justify the harm
       which I have identified from the appeal proposal.
10. Based on the above, I find that the proposal would have a harmful effect on the
    living conditions of the occupiers of the first floor flat below. In this respect it would
    be contrary to Policy D.DH8 of the Local Plan.
Other Matters
11. The proposal would create a benefit to the occupiers of the second floor flat
    through the provision of external amenity space, which is specifically supported
    through the London Plan (2021). Nevertheless, the benefits to the occupiers of the
    second floor flat would not be sufficient to outweigh the consequential harm to the
    living conditions of the occupiers of the first floor flat.
12. I have been provided extracts of the clauses relating to landlord rights for other
    parts of the building. However, the rights associated with the appeal site are a
    separate legal matter and do not alter my overall findings above.
13. The appeal site is within the Roman Road Market Conservation Area (CA). Section
    72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, requires
    special attention be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the
    character or appearance of the conservation area.
14. Roman Road sets the main street scene in the CA, forming part of a collective
    townscape merit, to which the appeal site forms part of. Bearing in mind the extent,
    nature and location of the proposed development, the character and appearance
    of the CA would be preserved. I note that the Council raised no objection in this
    regard either. Nevertheless, this lack of harm weighs neutrally and does not
    amount to a consideration in support of the appeal or alter my overall conclusions
    on the main issue.
Conclusion
15. I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the development plan when read
    as a whole, and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given, the
    appeal is dismissed.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
