Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18TH August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008974
23 Maurice Road, Birmingham B14 6DL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Waheed Rehman against the decision of Birmingham City Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/06923/PA.
•   The development proposed is described as a single storey and 2 storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
4. The appeal property is one of a pair of semi-detached dwellings that occupies a
   relatively prominent position within the street, due to a substantial side garden
   which allows clear public views of its side elevation. The pair exhibit a high degree
   of symmetry with a strong architectural identity, characterised by rendered
   elevations, prominent chimney stacks, decorative timber-clad steeply pitched gable
   features and projecting bay windows. Surrounding development comprises a mix of
   detached, semi-detached and terraced forms, exhibiting a range of architectural
   styles, ages, materials and detailing. Whilst there is no single prevailing house type,
   the differing dwelling types collectively contribute to a rich and attractive
   streetscape, contributing positively to the character and appearance of the area.
5. The appeal scheme represents a revised iteration of a previously refused proposal
   that was subsequently dismissed at appeal. I recognise that the proposals for this
   appeal, including setting the two-storey side extension away from the side elevation
   and introducing a hipped roof form, are intended to reduce the perceived bulk and
   visual prominence of the proposed two-storey addition. However, these changes
   would give rise to a form that appears contrived rather than a natural evolution of
   the host dwelling.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008974


6. Whilst the proposals would lessen the massing effect of the previous scheme to
   some extent, it would still elongate that side elevation and not materially alter the
   overall impression of what would still be a substantial two-storey extension. It would
   remain readily apparent owing to the open nature of the side garden and would
   significantly increase the overall massing of the dwelling. Consequently, the
   extension would not appear as a subordinate addition to the host dwelling.
7. Moreover, the appeal property forms one half of a distinctive and carefully
   composed pair of semi-detached dwellings whose symmetry and balanced
   appearance make a positive contribution to the street scene. The introduction of the
   proposed development would disrupt this visual balance, undermining the
   uniformity and architectural cohesion of the pair. As a result, it would appear
   incongruous and overly dominant in relation to both the host dwelling and its
   adjoining counterpart.
8. Of the cited examples, only limited information has been provided. The extended
   semi-detached dwelling appears to have been designed with a degree of
   subservience to the original through its set-back and stepped-down form, such that
   it remains visually well integrated for that style and design of dwelling. In the
   absence of a full planning history, it is unclear under what policy context or design
   considerations that development was permitted, or whether it pre‑dates the
   adoption of the current design policies. Furthermore, whilst variations in external
   materials are evident within the area, their use does not form part of the Council's
   reason for refusal, and I have no reason to disagree.
9. For these reasons, the proposal would result in unacceptable harm to the character
   and appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area. As such, it would
   conflict with Policy PG3 of the Birmingham Development Plan 2031, 2017, Policy
   DM2 of the Development Management in Birmingham, Development Plan
   Document 2031, 2021 and guidance contained in the Birmingham Design Guide,
   Principles Document, 2022, which, amongst other things, seek to ensure new
   development is of a high quality design that responds to site conditions and is
   appropriate to its location.
Conclusion and Recommendation
10. The appeal scheme would conflict with the development plan and material
    considerations do not indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I
    therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
11. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
