Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by C Billings BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9TH September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008724
K2 Bazar, 538-540 Stratford Road, Sparkhill, Birmingham B11 4AL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr A Shah against the decision of Birmingham City Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/06808/PA.
•   The development proposed is for alterations & extensions, including front and side canopies and single
    storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of development has been amended to exclude matters that are not
   acts of development.
3. While the appellant sets out that they seek to retain the development as built, the
   design of the side and front canopies in situ, differs from that shown on the proposed
   plans. This includes that the corrugated roof of the side canopy extends further
   towards Stratford Road up to the centre point of the existing ground floor side window
   of the host building, compared to that shown on the proposed plans. Also, the front
   canopy in situ is wider than that shown on the proposed plans, extending closer to
   the arched doorway with white surround along the front elevation of the host building.
   Therefore, I have determined the appeal on the basis of the plans submitted and not
   the development that has already been built.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on the
   17 August 2026 and so is a material consideration in this appeal. Comments were
   sought from the main parties about the revised Framework and, I have considered
   any comments received in making my decision.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
    • the character and appearance of the appeal building and surrounding area;
    • highway safety, in particular regard to parking provision; and,
    • the effect of the proposed rear extension on the living conditions of existing
      nearby residents, in particular, the occupiers of the first floor flats in regard to
      private outdoor amenity space and, the occupiers of properties in Castleford
      Road in regard to noise and disturbance.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008724


Reasons
Character and appearance
6. The appeal site is within a mixed use residential and commercial area. Stratford Road
   is a busy main road within a primary shopping area and the side streets, including
   Castleford Road, are predominately residential with terraced two and two and a half
   storey dwellings with unrestricted on-street parking in front. At the time of my site
   visit, the area was busy with a high level of traffic and pedestrian movement. Also,
   there are a number of commercial properties nearby along Stratford Road which have
   stalls with canopies above in front of them, similar to the proposed front canopy.
7. Along this part of Stratford Road, there is a strong architectural rhythm to the first
   floor of the terraced properties, by virtue of front pitch roof gables and the size and
   design of windows, although at ground floor most of the commercial premises have
   large, facia signs and roller shutters, which vary in design and appearance. There are
   a wealth and variety of traditional historic buildings along this part of Stratford Road,
   with feature buildings located on corners. The commercial bustle and architectural
   variety, including pepper potted ornate historic buildings is characteristic of the area.
8. The main host building is a former bank on a corner plot, 2.5 stories high, constructed
   of brick at the upper storey with stone, ornate cladding at ground floor to its road
   frontages. It has traditional sash style windows and an arched main corner entrance.
   While the appeal site is not within a Conservation Area, the appeal building is a non-
   designated heritage asset. Its significance is derived from its historic Victorian bank
   design and architectural detailing, including retained traditional features, such as
   ornate stone cladding, sash windows with fine mouldings around.
9. The proposed single storey rear extension, would extend out from a previous two
   storey red-brick extension at the rear. This existing rear extension has a flat roof and
   does not reflect the design and form of the main host property, although due to its
   scale and position, it appears subservient to the historic host building and it does not
   cover up or affect the ornate stonework cladding or any other historic features on the
   principal road frontages of the building.
10. Even though the proposed rear extension would be single storey and extend out from
    the later addition, it would have a large floor area, almost doubling the overall ground
    floor area of the existing building, as previously extended. Furthermore, the external
    materials of the new rear extension would have metal sheet cladding, rather than
    have brick or stone walls. Consequently, due to its scale and design, including its
    proposed external materials, the rear extension would be a disproportionate and
    anomalous addition to the main host building, despite the intervening earlier
    extension.
11. Furthermore, due to the corner position of the appeal site, there are fairly open public
    views from Castleford Road to the rear of the building. Consequently, the proposed
    rear extension would appear as an overly prominent feature from the street scene,
    harmful to the character and appearance of the host property and surrounding area.
    As a result, the rear extension would have a harmful effect on the significance of the
    non-designated heritage asset.
12. The proposed side and front canopies are modest in size and of a simple design,
    although they are on prominent road frontages, dominant within the street scene.
    They would extend in front of some of the historic and ornate features of the host

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008724


     building, including part of the ornate stone cladding and some of the ground floor
     windows. This would harmfully diminish some of the historic features of the former
     bank. Also, the canopies would be constructed of metal and have shutters, which
     would be at odds with the traditional materials and detailing of the host building.
13. Therefore, even though the canopies are of a scale and form not uncommon of other
    such structures found in the local area, they would appear anomalous on the host
    building and would obscure features that contribute to the significance of this non-
    designated heritage asset. Consequently, the canopies would harm the significance
    of the building and so, be detrimental to the character and appearance of the host
    building and surrounding area.
14. Overall, the harm caused to the significance of this non-designated heritage asset
    would be at the moderate to higher scale of harm, due to the size, design and
    position of the proposed development on the building and the prominence of it from
    within the street scene, affecting three elevations of the host building.
15. In view of the above, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the appeal building and surrounding area, in conflict
    with Policies PG3 and TP12 of the Birmingham Development Plan (January 2017)
    (BDP). Policy PG3 requires high design quality that responds to the site and local
    area context. Amongst other things, Policy TP12 sets out that great weight will be
    given to the conservation of the City’s heritage and that, applications for development
    affecting the significance of a designated or non-designated heritage asset will need
    to demonstrate how the proposal would contribute to the assets conservation whilst
    protecting or where appropriate enhancing its significance and setting.
Living conditions
16. The previous planning permission granted for four flats in the upper stories of the
    appeal building (Council ref. 2021/10023/PA) included an area of communal outdoor
    amenity space at the rear, of approximately 145sqm. Therefore, even if the outdoor
    space was never installed, it was a requirement of this previous permission, to ensure
    appropriate outdoor space would be provided for the occupiers of the four flats and
    meet the Council’s adopted standards at such time.
17. However, as set out by the appellant, there are certain permitted development rights
    to convert the upper floors of retail units to living accommodation, which does not
    include a requirement to provide outdoor amenity space for residents of the
    accommodation. Additionally, the Birmingham Design Guide, Healthy Living and
    Working Place City Manual (September 2022) at LW-13 sets out minimum standards
    for outdoor amenity space for residential development requiring a minimum of 5sqm
    for 1-bed flats and 7sqm for 2-bed flats, which can be provided together as communal
    space. This would equate to much less outdoor space than was required when the
    original permission was granted for the flats.
18. Even though there may be numerous flats across Birmingham which have been
    approved with limited or no external amenity space, the appeal scheme would result
    in no outdoor amenity space for the residents of the flats. However, on balance,
    having regard to the aforementioned permitted development rights and the likely
    shortfall of communal outdoor amenity space now being much less than that
    previously required, it is unlikely that the proposal would have a harmful effect on the
    living conditions of occupiers of the upper floor flats, due to the lack of outdoor
    amenity space. Furthermore, as asserted by the appellant and without substantive

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008724


     evidence to the contrary, it is unlikely the previously approved outdoor amenity space
     had been implemented prior to the rear extension being built. Therefore, the proposal
     would not deteriorate the living conditions of the residents of the existing flats in
     regard to outdoor space provision, as it is unlikely they previously benefited from any.
19. The appeal site is within an established mixed use area and part of a primary
    shopping area and local centre. I observed during my site visit that there is a high
    level of traffic and pedestrian movement within the area generally. Additionally, the
    car park and some access to the commercial use is likely to have always been from
    Castleford Road. Even though Castleford Road is predominately residential, it is not a
    particularly quiet street at the end closest to Stratford Road, due to its proximity to the
    shopping area and on street parking and activity along it. Also, the nearest residential
    property in Castleford Road is an end terraced property with a tall blank gable wall
    abutting the appeal site. This would likely help minimise any noise disturbance
    caused to the living conditions of occupiers of this property by the commercial
    activities associated with the appeal proposal.
20. Furthermore, nearby existing residents along Castleford Road would likely be used to
    a fairly high ambient noise levels and some disturbance associated with nearby
    commercial premises within the primary shopping area and traffic movement along
    the main road.
21. The appeal site has been in commercial use for some time and the evidence shows
    that there was previously a rear car park with access from Castleford Road to the
    commercial premises. While the rear extension would project further towards the
    nearest existing residential property in Castleford Road, the proximity to the parking
    and access of the commercial premises and the of hours of operation would not
    change. Therefore, even if there would be increased deliveries and other activities
    due to the proposed additional commercial floorspace, this together with the general
    ambient noise in the busy local centre and nearby main road and restricted hours of
    operation, the proposal would unlikely cause harmful noise and disturbance to nearby
    residents, including those living along Castleford Road.
22. Having regard to the above, the evidence before me and my site observations, the
    proposed rear extension would not have a harmful effect on the living conditions of
    existing nearby residents, in particular the occupiers of the first floor flats in regard to
    private outdoor amenity space and, the occupiers of properties in Castleford Road in
    regard to noise and disturbance.
23. Therefore, there would be no conflict with Policies DM2 and DM6 of the Development
    Management in Birmingham Development Plan Document (DMBDP) (December
    2021) and Policy PG3 of the BDP. Policy PG3 of the BDP requires new development
    to ensure private external spaces are attractive, functional and inclusive. Policy DM2
    of the DMBDP requires development to not result in unacceptable adverse impacts
    on the amenity of occupiers and neighbours, including in relation to access to high
    quality and useable amenity space and noise. Also, Policy DM6 of the DMBDP
    requires development to reduce exposure to noise and vibration.
Highway safety
24. There is an existing established vehicular access from Castleford Road which would
    provide access to the proposed 8 parking spaces within the appeal site. Accounting
    for the existing and proposed additional retail floorspace and parking for the four
    apartments, the Council set out that there would be a requirement for 19 parking

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008724


     spaces. Additionally, the increased floorspace would intensify the use of the appeal
     site, which would likely result in increased pedestrian and vehicular movement,
     including more delivery and servicing movements associated with it.
25. Most of the surrounding, predominately residential streets have unrestricted,
    congested on-street parking. However, the appeal site is in a sustainable location,
    within a busy primary shopping area, with good public transport links along Stratford
    Road. Also, it is surrounded by a high density residential area and, during my site
    visit, I observed there was a high level of footfall in the area. Therefore, customers of
    the proposed retail units would likely walk or use public transport. Also, some trips
    would likely be shared with those visiting other commercial premises in the local area.
26. The Councils’ Parking Supplementary Planning Document (November 2021) (SPD)
    sets maximum parking standards for new development and its objectives include, to
    manage the provision of parking in a balanced way, supporting an efficient transport
    network and encouraging more journeys based on walking, cycling and public
    transport. Therefore, as the appeal site is within a sustainable, accessible location
    served by a variety of modes of transport, the proposal would align with the
    objectives of the SPD.
27. No substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that there are existing
    highway safety issues arising from the current congested on-street parking situation
    nearby. Also, it has not been demonstrated why the proposed parking provision
    together with the existing on-street parking situation would likely cause incidents
    between vehicles and between vehicles and pedestrians, or why it would result in
    harmful or indiscriminate on-street parking. Furthermore, despite the existing parking
    situation, the local highway authority raises no concerns about the proposal, noting
    that there are numerous other similar sized retail units within the Sparkhill
    Neighbourhood Centre which do not have off-street parking.
28. In view of the above and the evidence before me, although the proposal would
    increase the amount of retail floorspace and is likely to generate additional vehicular
    movements, neither this, nor the proposed parking provision or any potential overspill
    parking demand, would likely result in conflicts between vehicles or vehicles and
    pedestrians. Consequently, the proposal would not have an unacceptable impact on
    highway safety.
29. Therefore, to conclude on this main issue, the proposed development would not have
    a harmful effect on highway safety, in particular regard to parking and so, there would
    be no conflict with Policies DM14 and DM15 of the Development Management in
    Birmingham Development Plan Document (December 2021) (DPD), which amongst
    other matters, require new development to not have an unacceptable impact on
    highway safety.
Other Matters
30. The appeal site is within a primary shopping area and the proposed development
    would support smaller retail businesses, both start up and established ones.
    Although, at the time of my site visit, not all of the internal spaces within the rear
    extension in situ were occupied and the side canopy area was not in use with
    shutters down. However, while the principle of the retail use of the proposed
    development in this local area is undisputed, no substantive evidence has been
    provided to demonstrate that without the proposed development, there would be a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6008724


     harmful lack of smaller retail units in the local area, nor that it would have a negative
     impact on the vibrancy of the shopping area.
31. The appellant has invested in the host property and brought a vacant property back
    into use, which will provide some positive economic and social benefits to the local
    area, including supporting local employment opportunities. Although, the building
    could have been reused without the extensions and canopies, and so I give limited
    positive weight to these benefits.
Heritage Balance
32. The proposed development would harm the significance of the host building, which is
    a non-designated heritage asset. Policy HE7 of the Framework sets out that harm to
    the significance of a non-designated heritage asset should be weighed against the
    benefits of the proposal having regard to the scale of any harm. As set out above, I
    find the harm to the significance would be at the moderate to higher scale, due to the
    scale, design and position of the proposed development.
33. There would be some social and economic benefits in bringing the appeal building
    back into use, enhanced opportunities for small businesses and it would contribute to
    the vibrancy of the shopping area. Although, it is likely that some of such benefits
    could be derived from bringing the host building back into use even without the
    proposed extension and canopies. Additionally, it has not been demonstrated why the
    host building could not be utilised in a profitable and sustainable way without the
    proposed extensions. Therefore, I give limited weight to these social and economic
    benefits.
34. Even though I have found no harm would be caused in regard to the living conditions
    of nearby residents or highway safety, these are not benefits of the appeal scheme,
    rather they are matters that the proposal is required to meet to be acceptable, as
    required by planning policy. Furthermore, the lack of objections from interested
    parties, including certain consultees, are neutral matters that do not weigh in favour
    of the proposal.
35. Therefore, having regard to the above, I find the moderate to higher scale harm that
    would be caused to the significance of the non-designated heritage asset, would not
    be outweighed by the public benefits of the proposed scheme.
Conclusion
36. In view of the above, the proposed development would conflict with the development
    plan read as a whole and other considerations, including the Framework, do not
    indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
37. Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.



C Billings
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
