Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 May 2026 by F Bradford BA (Hons) MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 Aug 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008286
203 Almners Road, Lyne, Surrey KT16 0BL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Nikita Sharma against the decision of Runnymede Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is RU.25/1830.
•   The development proposed is described as a side double, single storey rear extension incorporating
    with existing detached garage into habitable use and front porch added to dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure and Main Issues
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal scheme. The main issues in regard to which are a) whether the
   proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt; b) it’s effect on the
   openness of the Green Belt; and c) whether any harm by reason of
   inappropriateness, and any other harm, would be clearly outweighed by other
   considerations, so as to amount to the very special circumstances required to
   justify the proposal.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Inappropriate Development
3. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) establishes that
   development within the Green Belt should be regarded as inappropriate unless one
   of the specified exceptions applies. Paragraph 154 c) of the Framework concerns
   the extension or alteration of a building, provided that it does not result in
   disproportionate additions over and above the size of the original building. This
   position is reflected by Policy EE14 of the Runnymede 2030 Local Plan (2020) (the
   Local Plan). Policy is structured to take account of the cumulative growth of
   buildings in the Green Belt.
4. The Framework defines the original building as being as it existed on 1 July 1948
   or, if constructed after 1 July 1948, as it was built originally. Policy EE14 responds
   to a similar situation, explaining that regard should be hard to the planning history
   of the site post 1948. Neither the Framework nor the development plan provide a
   definition of disproportionate. There are different ways of assessing and measuring
   proportionality and I am mindful that the Framework refers to size. As such, an
   assessment of whether a proposal would amount to disproportionate additions is as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008286


     much a matter of planning judgement in the qualitative sense as it is a
     mathematical calculation, which may include floor area, volume, footprint, and
     external dimensions.
5. It is suggested that the appeal building is a modest two storey late 1960s semi
   detached house. There is detached flat roof garage to the rear, accessed via the
   driveway to the side. There is disagreement as to the floor area of the original
   building and how it might have grown since. The appellant sets out a lower
   increase across the board. For this purpose, it is assumed that the detached
   garage is original. The Council’s figures appear to consider it as later.
6. Taking the appellant’s lesser assessment, the house was extended in the early
   1970s through a single storey pitched roof projection to the rear. The appellant
   calculates that this added in the region of 17 square metres (sqm) to the floor area.
   Thus, a 13% uplift in the land take of the building at the time. The appellant then
   suggests that the proposals at appeal here would result in a total of just over 70%
   an increase in the square metreage of the original house.
7. This would be close to three quarters of the original building again. This would not
   be limited or marginal. It would in actual fact be quite substantial. Especially on an
   otherwise modest two storey semi detached suburban dwelling. The scheme itself
   would comprise a wide double doored pitched roof porch extension to the front, a
   two storey pitched roof extension to the side and an additional single storey
   extension to the rear tagged to the end of what appears to be an extant prior
   approval scheme. When considering the totality of the extensions and their
   combined bulk and mass (across more than one storey and incorporating pitched
   roofs) there would be a noticeable and significant uplift in the building’s visible size.
   Its land take would be considerably more sprawling.
8. I accept that the 1970s rear extension would be subsumed into the appeal scheme
   and other works. That said, and as such, the totality of the quantitative increase I
   have set out above would not be as high as 70% in reality, but this element
   accounts for a very small percentage in the context of what is being added in the
   appeal scheme as a whole. With the substance of the 1970s extension removed
   from the increase figures, the scheme would still be of some significance in both
   the mathematical and physical presence sense.
9. With this and the above in mind, the proposals would amount to disproportionate
   additions over and above the size of the original building. Such that they would be
   inappropriate development for the purposes of Policy EE14 and the Framework.
   This would be harmful to the Green Belt by definition.
Openness
10. As set out in the Framework, a fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent
    urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. Openness is an essential
    characteristic of the Green Belt that is commonly taken to have both spatial and
    visual aspects.
11. Whilst some of the works to the rear of the building would be obscured from public
    views, the main bulk and substance of the largest element in the two storey side
    section would be visually prominent by virtue of the building’s street facing frontage.
    As would the porch. In all respects, the appeal scheme would involve works of
    noticeable volume and height where there is previously no development. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008286


     building would also spread far deeper than it currently does through a more
     sprawling land take.
12. There would therefore be an unavoidable reduction in both the spatial and visual
    aspects of the Green Belt’s openness. This would conflict with the protection aims
    of both EE14 and the Framework and stand as further harm to the essential
    characteristic of the Green Belt.
Other Considerations
13. As I alluded to above, there is an extant prior approval for a single storey extension.
    This would extend the rear of the dwelling by six metres. It would have a pitched
    roof. In the event of the failure of this appeal, I have no reason to conclude that the
    extant scheme would not come forwards. That said, it would be considerably
    smaller in land take and volume than the appeal scheme and has been approved
    under secondary legislation that is not subject to the same Green Belt assessments
    as the appeal proposals. It would be considerably less harmful and thus attracts
    very limited weight as a fallback to the appeal scheme.
14. There are areas in which the proposed development would be acceptable. Such as
    in design terms and its effects on neighbours’ living conditions, highway safety, and
    ecology. These would however be a lack of harm in each case and therefore be
    neutral in any balance. They would not weigh in favour of the proposals. In addition,
    and irrespective of the perceived character of the area, the appeal site is located
    within the Green Belt land and therefore the policies of the Framework and the
    development plan apply.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. The appeal scheme would be inappropriate development which is, by definition,
    harmful to the Green Belt. There would be further harm arising out of a clear and
    obvious reduction in the Green Belt’s openness. The totality of the Green Belt harm
    attracts substantial weight. The other considerations advanced would, cumulatively,
    attract limited weight, such that they would not clearly outweigh the harms. As
    such, the very special circumstances necessary to justify the proposed
    development do not exist.
16. The appeal scheme would therefore conflict with the development plan. There are
    no material considerations, including the Framework, worthy of sufficient weight to
    indicate a decision should be made otherwise than in accordance with it. I therefore
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Finlay Bradford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
17. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
