 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 7 August 2026
 by B J Sims BSc (Hons) CEng MICE MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:19 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6008189
 27 Mill Way, Mill Hill, Barnet, NW7 3QR
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Shafad Koloth against the decision of Barnet London Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/0507/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is: Roof extension including 1 No side dormer window, 1 No rear dormer
      window and 2 No front-facing rooflights. Conversion of the new roof space to form one short-term let
      unit (Class C1). Bin and bike storage.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a roof
     extension including 1 No side dormer window, 1 No rear dormer window and 2 No front-
     facing rooflights; and conversion of the new roof space to form one short-term let unit
     (Class C1); and bin and bike storage, at 27 Mill Way, Mill Hill, Barnet, NW7 3QR, in
     accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/0507/FUL, subject to the
     conditions set out in the Schedule appended to this Decision.
Preliminary Matter
2. At the time of my site visit, the appeal property, comprising Nos 27 and 27A Mill
   Way, was shrouded for construction works. However, if the proposed roof
   extension and dormers have been commenced, this has no effect on the
   consideration of the issues arising in this appeal.
Main Issues
3. From review of the written representations, I consider the main issues in the appeal
   to be:
         i.    whether the proposals are acceptable in principle with reference to relevant
               planning policy;
         ii.   the potential effect of the proposed development on the character of the
               neighbourhood with respect to residential amenity and car parking; and
        iii.   the standard of accommodation proposed.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6008189


Reasons
Principle
4. The Council raises no objection to the proposed building works in themselves and I
   have seen no planning evidence to support objection on such grounds. I comment
   on related neighbour concerns below.
5. The refusal of the application and the response to the appeal are predicated in
   principle on the loss of presently unconverted loft space, which the Council regards
   as latent residential capacity with potential for conversion as part of the existing flat
   at No 27A. The Council states that this would contribute to identified Borough
   housing need for two- to three-bedroom, Class C3 residential units, and that
   planning decisions must consider reasonable future residential use of such space.
   The Council goes on to assess the quality of the proposed accommodation with
   reference to adopted standards for Class C3 housing.
6. Whilst the need for larger Class 3 housing units must carry material weight, on the
   evidence before me in this case, I find no basis in national or local planning policy
   for protecting presently vacant and unused loft space for future conversion to
   permanent residential accommodation. Policy HOU05 of the Barnet Local Plan
   (BLP), cited in the refusal, resists net loss of residential accommodation and
   conversion of housing to short-stay accommodation. Thus, it is essentially
   protective of existing permanent homes and, in the circumstances of the present
   case, there is no existing loft accommodation to protect.
7. In principle, the appeal proposal is not for Class 3 living space but for a Class C1
   letting unit and, in my judgement, falls to be assessed as such on its specific
   planning merits and effects.
8. Moreover, whilst, on one hand, there is nothing to say that the loft at No 27 Mill
   Way would ever be converted to Class 3 use in line with the Council’s preference,
   on the other hand, there is equally nothing to say that it could not be changed to
   Class 3 use at some future time.
Residential Amenity and Car Parking
9. Mill Way is a varied residential street of original family dwellings with many now
   subdivided to form apartments and with a mix of tenures.
10. The conversion of the loft at No 27 for separate occupation would intensify the use
    of the appeal site, with some potential for increased noise or disturbance to
    immediate neighbours, including as a result of guest changeovers. There is also
    potential for guests to require additional on-street car parking space.
11. The question for this appeal is whether, as a matter of judgement on fact and
    degree, these effects would be so significant as to warrant substantive planning
    objection.
12. In my view, in this essentially urban location, the short-term letting of the proposed
    small apartment would not give rise to such adverse impacts on neighbouring
    residential amenity to affect unacceptably the character of the locality. That is
    subject to conditions, suggested by the environmental health consultee, to secure
    appropriate sound insulation and another, suggested by the planning authority


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6008189


     without prejudice, to limit the occupation of the flat to its stated intended Class 1
     use.
13. Furthermore, there is no statutory highway objection to the appeal, subject only to
    cycle and refuse storage conditions. That is on grounds that the site is in an area of
    above-average public transport accessibility (PTAL4). Mill Way has straight
    alignment and reasonable effective width, despite kerb-side parking. I judge that
    the proposed small apartment at No 27 would be unlikely to generate significant
    additional on-street parking demand or congestion.
14. With a further suggested condition to secure permanent obscure glazing in facing
    windows, I consider overall that the proposed development would avoid
    unacceptable adverse impact on neighbouring amenity or the character of the area.
15. In these regards, I find that the appeal proposals are compliant with relevant
    development plan policy and guidance, in particular BLP Policy CDHOU01, Part C
    criteria a, f and I, concerning sensitive response to local character and the
    protection of amenity.
Standard of Accommodation
16. BLP Policy CDH01, cited by the Council, includes the aim that all development
    should optimise site capacity in line with London Plan Policy D3 to deliver the most
    appropriate use for the site. Design standards for a one-bedroom flat, set by
    London Plan Policy D6, include a minimum floor area of 7.5sqm with at least 1.5m
    headroom and 75% with 2.5m headroom.
17. The proposed single-bedroom letting unit would not meet these policy standards.
    However, it is accepted that Policy D6 applies to Class C3 housing and not directly
    to the proposed Class C1 accommodation, albeit it does provide material guidance
    for its assessment.
18. Whilst there is no direct relationship between the proposed individual apartment
    and Class C1 accommodation in a managed hotel environment, the
    accommodation is comparable with a small hotel room for short-term use.
    Moreover, it would be for intending occupiers to assess for themselves the
    suitability of the flat for their purpose.
19. In the circumstances of the present case, I find no objection in terms of the
    standard of accommodation afforded by the proposed Class C1 accommodation.
    Neither, therefore, do I find any conflict with BLP Policy CDH01 in this respect.
Other Considerations
Neighbour Concerns
20. The owner-occupier of the neighbouring property raises concern that the proposed
    building works at No 27A could harm the structural integrity of the attached
    dwelling. However, that is a matter for separate building control legislation.
21. The same correspondent also comments that there was no known prospect of
    adjacent short-term rental accommodation when the semi-detached house was
    purchased. This understandable concern is, in effect, addressed within the
    consideration of residential amenity within the main issue above.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
 Appeal Decision 6008189


Conditions
22. Standard conditions 1-3 set the time limit for commencement, require compliance
    with the approved drawings and the use of matching finishes. Conditions 4 to 7,
    suggested without prejudice by the Council, respectively secure efficient water use,
    control of carbon emissions, obscure glazing to avoid overlooking, and occupation
    of the letting unit in accordance with its intended use, all to safeguard amenity.
    Conditions 8 to 10, suggested by the highway authority and environmental health
    department, require cycle parking in support of sustainable transport and refuse
    storage and noise insultation in the further interests of amenity. Given the latter, I
    do not consider a further proposed requirement for a noise management plan to be
    necessary.
Conclusion
23. All the policies referenced above are consistent with the National Planning Policy
    Framework and I find the appeal proposals to be in accordance with the statutory
    development plan as a whole.
24. For the reasons explained, I conclude that this appeal should be allowed and the
    permission sought granted, subject to the conditions outlined above.



B J Sims
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
 Appeal Decision 6008189


                                              APPENDIX
                                   SCHEDULE OF PLANNING CONDITIONS
1)    The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
      date of this decision.
2)    The development shall be carried out only in compliance with the following
      approved drawings:
            20 / SPP / 000
            27AMW - 201 REV A
            27AMW - 202 REV A
            27AMW - 203 REV A
            27AMW - 204 REV A
            27AMW - 205 REV A
            27AMW - 206 REV A
            27AMW - 207 REV A
            27AMW - 208 REV A
            27AMW - 209 REV A
            27AMW - 210 REV A
            27AMW - 211 REV A
3)    The materials to be used in the external surfaces of the building shall match those
      used in the existing building.
      Reason: To safeguard the visual amenity of the building and surrounding area in
      accordance with Policies CDH01 and CDH05 of the Barnet Local Plan 2025.
4)    Prior to the first occupation of the new short-term Class C1 let unit hereby
      approved it shall have 100% of the wholesome water supplied to them by the
      mains water infrastructure provided through a water meter and the new dwelling
      shall be constructed to include water saving and efficiency measures that comply
      with Regulation 36(2)(b) of Part G2 of the Building Regulations to ensure that a
      maximum of 105 litres of water is provided per person per day with a fittings-
      based approach to determine the water consumption of the proposed
      development. Any use of grey water or rain water systems shall be separate from
      the potable water system and shall meet Part G of the Building Regulations.
      Thereafter, these arrangements shall be maintained in perpetuity.
      Reason: In the interests of efficient use of water in accordance with Policy ECC03
      of the Barnet Local Plan 2025, Policy SI5 of the London Plan 2021 and the Barnet
      Sustainable Design and Construction SPD 2016.
5)    Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby approved it shall be
      constructed incorporating carbon dioxide emission reduction measures which
      achieve an improvement of not less than 10% in carbon dioxide emissions when
      compared with a building constructed to comply with the minimum Target
      Emission Rate requirements of the Building Regulations 2013. The development
      shall be maintained as such in perpetuity.
      Reason: To ensure that the development is sustainable and minimises carbon
      dioxide emissions and to comply with the requirements of Policy ECC01 of the
      Barnet Local Plan 2025, and Policy SI2 of the London Plan 2021.
6)    Before the roof extension hereby permitted is first occupied the proposed side
      windows facing 29 Mill Way shall be obscure-glazed and permanently fixed shut
      with only fanlight opening and the obscure glazing shall be retained thereafter.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      5
 Appeal Decision 6008189


      Reason: In the interest of the privacy and amenity of occupiers of adjoining
      residential properties, in accordance with Policies CDH01 of the Barnet Local Plan
      2025, the Barnet Residential Design Guidance SPD 2016 and Policy D6 of the
      London Plan 2021.
7)    The building hereby permitted shall only be used as a Class C1 dwelling and for
      no other purpose, including any other purpose within Class C of the Town and
      Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, or any provision equivalent to that
      Class in any statutory instrument revoking or re-enacting that Order with or
      without modification.
      Reason: To enable the Local Planning Authority to exercise control over the type
      of use within the category in order to safeguard the amenity of the area in
      accordance with Policies D3 and T4 of the London Plan 2021 and Policy CDH01
      of the Barnet Local Plan 2025.
8)    Prior to occupation of the Class 1 letting unit hereby permitted, details of cycle
      parking provision to serve the unit shall be provided in accordance with London
      Plan cycle parking standards and the cycle parking area shall thereafter be kept
      available for the parking of cycles associated with the letting unit.
      Reason: In the interests of promoting cycling as a mode of transport in
      accordance with Policy TCR03 of the Barnet Local Plan 2025.
9)    Before the development hereby permitted is occupied, details of the refuse
      storage and collection arrangements shall be submitted to and approved in writing
      by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall thereafter be operated
      only in accordance with the approved refuse storage an collection arrangements.
      Reason: To ensure that waste is appropriately managed and any disturbance to
      residents sufficiently mitigated in accordance with Policy TRC01 of the London
      Borough of Barnet’s Local Plan 2025.
10) Prior to commencement of the development, details shall be submitted to and
      approved in writing by the Council, for the sound insulation of the floor, ceiling and
      walls separating the Class C1 use from neighbouring dwellings. Such details shall
      demonstrate that the sound insulation value is enhanced by at least 5dB(A) above
      the Building Regulations value and, where necessary, additional mitigation
      measures are implemented to contain commercial noise within the Class C1
      premises and to achieve the criteria of BS8233:2014 within noise sensitive
      premises. The approved sound insulation measures shall be implemented prior to
      occupation of the development and thereafter permanently retained.
      Reason: To ensure that the proposed development does not prejudice residential
      amenity in accordance with Policy ECC02 of the Barnet Local Plan 2025, the
      Sustainable Design and Construction SPD 2016 and Policy D13 and D14 of the
      London Plan 2021.


                                           End of Schedule   -




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           6
