Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 June by Scott Wilson LL.B. MSc MRTPI
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008551
Goose Green Cottage, Goose Green Lane, West Harting, West Sussex GU31 5PD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs T Clark against the decision of South Downs National Park
    Authority.
•   The application Ref is SDNP/25/04096/HOUS.
•   The development proposed is the demolition of the existing modern two and single storey extensions
    and replacement with a new two storey and single storey extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. The most recent iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework was published
   in August 2026 (the Framework). The policies relating to the main issues of this
   appeal are not materially different from those in the previous iteration of the
   Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation
   with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective cases would
   not be prejudiced.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   host dwelling with particular regard to its status as a Non Designated Heritage
   Asset (NDHA) and its setting, and the special character of the South Downs
   National Park (NP).
Reasons for the Recommendation
NDHA
5. The appeal property comprises a predominantly two-storey timber-framed dwelling
   with a central chimney. Substantial sections of the north elevation retain original
   timber framing with masonry infill panels, and I am advised that parts of the west
   elevation are also original, albeit largely obscured by a later extension. The south
   and east elevations have been rebuilt in masonry, and the building has been

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008551


     extended to the west. The surviving historic fabric is understood to date from
     between 1550 and 1650. The property occupies a verdant rural location within the
     NP and is prominently visible from a nearby public footpath, as well as from Goose
     Green Lane, factors which contribute positively to its setting.
6. The Authority consider the building an NDHA, which is not disputed by the
   appellants. It is therefore a heritage asset for the purposes of local and national
   policy. It is evident from my observations during the site visit that the significance of
   the property derives from the distinctive form and historic fabric of the original
   building in a verdant rural setting. This is clearly expressed through features such
   as the prominent chimney, surviving timber framing with masonry infill panels, the
   characteristic roofscape, and the use of traditional materials and construction
   techniques of evident quality. The building is prominently visible from a nearby
   public footpath. Collectively, these elements make a positive contribution to the
   significance of the NDHA, its setting, and to the wider character of the NP.
7. I acknowledge that the building has been subject to some alteration. This includes
   a catslide roof over a twentieth century outshut, projecting late twentieth century
   half hipped extension to the west elevation, and the addition of a small secondary
   porch to the north elevation, amongst other things. Nonetheless, the original
   building is clearly legible alongside these modest extensions which are subservient
   to the host building and do not appear out of character.
8. The contribution made by the historic, timbered north wall to the building’s
   significance is considerable. The existing porch creates a discernible break at
   ground floor level on this elevation, which contributes to an understanding of the
   building’s evolution and reinforces the subservient relationship of the extension.
   The proposal would remove the porch, and the proposed extension would flow from
   the existing timbered elevation. This would allow the full extent of the proposed
   north elevation to be read as an almost continuous façade at ground floor level,
   despite a small forward dogleg, thereby eroding this visual distinction and resulting
   in a harmful loss of legibility.
9. Whilst the ridge height would be broadly comparable to that of the existing
   extension, when considered alongside the increased length of the north elevation,
   the overall effect would be a material increase in the perceived massing and scale
   of the building. This would appear visually prominent and would be
   disproportionately large in relation to the modest scale of the main dwelling.
   Consequently, the proposal would diminish the clear indication of subservience
   presently exhibited by the existing extension and would harmfully dominate the
   cottage. Accordingly, the cumulative impact of the proposed development would be
   harmful to the significance of the NDHA.
10. There would also be an increase southward by an additional single storey element
    with a differing pitched roof to the rest of the building. Whilst the roof element would
    add clutter to the south elevation it would not be an unusual or unexpected feature
    of a period property. The use of zinc would contrast with the existing dwelling,
    however on an obviously new extension the use of complementary non-traditional
    materials would not be harmful. However, the additional mass and form at this
    location would add to the expansive effect of the proposal.
11. The appellants maintain that the removal of the existing single-storey porch on the
    north elevation would represent a benefit of the scheme. The porch does obscure


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008551


     part of the timbered elevation and revealing this would be a benefit. However, it is
     this very element which currently interrupts the elevation and signals the distinction
     between the original building and the later extension. I acknowledge that this is also
     signalled by a small catslide element at this location in the current proposal;
     however, the removal of the porch would diminish the current obvious distinction
     between the old and the new. Therefore, the removal of the porch would result in
     only a slight benefit overall.
12. Although the retention of the original chimney is noted, this would be a neutral
    effect and would not be a benefit of the scheme. The appellants contend that
    removal of the existing one and a half storey extension would be a benefit due to its
    poor quality, however, that is contradicted by the findings of their heritage
    statement that the extension makes a neutral or positive contribution. Therefore,
    replacing that extension would not enhance the significance of the NDHA.
13. Therefore, whilst the proposal would not result in the loss of substantial amounts of
    historic fabric, it would materially erode the legibility of the building's historic
    development. The proposal would diminish the positive contribution the property
    makes to the landscape and harmfully diminish its significance as a NDHA. This is
    a matter of considerable importance and weight and would not be outweighed by
    the removal of the existing modern extension and porch.
14. While the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the dwelling itself,
    it would not materially alter the environment within which it is situated, or the way in
    which it is experienced. Therefore, there would be no harm to the setting of the
    NDHA.
15. Nevertheless, for the reasons above the proposal would harm the significance of
    the NDHA. It would not conserve or better reveal its significance and therefore
    would not benefit from the support of Policy SD12 of the South Downs Local Plan
    2014-33 (adopted 2019) (the Local Plan).
16. Policy HE7 of the Framework requires that, where proposals would directly or
    indirectly affect an NDHA, a balanced judgement must be exercised, having regard
    to the scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the heritage asset. Given
    the high evidential and historic value of the asset, its conservation is a matter of
    considerable importance and weight.
17. I acknowledge that the proposal would increase the functional living space and
    likely improve layout and usability. However, these are personal benefits that would
    not outweigh the harm identified. The appeal building currently functions as a family
    home and there is no evidence provided to demonstrate that it fails to provide a
    functional viable use.
18. I am satisfied that the materials used to construct the proposed development could
    be adequately controlled by a suitably worded condition. The appeal scheme would
    comply with some elements of the Local Plan. However, compliance in these
    matters would be a neutral consideration that would not outweigh the harm
    identified.
19. The appellants have not therefore demonstrated benefits of sufficient weight to
    outweigh the identified harm. Applying the balanced judgement required by the
    Framework, I conclude that the proposal would result in an unacceptable level of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6008551


     harm to the significance of the NDHA. Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with
     the heritage policies of the Framework.
National Park
20. The statutory purposes of the NP are to conserve and enhance the natural beauty,
    wildlife, and cultural heritage of the area and to promote opportunities for the
    understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities of the NP by the public. In
    addition, Section 245 of the Levelling-Up and Regeneration Act 2023 amends and
    strengthens the Section 11A (2) duty of the National Parks and Access to the
    Countryside Act 1949 to ‘seek to further the specified purposes of Protected
    Landscapes’.
21. Policy SD1 of the Local Plan is consistent with the statutory purposes of the NP
    reflecting the language and principles therein. Furthermore, the Framework sets out
    that substantial weight is to be placed on the importance of conserving and
    enhancing the natural beauty, wildlife, and cultural heritage in NPs.
22. I have reasoned above that the mass and scale of the proposal would harm the
    significance of the NDHA. Therefore, it would not conserve or enhance the cultural
    heritage of the NP and would conflict with Local Plan Policy SD1.
23. Turning to dark skies, the proposal would increase the amount of fenestration at the
    appeal property above its existing position. Whilst the appellants maintain that
    fenestration would be controlled with blinds and curtains and that a suitably worded
    condition could control this matter, I have not been provided with any suggested
    wording of such a condition. Nor has it been demonstrated how one could be
    written that would meet the six tests. I therefore conclude that this matter cannot be
    controlled by condition in a manner that is enforceable and reasonable.
    Consequently, the proposal would conflict with Local Plan Policy S8 which requires
    development proposals to demonstrate that all opportunities to reduce light
    pollution have been taken.
24. Furthermore, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the host
    dwelling and therefore would not result in the high quality design required by Local
    Plan Policy SD5, which requires development to use architectural design which is
    appropriate and sympathetic to its setting.
25. The impacts of the proposal would be limited to the dwelling and its immediate
    surroundings, however, so would not harm the rural character of the area and local
    landscape. I therefore find no conflict with Local Plan Policies SD4 or SD31.
26. The proposal would also conflict Policy N4 of the Framework, insofar as it seeks to
    conserve and enhance Protected Landscapes.
Fallback
27. As part of the appeal, my attention has been drawn to the potential availability of
    permitted development rights, and a plan has been submitted indicating a single-
    storey extension to the north elevation. However, no Lawful Development
    Certificate has been provided to demonstrate that the fallback scheme would meet
    the requirements of the relevant permitted development provisions, particularly
    regarding which is the principal elevation, and therefore whether the fallback
    scheme would be a side or rear extension. Given its location within a NP and the
    restrictions to permitted development rights in such areas, this is a significant

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6008551


     consideration. In the absence of such evidence, I am not convinced there is a
     greater than theoretical possibility that the appellants would build this alternative
     scheme if I were to dismiss this appeal.
28. Even if the submitted plans were to fall within the scope of permitted development,
    and even if I were to conclude that the appeal scheme would give rise to less harm
    than that fallback position, there is no mechanism before me to remove permitted
    development rights so as to preclude both schemes being implemented. In such
    circumstances, there would remain the realistic prospect of both forms of
    development being carried out, with a consequent cumulative effect. Having regard
    to the above matters, I attribute only limited weight to the fallback position in the
    overall planning balance, and it does not outweigh the harm I have identified.
Other Matters
29. I acknowledge that the appellants have undertaken pre-application discussions with
    the Council and taken on board comments that were made by reducing the length,
    removing dormers, and refining massing and roof form. This approach is
    commendable and promoted by the Framework. Such discussions are nevertheless
    customarily given without prejudice to the formal decision of the Council. I therefore
    give this limited weight in the appeal.
30. I acknowledge the appellants’ frustrations with the Council’s communication and
    the way in which it handled the planning application. However, in this regard such
    matters do not impact on the planning merits of the proposal and consequently are
    not matters that are for my consideration in relation to this appeal.
Planning Balance, Conclusion and Recommendation
31. The proposal would conflict with the development plan, and the material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other
    matters raised, I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Scott Wilson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
32. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
