Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by E Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by F Harrison BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6008277
73 Henton Road, Leicester City, Leicester LE3 6AY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr M Singh against the decision of Leicester City Council.
•    The application Ref is 20260064.
•    The development proposed is conversion of existing workshop at the rear into a self contained flat;
     single storey side extension and alterations; (remove asbestos tiles and replace with concrete tiles).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. Since the appeal was submitted the Council has adopted the Leicester Local Plan
   2020 to 2036 (2026) (LP). As such, it forms part of the development plan for the
   area, and the appeal has been determined on this basis. Reference in my
   recommendation to the relevant policy as identified by the Council is to the online
   version. In addition, a new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) has come into effect. For both documents, there are no material
   changes in policy emphasis relevant to the substance of the appeal.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
   the future occupiers, with particular regard to outlook and privacy.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5.     The proposed ground-floor windows of the living room/kitchen would not be unduly
       small. However, they would face a 1.8 metre boundary fence at close range. In
       addition, these windows would be positioned proximate to the two-storey outrigger
       at 73 Henton Road. Consequently, the outlook from this room would be heavily
       constrained and dominated by the boundary treatment and existing built form,
       creating an uninviting outlook. Notwithstanding that the guidance contained in
       Appendix G in the Supplementary Planning Document Residential Document
       (2008) (SPD) concerning separation distances relates to extensions, and so is not


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6008277


       directly applicable, the proposal would fall well short of the advised distance,
       indicative of the poor outlook.
6.     Whilst located within a dense urban area where the conversion and reuse of
       existing buildings may well typically result in more limited outlook, occupiers
       should nonetheless be afforded acceptable living conditions. In this case, while a
       modest gap would be provided by the proposed courtyard area, and even if
       sufficient natural light would reach the room, taking account of the relationship
       between the proposed dwelling, boundary treatment and adjacent buildings, the
       proposal would have an unacceptably poor outlook and an oppressive sense of
       enclosure for future occupiers, resulting in inadequate living conditions.
7. The bedroom window on the front elevation is shown as obscure glazed. Given that
   a fully glazed door and window is proposed on the side elevation and taking
   account of the more generous distance to the boundary wall, looking over the
   amenity space, the outlook from the bedroom would be acceptable.
8. The arrangement of windows on the front elevation at ground floor level and the
   limited separation distance to No 73 would also result in opportunities for direct
   overlooking from the first-floor rear window of No 73 into the kitchen/living room
   windows. Whilst a degree of overlooking can sometimes be expected in dense
   urban areas, despite the provision of a private yard area, the relationship would be
   harmfully close, allowing for direct views, contrary to the advice in the SPD
   regarding privacy and to the detriment of the standard of living conditions that could
   reasonably be expected. This is not a matter that can be resolved through the
   imposition of a condition in relation to obscure glazing of the window at No 73 as I
   cannot be confident that this would not have a harmful effect on outlook or
   daylight/sunlight for the occupiers of that property.
9. As a consequence, the proposal would not provide adequate privacy for the
   prospective occupiers and would be contrary to Framework Policy L2 that requires
   development to provide acceptable living standards for residents in terms of privacy
   when making effective use of land.
10. Overall, I conclude that the proposal would cause unacceptable harm to the living
    conditions of future occupiers, with particular regard to outlook and privacy.
    Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with LP Policy DQP06, insofar as it
    requires proposals to avoid causing unacceptable harm to the living conditions of
    future residents taking account of privacy and overbearing impact.
Other Considerations
11. The proposal would make use of an existing building within an established and
    accessible urban location. It would also make a positive contribution to the supply
    of housing, consistent with the objectives of the LP and the Framework. However,
    these benefits attract limited weight owing to the scale of the proposal. There would
    be no significant consequences for the character and appearance of the area,
    standard of internal accommodation, neighbouring occupier’s living conditions and
    drainage however this, and any other policy compliance, would be a neutral matter
    weighing neither for nor against the proposal. The absence of objections to the
    scheme is not a reason, in itself, to allow harmful development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6008277


Conclusion and Recommendation
12. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development
    plan, read as a whole. There are no material considerations that indicate a decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. I therefore recommend that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
13. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
