Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by R Gee BA (Hons) Dip TP PGCert UD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009598
4A, Gimmels Gate, Spalding PE12 9AS
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by John Heading against the decision of South Holland District Council.
•      The application Ref is H11-1294-25.
•      The development proposed is described as change of use of storage shed to residential -
       retrospective.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. On 17 August 2026 a new Framework was published. As this could affect the
   issues and matters in this case, the Council and the appellant were invited to make
   further comments. My decision reflects the latest version of the Framework, and the
   responses received on it.
3. My attention has been drawn to a previous appeal1 relating to the site. Whilst I
   recognise there are similarities in the proposals the description of development
   differs, as does the policy context. In any event I have determined the appeal on its
   own merits, based on the evidence before me.
Main Issues
4.       The main issues are:


         i)       whether future occupiers of the proposed development would be safe from
                  flooding and whether the proposal would comply with national and local
                  planning policies which seek to steer new development away from areas at
                  the highest risk of flooding;

         ii)      whether a suitable location for development having regard to local and
                  national planning policies; and

         iii)     whether or not the proposal would provide satisfactory living conditions for
                  its future occupiers with regard to the internal space.




1
    APP/A2525/2/21/3267554 issued 21 June 2021

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009598


Reasons
Flood risk
5. The appeal site lies within Flood Zone 3a. The proposal relates to the change of
   use of an existing building to residential accommodation. National Decision Making
   Policy (NDMP) F5 of the Framework identifies circumstances where the Sequential
   Test is not required, including specified changes of use. Nevertheless, NDMP F6
   requires development proposals to be safe for their lifetime, having regard to the
   vulnerability of users, the resilience of the development to flooding, and
   arrangements for safe access, egress and evacuation where necessary. Similarly,
   NDMP F7 states that development in locations known to be at risk from flooding
   should be refused unless it can be demonstrated, amongst other matters, that the
   development would be safe throughout its lifetime, taking account of the
   vulnerability of its users, and that any residual risk can be safely managed.
6. Policy 4 of the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011-2036 (LP) states the
   change of use of existing buildings will be supported providing they do not pose an
   increase in risk to people. Where such proposals would result in self-contained
   ground floor residential accommodation in areas of hazard rating ‘danger for some’,
   ‘danger for most’ and ‘danger for all’ will not be supported. In these areas
   unrestricted access to a habitable room above the flood level and an emergency
   evacuation plan will be required.
7. The submitted Flood Risk Assessment (FRA)2 identified that the site has a future
   hazard classification of ‘Danger for Some’ (includes children, the elderly and the
   infirm) as shown in Appendix A of the South East Lincolnshire Strategic Flood Risk
   Assessment (SFRA). The 1% Fluvial / 0.5% Tidal Event depth maps contained in
   Appendix B of the SFRA shows that the site could experience flood depths of up to
   0.25m arising from a breach in the defences in any one year up to 2115.
8. The submitted FRA does not indicate what the existing land/building levels and the
   finished floor level are, in metres above Ordnance Datum. The submitted FRA
   proposes that the finished floor level of the dwelling would be raised a minimum of
   400mm above the existing ground level to mitigate the risk of flooding from the
   River Nene. Whilst the EA consider such measures would be appropriate to
   mitigate the risk of flooding, no plans or drawings have been submitted that
   adequately demonstrate how/if the raising could be achieved.
9. The Appellant contends that such matters could be secured by condition. However,
   given that the proposal is for the conversion of an existing building it is not apparent
   how the raising of floor levels would be achieved through the building design. Such
   mitigation is fundamental to ensuring the safe occupation of the development and
   could have wider planning implications. Consequently, I do not concur that such
   matters could be left to condition post-decision.
10. I am therefore unable to conclude that the proposal complies with the relevant flood
    risk policies of the LP or the Framework. This draws the proposal into conflict with
    Policy 4 of the LP and NDMP F6 and F7 of the Framework.




2
    dated December 2025, ref: ‘GCB/HEADING’, prepared by Geoff Beel Consultancy


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6009598


Location
11. The appeal site is outside a defined settlement boundary and lies within the
    countryside. It is adjacent to a cluster of residential and commercial buildings at the
    junction of Gimmels Gate with Roman Bank and therefore is not isolated.
12. Policy 1 of the LP seeks to direct housing to existing settlements and permits
    limited forms of development in the countryside where it can be demonstrated that
    they meet the sustainable development needs of the area. Policy 23 of the LP
    supports the re-use of buildings in the countryside, subject to a number of criteria,
    including a requirement that the building is of architectural or historic merit or
    makes a positive contribution to the character of the landscape, to justify
    conversion to ensure retention. However, these aspects of the policies are not
    consistent with the revised Framework, which contains no equivalent requirement
    for a building proposed for re-use to possess architectural or historic significance.
    The building is of permanent and substantial construction, and I am therefore
    satisfied that the proposal accords with criterion c) of S5. I therefore afford only
    limited weight to the conflict with Policy 23 in this respect.
13. The Appellant advances the need for the residential unit in support of the
    established business; however, the Council contends that the proposal fails to
    demonstrate the need for a countryside location. Policy S5 of the Framework
    identifies a range of circumstances in which development may be acceptable in the
    countryside. As the proposal would accord with criterion 1 c) of Policy S5, it is not
    necessary for it to satisfy each of the alternative criteria. I therefore conclude that it
    is not necessary for me to consider where there is an essential need on the basis
    that the proposal would comply with one of the forms of development listed in
    Policy S5.
14. Whilst the proposal would be in conflict with Policies 1, 17 and 23 of the LP for the
    reasons stated I afford this limited weight. The material considerations in this
    circumstance, indicate compliance with the Framework, and I therefore conclude
    that the proposal would be in a suitable location.
Living conditions
15. Whilst the Council cites conflict with the Nationally Described Space Standards
    (NDSS) the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) is clear that local planning
    authorities should only require that an internal space standard is met where it is
    referred to in a local plan, which is not the case here. Nevertheless, I recognise that
    the NDSS provides a useful guidance to determine whether the proposal would
    offer an acceptable level of internal amenity space for future occupiers.
16. As set out above, the Appellant proposes to raise floor levels by 400mm to mitigate
    flood risk. However, the building is already in situ and of limited height, and it is not
    clear from the submitted plans how this increase in floor level would be achieved.
    Consequently, I am unable to determine the resulting floor-to-ceiling height within
    the accommodation, or whether it would fall below the generally accepted guideline
    of 2.3m. Whilst this benchmark is only a guideline, the absence of sufficient
    information means that I cannot be satisfied that the proposal would provide
    adequate internal headroom or a satisfactory standard of accommodation for future
    occupiers. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would fail to demonstrate
    acceptable living conditions in this regard.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009598


17. At 48sqm, the proposed dwelling would fall marginally below the 50sqm minimum
    gross internal floor area set out in the NDSS. However, given the shortfall would be
    limited I am satisfied that the accommodation would provide an acceptable
    standard of living for future occupiers.
18. The Council raises concerns regarding the absence of a separate bedroom.
    However, I see little material distinction between the proposed arrangement and a
    conventional studio apartment with open-plan living and sleeping accommodation.
    The Appellant explains that the layout reflects their personal circumstances,
    including health-related matters, and that they choose to sleep on sofas rather than
    in a bedroom. In any event, I am satisfied that the overall internal space would be
    sufficient to allow the accommodation to be partitioned to create a separate
    bedroom should this be desired in the future. Consequently, the absence of a
    dedicated bedroom does not, in itself, lead me to conclude that the proposal would
    provide unacceptable living conditions. Furthermore, were I minded to allow the
    appeal, I could impose a personal permission, thereby limiting occupation to the
    Appellant and taking account of their particular circumstances.
19. Nevertheless, for the reasons stated I am unable to conclude that the development
    provides satisfactory living conditions for its occupiers. Accordingly, it conflicts with
    Policies 2, 3, 17 and 23 of the LP, and the Framework, insofar as they aim to
    secure appropriate living conditions for occupiers.
Other Matters
20. It is not disputed that an established firearms business at the site. However, the
    evidence indicates that it has not previously required an on-site security presence.
21. The appellant advises that the use of CCTV for surveillance would be costly. Whilst
    I recognise the personal benefits of living within close proximity to the business
    there is very little substantive evidence that there have been incidences of security
    breaches at the site in the past, or that the premises and equipment, could not be
    adequately protected using security systems such as alarms and surveillance,
    which would be likely to act as a deterrent against criminal activity.
22. The appeal building is set back into the site. However, a lack of harm in respect of
    character and appearance is a neutral matter.
23. It is advanced that the proposed dwelling would meet the needs of the Appellant
    who have health issues and that the internal layout has been designed to provide a
    large flexible living space capable of accommodating their needs. I have, therefore,
    had regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) contained in section 149 of
    the Equality Act 2010. The duty includes having regard to the need to eliminate
    discrimination, harassment, and advance equality of opportunity between those
    sharing relevant protected characteristics and those who do not.
24. I am mindful of the needs of the Appellant. However, from the evidence before me
    it has not been demonstrated that their needs cannot be met by an alternative
    scheme. Accordingly, this would not outweigh the harms in respect of flood risk.
    Therefore, the PSED considerations do not lead me to an alternative view in this
    case, and following careful consideration of these matters, I am satisfied that the
    impact of dismissing this appeal would be proportionate and justified.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009598


25. I also recognise that the dismissal of the appeal may interfere the appellant’s
    human rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
    Nevertheless, any such interference would be lawful, necessary and proportionate
    in the public interest of maintaining proper planning control.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
26. In accordance with the Framework due weight should be given to relevant policies
    of the development plan according to their degree of consistency with the
    Framework.
27. The revised Framework introduced a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development for certain proposals outside of settlement boundaries through
    NDMPs S3 and S5, replacing the presumption contained within the previous
    Framework.
28. Whilst the proposal would conflict with policies of the LP, the principle of
    development would align with Policy S5 c) of the Framework in terms of being one
    of the limited forms of development that could be permitted outside of settlements
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in this
    Framework.
29. I have found that the proposal conflicts with the Framework’s flood risk policies. I
    attach substantial weight to this harm.
30. The proposal would give rise to some benefits, including a personal benefit to the
    Appellant in the form of a new home. However, the evidence before me indicates
    that the benefits would be limited in nature and extent. I therefore afford them only
    limited weight in the overall planning balance.
31. Paragraph 2(c) of NDMP S5 states that in applying this policy, the circumstances in
    which the benefits of approving development proposals are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where
    the development proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-
    making policies which state that development proposals should be refused in
    specific circumstances.
32. Consequently, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by
    the conflict with national flood risk policies. These matters are sufficient for me to
    conclude that the scheme is unacceptable. Indeed, the failure to meet the
    Framework criteria in respect of flood risk means that the development should be
    refused.
33. Drawing all the matters together, and having regard to the material considerations
    before me, I conclude that the benefits of granting permission would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. Accordingly, the
    appeal should be dismissed.

R Gee
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
