Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by C Evans MTCP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009697
Land off Chelford Lane, Over Peover, Knutsford, Cheshire WA16 8UG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Paul Read of P & T Read against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0011/PRIOR-6.
•    The development proposed is described as “agricultural determination for proposed general
     purposed produce and machinery store”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026.
       There have been no material changes relevant to this appeal. On this basis, I have
       not sought further comments from the Council or the appellant on the revisions.
Background and Main Issue
3.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended
       (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for the erection of a building on
       agricultural land in an agricultural unit of 5 hectares or more, which are reasonably
       necessary for the purposes of agriculture within that unit, subject to limitations and
       conditions.
4.     The Council considers that it has not been demonstrated that the proposal is
       reasonably necessary and that it would not meet the requirements of the GPDO
       regarding the height of the building for areas within 3 kilometres of the perimeter of
       an aerodrome.
5.     On this basis, the main issue is whether the proposed development would be
       permitted under Part 6, Class A of the GPDO.
Reasons
6.     The agricultural unit is in two parts. The land where the proposed development
       would be sited has no existing agricultural buildings and is physically separated
       from the existing farmyard and buildings by Chelford Lane.
7.     The Council decision notice refers to whether it has been demonstrated that the
       proposed building is reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture. It would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009697


       be used to store hay and agricultural maintenance equipment. Details to justify the
       area needed to store these has been provided by the appellant, which correlates
       with the size of the proposed structure. The Council has not disputed this. It has,
       however, disputed why the structure is necessary.
8.     There are existing buildings at the farmyard, and it has not been justified why
       these cannot be utilised for the purpose detailed above. The appellant contends
       that these are at capacity for the storage of hay, agricultural machinery and
       livestock in winter months. Whilst the test is not one of absolute necessity, the
       onus is on the appellant to demonstrate that the requirements are met. On the
       basis of the evidence provided, it has not been fully demonstrated that existing
       buildings are not suitable.
9.     Paragraph A.1. (f) states that development is not permitted where the height of any
       part of any building, structure or works within 3 kilometres of the perimeter of an
       aerodrome would exceed 3 metres. Both parties are in agreement that the appeal
       site is within this distance of a helipad and that the proposed building would be
       greater than 3 metres in height. They disagree, however, whether the helipad
       meets the statutory definition of an aerodrome.
10. The GPDO definition of an aerodrome is as defined in paragraph 1 of Schedule 1
    to the Air Navigation Order 2016. A site need only meet one of these criteria.
    Relevant to this appeal are:
         (a) licensed under that Order
         (d) one used by aircraft engaged in the public transport of passengers or cargo
             or in aerial work
11. The Council received a planning application (Ref: (22/3941M) for the helipad. The
    use had been taking place in excess of 10 years, and so no formal enforcement
    action was progressed. Few details have been provided, but the Council states
    that the business operating there is fully licensed by the Civil Aviation Authority.
    Although the Council has not provided a copy of the licence, I have no reason to
    doubt them.
12. For the reasons given above, it has not been evidenced that the proposed
    development is reasonably necessary. In addition, the site is located within 3
    kilometres of the perimeter of an aerodrome, a helipad, which the Council has
    informed me is licensed under the Air Navigation Order 2016. Consequently, the
    proposed structure exceeds the size parameters permitted under the GPDO for
    this location.
13. The requirements of Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the GPDO have not been met
    in full and therefore it has not been shown that the proposed development qualifies
    as permitted development.
14. The appellant has drawn my attention to two planning applications (Refs:
    23/0865M and 17/5896M) for agricultural buildings sited away from the main farm
    unit. Given my finding that the scheme does not fall within the scope of the GPDO,
    I do not need to consider the appeal any further, including the siting, design and
    external appearance of the building.
Other Matters


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009697


15. The appellant contends that the Council has granted prior approval for other
    applications for agricultural buildings, which are within 3 kilometres of the helipad
    (Refs: 25/4623/PRIOR-6, 25/4284/PRIOR-6, 25/2788/PRIOR-6 and 24/2397M).
    Few details have been provided to me; therefore, I cannot be certain that they are
    directly comparable or materially different. In addition, I am not bound by previous
    decisions of the Council and am required to determine this appeal on the basis of
    its own merits.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



C Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
