Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by Billy Pattison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009621
3 Old Glass House, Kents Lane, North Weald Bassett, Epping, Essex CM16 6AX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mike Highstead against the decision of Epping Forest District Council.
•    The application Ref is EPF/0117/26.
•    The development proposed is Conversion of dwelling into two and conversion of outbuilding into a
     separate dwelling and associated works.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026, Government published a revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). This included revisions to policies that are pertinent
       to the appeal, such as those relating to development in the Green Belt. During the
       appeal the main parties were invited to comment on the relevance of the revised
       Framework to the appeal proposal. In my decision, I have had regard to the written
       responses.
3.     The appeal submission includes a site layout plan which details an amendment to
       the proposed layout of gardens within the appeal site. This was not before the
       Council at the time of its decision. It is important that what is considered by the
       Inspector is essentially what was considered by the local planning authority, and
       on which interested people’s views were sought.
4.     In this case, the amendments to the layout represent a minor alteration which the
       Council has provided commentary on. For this reason, I consider that there would
       be no prejudice to any party by considering the additional drawing. I have therefore
       determined the appeal on the basis of the additional drawing.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
           •    whether or not the proposal would be inappropriate development within the
                Green Belt having regard to the Framework and any other relevant
                development plan policies and its effect on openness of the Green Belt;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area; and




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009621


           •    whether the site is a suitable location for the proposal having regard to local
                and national planning policy, and the accessibility of the site to services,
                employment opportunities and facilities.
Reasons
Whether or not inappropriate development in the Green Belt
6.     The appeal site lies within the Metropolitan Green Belt. Policy DM4 of the Epping
       Forest District Local Plan 2011-2033 Part One (2023) (LP) sets out that within the
       Green Belt, planning permission will not be granted for inappropriate development,
       except in very special circumstances, in accordance with national policy. It outlines
       certain exceptions where development would not be inappropriate development.
       One of which is criteria C (vi) which is the limited infilling or the partial or complete
       redevelopment of previously developed land, whether redundant or in continuing
       use (excluding temporary buildings), which would not have a greater impact on the
       openness of the Green Belt and the purpose of including land within it than the
       existing development.
7.     Chapter 13 of the Framework identifies that the fundamental aim of Green Belt
       policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The essential
       characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their permanence. Policy
       GB6.2. of the Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition,
       harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special
       circumstances.
8.     Policy GB7.1 of the Framework outlines a number of categories of development
       which are not inappropriate development in the Green Belt. The main parties
       agree that GB7.1.e. of the Framework is of relevance to the appeal. This identifies
       the redevelopment of previously developed land (including a material change of
       use to residential or mixed-use including residential), which would not cause
       substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt, as an exception which would
       not be inappropriate development. There is no dispute between the main parties
       that the appeal site is previously developed land. As GB7.1.e. refers to
       redevelopment which could include a change of use, it seems to me, that all
       aspects of the proposal can be assessed under this category.
9.     As set out above, Policy GB7.1.e of the Framework requires any harm to
       openness to be substantial before development is regarded as inappropriate in the
       Green Belt. By contrast, Policy DM4 C (vi) of the LP requires proposals to have no
       greater impact on the openness of the Green Belt. This approach is more closely
       aligned with a previous version of the Framework. Consequently, the wording of
       Policy DM4, insofar as it relates to openness, is not consistent with the current
       Framework.
10. Openness is an essential characteristic of the Green Belt and is capable of having
    both spatial and visual aspects. An assessment against Policy GB7.1.e requires
    an assessment of openness, but not one that simply identifies harm, as not all
    harm to openness will necessarily be substantial.
11. The submitted drawings indicate that, whilst it would be subdivided to form two
    dwellings, the proposal would not involve any extension to the existing dwelling
    other than the erection of a small porch. Given its limited size this would have
    minimal effect on the spatial and visual openness of the Green Belt.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6009621


12. A fourteen square metre infill extension would join two rear outbuildings in order to
    create an additional dwelling. This would introduce new built form into an area that
    is currently undeveloped, thereby reducing the openness of the site. Nonetheless,
    due to its limited scale, low height and position in between two existing buildings,
    the extension would have a limited effect on the visual and spatial openness of the
    Green Belt.
13. The introduction of two additional dwellings within the site would likely to see an
    increase in domestic paraphernalia, as a result of items such as washing lines,
    outdoor furniture, and children's play equipment across the newly subdivided
    gardens. There would also likely be additional boundary treatments to define the
    subdivision of the site, and an increase in the number of vehicles parked across
    the site.
14. The additional domestic paraphernalia and vehicles would not be of significant
    scale. Their impact is further tempered by the fact that the site is currently in
    residential use, and there is already potential for domestic paraphernalia to be
    spread across it. Whilst there would be public views from Kents Lane of the
    paraphernalia and the additional vehicles, given their scale they would not be
    prominent features. Overall, this aspect of the proposal would have a moderate
    effect on visual and spatial openness.
15. The introduction of two additional dwellings within the site would see an
    intensification in its use. The increase from a five bed dwelling, to three, three bed
    dwellings would invariably see an increase in the comings and goings from
    occupiers and visitors. However, given the relatively limited increase in the number
    of occupiers, this would not have more than a limited impact on the openness of
    the Green Belt.
16. Taking all factors into account, I find that the development would cause a
    moderate degree of harm to the openness of the Green Belt when compared with
    the existing situation, but not substantial harm.
17. Overall, the proposal would result in some conflict with Policy DM4 of the LP as it
    would have a greater impact on the openness of the Green Belt. However, Annex
    A of the Framework confirms that development plan policies (or parts of those
    policies) which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies in
    the Framework should be given very limited weight. As the 2026 Framework
    contains relevant and up to date national planning policy, I attach greater weight to
    the provisions of the Framework.
18. Consequently, the development would not constitute inappropriate development in
    the Green Belt as defined by the Framework. Therefore, it would accord with the
    approach to development in the Green Belt as set out in the Framework and Policy
    DM4 of the LP insofar as it seeks to safeguard the Green Belt from inappropriate
    development.
19. As I have found that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, it is not necessary for me to consider whether the proposed
    development would meet any of the other exceptions listed in the Framework. As a
    further consequence, I also do not need to consider whether there are other
    considerations and whether they amount to very special circumstances to justify
    the development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009621


Character and appearance
20. The appeal site is located within a relatively short stretch of ribbon development
    along Kents Lane. The dwellings on the lane vary in terms of their height, width,
    overall scale and use of facing materials. However, the pattern of development is
    generally low density and characterised by dwellings set within deep plots that
    extend a considerable distance to the rear. This feature, combined with the mature
    vegetation along the front boundaries of many plots, creates a strong impression
    of dwellings being set within spacious plots.
21. The proposal would create three dwellings within a plot where there is currently
    one. The resulting subdivision would create narrow and small enclosed gardens.
    The size of the plots and gardens would not be comparable to other sites along the
    lane, and their shallow layouts would not reflect the more spacious quality of plots
    within the local area. In this regard, the enclosed front garden to unit 1 would be a
    particularly uncharacteristic feature. Similarly, due to the proximity of the building
    footprints to each other, the layout of unit 3 created by the amalgamation of the
    outbuildings would create a form of development which is indicative of
    overdevelopment.
22. Due to its backland location, unit 3 would not have a presence fronting the lane. It
    would be positioned very close to the rear of unit 2 and its side elevation would
    adjoin unit 2’s garden boundary. Whilst this would not have an unacceptable
    impact on the living conditions of the future occupiers, buildings positioned in such
    proximity to their garden boundaries is not a characteristic of the area. As a
    consequence, I find that unit 3 would appear ‘squeezed’ onto the site in a manner
    that would appear cramped. In coming to this view, I have taken into account that
    one of the outbuildings has recently been used as a residential annex.
23. The appellant has submitted an amended site plan that reduces the size of the
    garden areas. Even if I were to favour this proposed layout, it would have the
    effect of emphasising the limited plot sizes of the tight-knit dwellings, which would
    highlight their incongruously small size.
24. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area. I therefore find that it would conflict with
    Policy DM9 of the LP. Amongst other aspects, the policy seeks to secure
    development of a high standard of design which positively contributes to the
    existing character, appearance and context of the area.
Suitable location
25. The appeal site lies within a rural area accessed via a quiet, single track lane. The
    main parties agree that the appeal site is located outside any defined settlement
    boundary. Consequently, the proposal would be within an area of open
    countryside.
26. Policy SP1 of the LP sets out the strategic approach to the location of
    development. It identifies that housing will be delivered by permitting development
    proposals within the defined settlement boundaries. As a result of the proposal
    being located outside of the defined settlement boundary, it would fail to accord
    with the requirements of the policy.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009621


27. The Council indicate that the Essex connectivity map identifies the site as being
    within an area of low connectivity, that is not well served by public transport. This
    is not disputed by the appellant.
28. It has been put to me that the appeal site is a short cycle from North Weald.
    However, to access North Weald occupants of the proposed dwelling would have
    to walk or cycle along Kents Lane and Weald Bridge Road which are rural roads
    which are unlit and would not be an attractive route outside daylight hours.
    Furthermore, there are no dedicated cycle lanes or footpaths for the majority of the
    route. Therefore, the route is unlikely to be an attractive option for walking and
    cycling outside of daylight hours or during inclement weather.
29. Due to the lack of services and facilities in close proximity to the site, and the
    limited public transport opportunities, future occupiers of the proposed dwellings
    would require the use of private vehicles to gain access to services and facilities
    necessary for day-to-day living. Due to the increase in the number of dwellings, the
    proposal would generate additional vehicle trips over and above the existing use of
    the site. Whilst the increase in trips may be limited, over time these would
    cumulatively result in a significant number of additional private vehicle movements.
30. Policy HO11 of the Framework relates to isolated homes in the countryside.
    ‘Isolated’ is not defined in the Framework but the Braintree judgement 1 set out that
    it simply connotes a dwelling that is physically separate or remote from a
    settlement. The appeal site is within a stretch of ribbon residential development
    which forms a cluster with these dwellings and therefore the site would not be
    isolated for the purposes of Policy HO11 of the Framework. Therefore, the policy’s
    criteria relating to the re-use of redundant or disused buildings are not applicable
    to the proposal.
31. My attention has been drawn to a recent appeal decision on Kents Lane (PINS
    Ref: APP/J1535/W/22/3313957). However, consideration of whether that site was
    a suitable location for the proposal, did not form one of the main issues under
    consideration by the Inspector. I also note that the proposal involved an increase
    of one dwelling, rather than two dwellings as is the case for the appeal before me.
    For this reason, the circumstances within the appeals differ to the proposal before
    me. Notwithstanding this, each development must be considered on its individual
    merits, and I have reached my conclusion based on the individual merit of the
    appeal proposal.
32. Whilst I have found that the proposal is not inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, this is a separate planning assessment to the consideration of whether
    a site is in a suitable location for residential development. Furthermore, the
    Framework, within Policy TR3 seeks to locate development where it can support
    sustainable patterns of movement, enable good accessibility for different users
    and make the most of existing and proposed transport infrastructure.
33. As such, the appeal site would not be a suitable location for the appeal scheme
    when applying the spatial strategy in the LP, having regard to local and national
    planning policy, and the accessibility of the site to services, facilities and
    employment opportunities. The proposal fails to accord with Policies SP1 and T1
    of the LP. Amongst other things, these policies set out the strategic approach to
    the location of development and seek to minimise the need to travel, promote
1
    Braintree District Council v Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government & Ors [2018] EWCA Civ 61


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 5
Appeal Decision 6009621


       opportunities for sustainable transport modes, and improve accessibility to
       services.
Other Matters
34. The development has the potential to result in a net increase in traffic using roads
    through the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC). Traffic is a key
    contributor to atmospheric pollution within the SAC. If I were to allow the appeal, I
    would be required, as the competent authority, to consider whether the
    development would result in any likely significant effects on the integrity of the site.
    The appellant does not dispute the need for contributions towards the SAC, and
    has provided a Unilateral Undertaking with the appeal which secures a per
    dwelling contribution to fund mitigation. However, as I am dismissing the scheme
    for other reasons it has not been necessary for me to undertake an Appropriate
    Assessment and consult with Natural England in order to be certain that the
    integrity of the protected sites would not be adversely affected.
35. The main parties agree that a five year supply of housing land is not in place,
    albeit the extent of the shortfall has not been articulated. The proposal would
    contribute 2 additional dwellings towards addressing that shortfall and would also
    contribute to the delivery of housing on small sites, which can generally be
    delivered quickly. Policy HO11 of the Framework states that substantial weight
    should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards
    meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community, as is the case
    here.
36. In support of the appeal, the appellant has drawn my attention to Policies L2, L3
    and N2 of the Framework. Policy L2 requires substantial weight to be given to
    proposals which make effective use of previously developed land. Policy L3
    outlines that outside settlements, development footprints should make the best use
    of a site’s development potential. Given the scale of the proposal, I afford this
    factor limited weight.
37. Policy N2 of the Framework requires that proposals conserve and enhance
    existing natural features of visual, or nature conservation value (such as
    established trees and hedgerows) where possible. Policy HE4 of the Framework
    seeks to secure the conservation of heritage assets. However, the absence of
    harm or conflict with these policies is a neutral factor and does not weigh in favour
    of the proposal.
38. The issue of highway safety and vehicular turning on site were discussed in the
    officer report. However, the Council did not refuse planning permission on the
    basis of harm to highway safety and I have not referred to this issue further.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
39. In the context of the presumption in favour of sustainable development, Policy S5
    of the Framework applies. Where development is proposed within the Green Belt,
    Policy S5 directs decision-makers to Policies GB6, GB7 and GB8 in the first
    instance. In this case, the proposal would not constitute inappropriate development
    when assessed against Policy GB7. Accordingly, Policy S5.2 applies. This states
    that, when applying Policy S5, the circumstances in which the benefits of a
    proposal are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include, but
    are not restricted to, situations where the proposal would fail to comply with a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009621


       national decision-making policy in the Framework that indicates planning
       permission should be refused in specific circumstances.
40. Policy DP3.1 of the Framework requires development proposals to respond to their
    context, including the history, character and features of the site and its setting, so
    that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Policy DP3.2.d requires
    proposals to reflect principles such as providing good connections to nearby
    settlements and prioritising walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport. Given
    my findings on the proposal's effect on the character and appearance of the area,
    together with its poor accessibility to services and facilities, I conclude that the
    proposal would conflict with these aspects of Policy DP3. Policy DP3 is one of the
    national decision-making policies that indicates planning permission should be
    refused in specific circumstances.
41. Substantial weight is afforded to the proposal’s benefits of making use of
    underutilised land and buildings, and providing homes which will contribute
    towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community.
    However, having regard to the conflicts with Policy DP3, I find that the proposal's
    benefits would be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects on the character
    and appearance of the area, together with its failure to align with principles that
    promote sustainable travel and good connections to nearby settlements.
    Consequently, the proposal would not benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out in Policies S3 and S5 of the Framework.
42. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

B Pattison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
