Appeal Decision
Site visit made 7 September 2026
by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009281
Willow Tree Farm, Denham Lane, Chalfont St Peter SL9 0QW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Sun Sass against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/5959/OA.
•    The development proposed is Outline planning application for construction of up to 4 dwellings
     (matter to be considered at this stage: access).

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
      in August 2026. Main parties have been provided with the opportunity to comment
      on the implications of the revisions to their cases. I have taken account of the
      revised Framework, and any comments made, in my determination of the appeal.
3.    The appeal proposal is made in outline form with all matters reserved other than
      access. Despite this, the submitted layout plan shows one way that the scheme
      could be developed, I therefore intend to treat details of layout as indicative only.
      Accordingly, I shall consider this appeal in those terms.
Main Issues
4.    The main issues are:
      •     Whether the proposed development would be inappropriate development in
            the Green Belt and its effect on openness taking into account the Framework
            and any relevant development plan policies, and
      •     whether any harm is clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to
            amount to very special circumstances to justify it.
Reasons
Inappropriate development – Green Belt considerations
5.    The development plan for the district includes the Chiltern District Local Plan
      [1997, consolidated 2007 and 2011] (LP). LP Policy GB2, with respect to
      development in the Green Belt, states that most development in the Green Belt is
      inappropriate. At subsections (a) to (f) the policy sets out the types of development
      that would be regarded as not inappropriate within this context. However, this

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009281


      policy is in part inconsistent with the Framework, as development regarded as ‘not
      inappropriate’ in the Framework is broader than that set out at LP policy GB2 and
      this policy is therefore only afforded moderate weight.
6.    The Framework explains that whilst development plan policies should not be given
      reduced weight simply as they were adopted prior to the publication of the
      Framework, policies which are materially inconsistent with the national decision-
      making policies of the Framework should be given very limited weight. As such,
      where relevant I have taken into consideration the requirements of the Framework
      when considering whether the proposal would be regarded as inappropriate
      development.
7.    The Framework attaches great importance to the Green Belt, the essential
      features of which is its openness and permanence. Policy GB6 establishes that
      new development would be inappropriate unless it meets a listed category of
      development at policy GB7, which defines development that should not be
      regarded a harmful to the Green Belt. Policy GB7(1) part (e) refers to the
      redevelopment of previously developed land (PDL) and part (g) relates to other
      development including, among other matters, grey belt land.
      Previously developed land GB7(1)(e)
8.    Policy GB7(1)(e) supports the redevelopment of PDL provided it would not cause
      substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt. PDL is defined in the glossary
      as including land which has been lawfully developed and is or was occupied by a
      permanent structure and any fixed surface infrastructure associated with it. It
      includes the curtilage of the developed land, although it should not be assumed
      that the whole of the curtilage should be developed.
9.    The appeal site consists of a parcel of land to the side of a dwelling and a stable
      building. The site consists of a manége and part of a large residential garden. The
      manége can be regarded as fixed surface infrastructure installed in association
      with the adjacent stables. It is enclosed by post and rail wooden fencing but is
      otherwise open. As such, the appeal site is not occupied by structures, but only an
      area of hardstanding that appears to occupy around a third of the entire site. As
      only part of the site can be regarded as previously developed, the site as a whole
      is not regarded as PDL.
10. The proposal would include the erection of buildings and associated hardstanding
    that would, in combination, significantly increase the scale of development on site.
    In visual terms the site is currently open and devoid of buildings. Its openness,
    through an absence of built form, can be perceived from outside the site from the
    adjacent highway, the public footpath to the side of the site and in wider views
    from the cemetery, beyond the footpath. As such, it would both spatially and
    visually erode the sites existing openness, resulting in moderate harm to the
    Green Belt.
11. Therefore, even if the entire site were regarded as PDL, the scheme would
    significantly increase the scale of development on site and cause harm to the
    openness of the Green Belt, failing to satisfy policy GB7(e).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009281


      Other ‘not inappropriate’ development GB7(1)(g)
12. Policy GB7(1)(g) supports other development in the Green Belt which meets all
    provisions of sections (i-iv). To comply with subsection i) requires the site to be
    regarded as grey belt land and for its development to not fundamentally undermine
    the purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the plan area.
    At ii) it requires that there is evidenced unmet need for the type of development
    proposed, and at iii) that the development would be in a sustainable location.
    Subsection iv) relates to major development, which is not relevant in this case.
13. The purposes of the Green Belt are defined in the Framework’s ‘policy making’
    policies of policy GB2. This states that five purposes are to (a) check unrestricted
    sprawl, (b) prevent neighbouring towns merging, (c) assist in safeguarding the
    countryside from encroachment, (d) preserve the setting and special character of
    historic towns and (e) to assist in urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling
    of derelict and other urban land.
14. With regard to the first test of GB7(1)(g)(i) the Glossary of the Framework defines
    grey belt as Green Belt comprising of previously developed land and/or any other
    land that, in either case, does not strongly contribute to any purposes (a), (b) or (d)
    of policy GB2, and therefore applies two tests.
15. As discussed above, I have found that the site cannot be regarded as PDL. In
    terms of the second test the Council’s recent Draft Green Belt Assessment [2026]
    provides a useful tool in assessing the contribution land makes to the purposes of
    the Green Belt. The Assessment, although in draft form, shows that Denham Lane,
    adjacent to the appeal site, acts as a clear delineated boundary between the built-
    up area of the settlement and the Green Belt. Most pockets of land to the east of
    the town have assessment areas that are deemed to either make a strong or
    moderate contribution to preventing urban sprawl, with the area of the appeal site
    deemed to make a strong contribution. Despite its draft status it seems reasonable
    for it to conclude that the site makes a strong contribution to purpose ‘a’ due to its
    proximity to the town and the intact nature of the open Green Belt to the north,
    south and east of the site.
16. The appellant suggests that the Assessment is a broad county-wide assessment
    that Council should not rely on it to determine the effects of a specific proposal. To
    that I agree, but equally I find that the site is within an area that is not enclosed by
    built form and connects to other Green Belt to its north, south and eastern
    boundary, therefore being at risk of encroachment from the adjacent town.
17. The layout of the proposal, whilst indicative only, shows the rectangular site
    accommodating four large footprint dwellings that are stacked with two set in
    backland plots. Adjacent development on the northeast side of Denham Lane is
    undeveloped save for ‘Willow Tree Farm’ and its associated stables. The
    cemetery, whilst not ‘countryside’, is a use regarded as appropriate in the Green
    Belt by virtue of GB7(1)(f)(iv). The next development to the north is Roberson
    School, but this is separated from the appeal site by several fields and fails to have
    a material bearing on the immediate context of the site. As such, the size and
    shape of the site shows a form of development that would intrude into the Green
    Belt away from the highway, further increasing the resultant sense of
    encroachment.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009281


18. Accordingly, the appeal site is not within a continuous row of development and
    would not act as an infill plot. Instead, it would represent development beyond the
    village envelop on land which is most vulnerable to encroachment into the open
    countryside. Consequently, the site performs strongly with respect to guarding
    against encroachment and thus cannot be regarded as grey belt land. Accordingly,
    the site fails to meet the exemption listed at policy GB7(1)(g)(i).
19. Any compliance with the remaining criteria of policy GB7(1)(g) would not alter the
    above findings, meaning that the proposal is regarded as inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt.
Other considerations
20. The Council cannot demonstrate it has a 5-year supply of housing, with a current
    provision of only 0.75 years, as of March 2024. As such, the proposal would meet
    an unmet need for housing. Policy H07 of the Framework requires substantial
    weight to be afforded to the benefits of providing homes that contribute towards
    meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community.
21. Chalfont St Peter and Gerrards Cross is a large settlement surrounded by the
    metropolitan Green Belt. The site is well located with bus stops within a short walk,
    providing services to destinations including Slough. Chalfont St Peter High Street
    is also within a 15-minute walk, providing future occupiers of the site with good
    access to goods and services. Consequently, the site is deemed to be in an
    accessible location, which also weighs in favour of the scheme.
22. The proposed dwellings would deliver both economic benefits during construction
    and for the local community once occupied by future occupiers spending in the
    local area, attracting further support for the proposal.
Green Belt balance
23. Policy GB6 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to any harm
    to the Green Belt, including harm to openness. Furthermore, Policy GB7 states
    that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and
    should not be approved except in very special circumstances. Such circumstances
    will not exist unless the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of
    inappropriateness, or any other harm, is clearly outweighed by other
    considerations.
24. The Framework, at policy H07, requires substantial weight to be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. This is especially pertinent in a district
    where the Council is not meeting its required 5-year supply of housing land, with a
    provision of only 1.98 years. In this instance, the benefits of additional housing, in
    a sustainable location, weighs substantially in favour of the proposal. Nonetheless,
    whilst the provision of any new dwellings within the district would be an important
    benefit of the proposal, such provision is only of moderate significance being for
    only 4 dwellings.
25. The proposal would result in encroachment into the Green Belt, harming the Green
    Belt and further harm would be caused by its adverse effect on the openness of
    this relatively exposed site, in conflict with policies GB6 and GB7 of the
    Framework. The economic and social benefits, as identified as important at


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009281


      policies E2 and H07, can only be deemed to be of moderate to limited support in
      favour of the scheme although it is recognised that’s its locational benefits also
      weigh moderately in support of the proposed development.
26. Accordingly, the harm to the Green Belt is not clearly outweighed by the other
    considerations identified and therefore the very special circumstances necessary
    to justify the development do not exist. Accordingly, the proposal fails to adhere to
    the local and national Green Belt policies I have already outlined. Consequently,
    the proposal would be inappropriate development and as such harmful to the
    Green Belt. The proposed dwelling would therefore be contrary to LP Policy GB8
    and the Framework, which seek to resist most development in the Green Belt as
    inappropriate development.
Planning balance
27. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with development plan LP policy
    GB2. The proposal would therefore be at odds with the spatial strategy of the
    development plan and would conflict with the development plan when taken as a
    whole. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be
    determined in accordance with the development plan unless material
    considerations indicate otherwise. The material considerations in this case,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that a decision should be made other
    than in accordance with the development plan.
Conclusion
28. For the above reasons the appeal is dismissed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
