    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 9 September 2026
    by L Gardner MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009405
Historic Toilet Block, Road of Remembrance, Folkestone CT20 1SW
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Robert Mouland against the decision of Folkestone and Hythe District
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/2308/FH.
•      The development proposed is proposed military memorial at former toiler block, Road of
       Remembrance.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for proposed military
         memorial at Historic Toilet Block, Road of Remembrance, Folkestone CT20 1SW
         in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/2308/FH subject to the
         following conditions:
        1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years
                from the date of this decision.
        2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
                drawing no 001 Rev P1.
        3)      No development above ground level shall take place until details of the
                design of the memorial structure including external finish, methods of ground
                affixation and drawings at scale 1:20 have been submitted to and approved
                in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall be carried
                out in accordance with the approved details.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The description of development in the banner header above is taken from the
         application form and is the description which I have referred to in my formal
         decision. I note that this differs from the description on the Council’s decision
         notice which also refers to a flagpole and associated signage.
3.       However, elsewhere within the evidence, the Council accept that these elements
         require advertisement consent rather than planning permission and therefore did
         not form part of the application. I have assessed the appeal on this basis and find
         that the description used by the appellant in the original application form is an
         accurate description of the proposed appeal development.
4.       The appeal site is situated within the Folkestone Leas & Bayle Conservation Area
         (CA) and within the setting of several listed buildings. Accordingly, I have applied
         the duties set out in Section 66(1) and Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009405


       Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) which require me to have
       special regard to the desirability of preserving the setting of the listed buildings and
       to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character
       or appearance of the CA.
5.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were
       provided with an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of
       the Framework in my decision.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
                surrounding area, and whether it preserves or enhances the character or
                appearance of the Folkestone Leas and Bayle CA and preserves the setting
                of nearby listed buildings, namely the Grade II* listed Folkestone War
                Memorial, and the Grade II listed Folkestone Memorial Cairn; and,
           •    whether the proposal would have an acceptable effect on highway safety,
                including pedestrian safety.
Reasons
Character, appearance and heritage
7.     Policy HB1 of the Folkestone & Hythe District Places and Policies Local Plan
       (2020) (the Local Plan) sets out that planning permission will be granted where the
       proposal meets several criteria, including making a positive contribution to its
       location and surroundings, and enhancing areas of public open space, heritage
       and other public realm assets.
8.     The Folkestone Leas & Bayle CA extends across a relatively wide area which
       includes a variety of land uses. The appeal site forms a modest area, primarily
       forming part of the slope to the north of the Road of Remembrance. It consists of a
       Victorian Latrine built into the landscape which has been recently exposed by a
       landslide event and subsequent vegetation removal.
9.     Insofar as is relevant to the appeal before me, this part of the CA derives its
       significance in part from the areas of publicly accessible open space, to which the
       appeal site forms part of, populated in some areas by dense tree cover, broadly
       following the shape of the coastline.
10. This part of the CA also features several listed buildings, including the Grade II*
    listed Folkestone War Memorial, and the Grade II listed Folkestone Memorial
    Cairn. Both listed buildings hold historical significance, acknowledging the role of
    Folkestone during the First World War, commemorating the route from Folkestone
    harbour to the battlefields of Europe. The War Memorial also holds plaques in
    commemoration of those who fell in the Second World War. The appeal site forms
    part of the wider setting of these listed buildings, contributing to the openness
    which allows the appreciation of the assets as experienced along the Road of
    Remembrance.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009405


11. In addition to the above designated assets, there are other existing war memorials
    close to the appeal site including a commemorative arch and several stone
    plaques positioned on the retaining wall to the north of the Road of Remembrance.
    Overall, these have created a notable concentration of war memorials in this part
    of the CA, which are experienced collectively within a relatively compact area.
12. The appeal proposal would add an additional commemorative structure, in the
    form of a soldier statue. The structure would be physically separated from existing
    memorials. Rather than competing with, or diluting the existing commemorative
    hierarchy of the area, the modest scale and form of the proposal would ensure that
    it would be complimentary to the existing memorial setting of this part of the CA.
    Consequently, the appeal proposal would not amount to visual clutter or detract
    from the setting of nearby memorials.
13. Based on the above, I find that the appeal proposal would have an acceptable
    effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would preserve
    the character and appearance of the CA and would not introduce harm to the
    setting of nearby designated war memorials, namely the Grade II* listed
    Folkestone War Memorial, and the Grade II listed Folkestone Memorial Cairn. In
    relation to this main issue, I have therefore identified no conflict with Policy HB1 of
    the Local plan arising from the proposal.
Highway safety
14. Policy HB1 of the Local Plan also refers to the need for proposals to facilitate
    circulation and ease of movement for all users. The memorial would be positioned
    to the north of the Road of Remembrance, at a point where there is no public
    footpath. There is however a public footpath on the opposite side of the road.
15. Whilst I accept the potential for people to stop and reflect, particularly on specific
    commemorative occasions, I am not convinced that there would be a strong and
    persistent likelihood of people crossing the road to do so. The nature of the
    memorial would not lend itself to a need to be experienced up close to appreciate
    its sentiment. I therefore find that there is little substantive evidence before me to
    suggest that the proposal would lead to an intensification of pedestrian activity to
    the north of the Road of Remembrance.
16. Upon the reopening of the highway, the memorial would also be visible to drivers
    using the road. However, the modest scale and form of the proposal would ensure
    that it would not create an undue distraction to drivers.
17. The proposal would therefore have an acceptable effect on highway safety,
    including pedestrian safety. Consequently, I have not identified conflict with Policy
    HB1 of the Local Plan in relation to this main issue.
Other Matters
18. Interested parties have objected to the proposal for various reasons in addition to
    the main issues discussed above. Whilst I appreciate the concerns regarding the
    historical accuracies included within the application submission, differing opinions
    regarding local history or the interpretation of historical events do not alter my
    assessment of the relevant material planning considerations of the proposal.
19. Concerns have been expressed regarding potential anti-social behaviour and the
    plans for the long-term maintenance of the memorial. Notwithstanding that the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009405


       funding of the proposal is not material to the determination of the appeal, I
       understand that the proposal is part of a privately funded heritage initiative, which,
       subject to the necessary permissions will assume responsibility for the ongoing
       stewardship and maintenance of the memorial. In any case, given the modest
       scale of the proposal, there is little to suggest that its maintenance would be an
       overly onerous task which would require specific control through the planning
       process.
20. In addition to the listed buildings referred to in my first main issue above, the
    Council has identified that the appeal site is proximate to other listed buildings,
    including 3 19th Century cast iron bollards to the south of the Parish Church which
    are Grade II listed and hold architectural value. My attention has also been drawn
    to the Grade II listed 1 and 2; 3 and 4; and 5 and 6 Albion Villas and Grade II listed
    1 to 14 Marine Crescent, which form a mixture of semi-detached and terraced
    villas of strong architectural merit.
21. Notwithstanding the proposed developments proximity, in my judgement, due to
    the intervening landscape topography and vegetation, the appeal proposal would
    preserve the setting of these listed buildings, the significance of which would not
    be harmed.
Conditions
22. I have considered the conditions put forward by the Council, where necessary I
    have amended the wording in the interests of precision and enforceability.
23. In the interests of certainty and clarity, I have imposed the standard conditions
    relating to the commencement of development as well as the approved plans.
24. In the interests of maintaining the character and appearance of the CA, I find it
    necessary to also attach a condition seeking the precise details of the proposed
    memorial. Although the Council has suggested a separate condition relating to
    land stability, I find that this could be adequately considered through the methods
    of ground affixation within this condition, noting the minor scale of the proposal. I
    therefore do not find that a separate condition relating to land stability is
    necessary, even noting the history of the appeal site.
25. The Council has suggested a condition seeking further details of planting which I
    note is indicated on the submitted plans. However, I do not find that additional
    landscaping would be required to make the development acceptable in planning
    terms and therefore I am not satisfied that such a condition would be necessary.
26. In line with the advice of Kent County Council Highways department, the Council
    has suggested a condition requiring the submission of a construction management
    plan. However, I find this to be overly onerous to the scale and nature of the
    development and therefore do not find such a condition necessary.
27. The appeal site forms highway land which would need to be subject to a stopping-
    up order to extinguish all public highway rights. The need for such an Order would
    be separate to the outcome of the appeal and would remain even if there were not
    a planning condition requiring its completion. Policy DM7 of the Framework is clear
    that decision makers should assume, unless there is clear evidence to the
    contrary, that separate regulatory regimes will operate effectively. As such, I am



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009405


       not satisfied that this recommended condition is necessary as it would represent
       an unnecessary duplication of control.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above, having regard to the development plan and all
    relevant material considerations, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
