Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009760
148 Bradwell Common Boulevard, Bradwell Common, Milton Keynes MK13 8BE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. Oludoton Olubanjo against the decision of Milton Keynes Council.
•   The application Ref is PLN/2025/2471.
•   The development is described as change of use from house (C3) to a six bedroom, six person House
    in Multiple Occupation (C4).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. I have removed ‘retrospective’ from the description of development in the banner
   heading above, as this relates to the narrative of how the development has occurred
   and does not describe an operative part of the development.
3. The property has been licensed as a house in multiple occupation (HMO) since
   2021 and the application form confirms that the development has already been
   completed. I have therefore determined the appeal on that basis.
4. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
   was published. The main parties have been invited to comment on the relevance of
   the Framework to the appeal, I am therefore satisfied they have not been
   prejudiced. Consideration has been given to those comments received in reaching
   the appeal decision.
Main Issue
5. The effect of the development on the character of the area with regard to the mix
   and balance of the community.
Reasons
6. The appeal site comprises a three storey mid-terraced property and is located within
   a predominantly residential area, primarily comprising of family size dwellings. The
   area is subject to an Article 4 Direction removing permitted development rights
   allowing the change of use of Class C3 dwellinghouses to Class C4 HMOs.
7. Policy HN7 of the Plan:MK 2019 (the LP) states that to maintain mixed, balance,
   sustainable and inclusive communities, development for HMOs will be approved
   where they will not create an over concentration of such accommodation resulting in
   an imbalance within the local communities or other significant adverse impacts. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009760


       policy also states that the Houses in Multiple Occupation: Supplementary Planning
       Document 2012 (the SPD) must be complied with.
8. The SPD highlights the density of HMOs and the effect on the character of an area
   is clearly linked. Furthermore, it outlines that occupiers of HMOs in Milton Keynes
   are considerably more transient than average and this can give rise to a lack of
   community integration and cohesion, and less commitment to maintain the quality of
   the local environment. The SPD sets the concentration threshold of 35% for where
   the concentration of HMOs could be considered “too great” and would cause an
   imbalance.
9. Though the appellant has stated the Council have not evidenced their calculation,
   the appellant has also acknowledged that including the appeal site there are 3
   properties currently operating as HMOs within a 50m radius around the appeal site.
   Using the methodology within the SPD, this results in a concentration in excess of
   the threshold.
10. The appellant contends that though 160 Bradwell Common Boulevard has a HMO
    licence it does not have planning permission, so it should not be included in the
    calculation. The SPD clearly outlines the methodology of the calculation, which
    includes properties that have a HMO licence, and I have not been provided with any
    evidence to suggest that No.160. is not being occupied as a HMO. Given that it
    does therefore form part of the current housing mix, No. 160 should be included in
    the calculation. Therefore, the development leads to an over concentration of HMOs
    within the immediate area.
11. These findings are consistent with the those of the Inspector for the appeal located
    at 184 Bradwell Common Boulevard1, which was for the change of use from a
    dwellinghouse to a HMO, and dealt with a very similar issue in relation to properties
    having HMO licenses and not having planning permission. Considering the subject
    matter and the proximity of the appeal at 184 Bradwell Common Boulevard to the
    current appeal site, this appeal decision is directly relevant.
12. My attention has also been drawn to another appeal in Lancaster2 where in that
    instance the Inspector considered Lancaster City Council did not explain or justify
    their calculation. However, Milton Keynes Council have provided their methodology,
    workings and I note the appellant has accepted the existence of the surrounding
    HMOs.
13. The Council are satisfied that the development does not give rise to any harm in
    relation to parking, refuse storage and living conditions in compliance with the SPD,
    and I have not been provided with any records of noise and disturbance complaints
    associated with the property, however this does not mean the effect on the balance
    on the community is acceptable.
14. The development has increased the concentration of HMOs to an unreasonably
    high level and has resulted in the loss of family housing, affecting the balance of
    age groups and household types that occupy properties within the area. The more
    transient nature of HMO occupation, together with reduced tenure, diminishes
    opportunities for community integration and cohesion. Collectively these factors
    undermine the mix and balance of the community and have harmed the character of

1
    APP/Y0435/W/23/3329546: 184 Bradwell Common Boulevard, Bradwell Common, Milton Keynes MK13 8AB
2
    APP/A2335/W/24/3343024: Flat 2, 11 Cable Street, Lancaster


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6009760


    the area. The appeal at 184 Bradwell Common Boulevard also highlights the
    relatively high concentration of HMOs in the wider area.
15. I appreciate the property is already occupied and the appellant has forwarded that
    some of the current residents have resided at the property for a number of years.
    However, I have not been provided with details of precisely how many residents
    have had a longer period of residency and for how long. The appellant has also
    described some of the residents as vulnerable. However, there is no substantive
    evidence that there is no other suitable alternative accommodation for the current
    residents in the local area where appropriate support would also be available. There
    is also no indication that the residents would not be given a reasonable notice
    period to find an alternative home if enforcement action was forthcoming.
16. For the reasons above, I conclude the development harmfully effects the character
    of the area, with particular regard to the mix and balance of the community. This
    conflicts with the aims of policies HN7 and D1 of the LP, which seek that
    development maintain mixed, balanced, sustainable and inclusive communities, and
    that development as a whole responds appropriately to the site and surrounding
    context.
Other Considerations
17. The development provides shared, affordable and flexible accommodation in a
    sustainable location, contributing to the mix of homes in the area and making
    efficient use of an existing building, contributing to housing supply, as supported by
    the Framework. Even so, I have not been provided with any substantive evidence
    that indicates there is greater demand for HMOs over dwellinghouses in the wider
    area and I have also identified harm in relation to the over concentration of HMOs in
    the immediate area.
18. Acceptable living conditions are provided for occupants of the HMO and the
    standard of accommodation is high quality, which includes garden space. No
    concerns are raised with fire safety or the management of the HMO, and with no
    external alterations, the appearance of the building would be unchanged.
19. Even if there are developments within the local area that have not obtained planning
    permission that require it, though I am sympathetic of how this effects the
    concentration calculation with the SPD, this does not affect the position of the
    development plan or the SPD. In any event I have determined the appeal on its own
    merits and this matter does not outweigh the harm set out above.
Planning Balance
20. Policy S4 of the Framework states development within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects. Circumstances in which the benefits of approving development are
    likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include failing to comply with
    one of the national decision-making policies which state that development proposals
    should be refused in specific circumstances.
21. The appeal development results in harm to the character of the area with regard to
    the mix and balance of the community. This conflicts with the principles of Policy
    DP3(2)(a) of the Framework, which support healthy, mixed, vibrant and integrated
    communities, which will function well over the lifetime of the development, by


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009760


    incorporating a range of uses and tenures, employing features which promote social
    interaction. Development should be refused if without clear justification it conflicts
    with the principles of Policy DP3 of the Framework.
22. Given the modest scale of the development, the weight of each of the benefits noted
    under other considerations is limited. Consequently, the benefits are substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects of the development, and the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development does not apply.
Conclusion
23. I have found that the appeal site in use as a HMO is harmful to the character of the
    area, with particular regard to the balance and mix of the community, in conflict with
    the development plan as a whole. I attach significant weight to the harm caused by
    this. In favour of the appeal, the property is already occupied as a HMO, and I am
    sympathetic to the current residents’ situation, however no substantive case has
    been made that there is no suitable alternative accommodation in the area nor that
    the appeal site is unique or in any way specifically caters for their particular needs.
    Therefore, I attribute this moderate weight. On balance, I am satisfied that the harm
    caused by the development outweighs the other considerations to the extent that
    planning permission should not be granted
24. Dismissing the appeal may interfere with the residents’ rights to peaceful enjoyment
    of their possessions, and to a private and family life and home, under Article 1 of the
    First Protocol and Article 8 as set out under the Human Rights Act 1998. However,
    those are qualified rights; interference with them in this instance would accord with
    the law, as the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 empowers the decision maker
    to allow or dismiss an appeal, and it would be in pursuance of a well-established
    and legitimate aim: to protect the character of an area including the balance and mix
    of the community.
25. The appellant has described some of the residents as vulnerable, indicative of them
    having a protected characteristic. Therefore, I have had regard to the Public Sector
    Equality Duty contained in section 149 of the Equality Act 2010. However, given the
    above, the harm caused by the development outweighs its benefits in terms of
    eliminating discrimination against persons with the protected characteristics,
    advancing equality of opportunity for those persons and fostering good relations
    between them and others.
26. Given the circumstances overall, I find that dismissal of the appeal is proportionate
    and necessary. Consequently, it does not violate the residents’ human rights. The
    protection of the public interest cannot be achieved by means that are less
    interfering with their rights
27. The development conflicts with the development plan read as a whole and no
    material considerations have been shown that a decision should be taken otherwise
    than in accordance with it. I therefore conclude the appeal should be dismissed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
