Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by A Hunter LLB (Hons) PG Dip MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009857
11 and 13 Marlborough Avenue, Kingston Upon Hull HU5 3JP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Kay Mutch of HER Mind against the decision of Kingston-Upon-Hull City
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00618/FULL.
•    The development proposed is described as a planning application for change of use from C3
     dwellings to sui generis use, including: ground floor flat to office use; external insulated render; rear
     windows; and external fencing.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    In the banner heading above, I have altered the address specified on the
      application form, to reflect the properties within the red line to which this appeal
      relates.
3.    On my site inspection I saw that the change of use had already commenced, the
      rear elevations had been rendered, new rear windows had been installed, and
      both a timber fence, and palisade fence to the rear sides had also been installed.
      The appeal has been determined on this basis.
4.    The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised on 17
      August 2026. Both main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
      how the changes affect their respective cases, and any responses received have
      been taken into account in my decision.
Main Issue
5.    The main issue is the effect of the development on the Avenues and Pearson Park
      Conservation Area (the CA).
Reasons
6.    Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
      (the Act) requires when determining proposals in conservation areas that special
      attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character
      or appearance of that area. Policy HE4 of the Framework says heritage assets are
      an irreplaceable resource and should be conserved in a manner appropriate to
      their significance. Policy HE9 adds that development within or affecting the
      significance of conservation areas, should where possible, retain and conserve

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009857


      buildings that make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of
      conservation areas, and consider the area’s architectural or historic interest.
7.    The Council’s Character Appraisal 1: The Avenues, published 2017 (CATA) says
      the CA is principally designated for its architectural value, as what is said to be a
      late Victorian and Edwardian residential suburb, including tree-lined avenues
      running west- east, with Marlborough Avenue being one of them, along with the
      visual harmony of long terraces sharing a unity of design, including consistent
      building materials and colours. Although there is some render on properties in the
      CA, such as those said to be of an arts and craft style or having a mix of
      contrasting materials as part of their original design, the CATA is clear that the
      predominant material in the CA is brick, which is mostly coloured red. The CATA
      also recognises that ‘ten foots’ (a reference to ten feet wide tracks to the side and
      rear of properties) are characteristic of the CA, which provide rear access to many
      of these terraced properties. Collectively these aspects contribute positively to the
      significance of the CA.
8.    Furthermore, the CATA goes on to say that aged brick is beautiful, and it is
      important that any new brickwork matches the existing weathered brick. It also
      recognises that unsympathetic alterations are a threat to the harmony of these
      long terraces.
9.    The appeal site relates to two mid-terraced properties, understood to have each
      been converted to 5 no. flats many years ago. They are part of a long terrace of
      brick-built properties, set behind a small front forecourt, and served by a ‘ten foot’
      to the rear which is accessed from either end of the terrace. The terrace has a
      mainly uniformed character and appearance, which is part of the significance of
      the CA, including its rear side when viewed from the ‘ten foot’.
10. I saw on my site inspection that no’s 7 and 9 had their rear sides rendered and
    painted, which are said by the Council not to be authorised, and that the rear side
    of no.1 was rendered. Apart from the appeal site, the remainder of the rear of the
    terrace was in red brick, matching their front sides. As a result of no’s 7 and 9 not
    having been granted planning permission, and without being aware of the planning
    history of no.1, which appears to have been rendered some time ago, I attach
    limited weight to them. Moreover, their rendered exteriors harmfully contrasted
    against the brickwork on other properties in the terrace and their appearance
    negatively affected the character and appearance of this part of the CA.
11. The introduction of render (said to include external wall insulation) onto the rear
    side of the appeal properties covers their historic brickwork that is integral to the
    unified character and appearance of this terrace. I saw in the submitted evidence
    that some of the lower parts of the building had been rendered previously, but the
    upper parts retained their original brick, which from the submitted photographs did
    not appear to be in any obvious state of disrepair. Notwithstanding other
    alterations made to the properties in the surrounding area and the appearance of
    nearby outbuildings, the discordant appearance of the render, particularly across
    the entire rear sides of both properties appears jarring, moreover its lighter colour
    contrasts harmfully against the red brick colour of the traditional rear sides of this
    terrace. It is accepted that development does not need to have complete
    conformity with its surroundings, but in this case, with the mainly unified
    appearance of the terrace being part of the significance of the CA, ensuring that its
    significance is preserved or enhanced is an important consideration in this case.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009857


12. It is accepted that the rear sides of the appeal properties have less public visibility
    than their grander front elevations, but this is not a reason to justify poor quality
    development, and the duty applies to the whole of the CA. Furthermore, there are
    views of the new render from the ‘ten foot’ behind it, along with views from nearby
    properties. Such views of the render would make the appeal properties much more
    prominent and significantly at odds with the mainly otherwise unified brick
    appearance of the terrace.
13. Although I did not observe any obvious discolouration on my site inspection,
    render can weather and it is acknowledged that without regular maintenance its
    appearance can deteriorate, nevertheless this is not a determinative factor in this
    case.
14. The rear side of the appeal site is informal in its appearance, and there are a
    variety of boundary treatments. However, the palisade fence installed at the
    appeal site, which is also visible on part of its side with no.9 is highly conspicuous
    when seen from the ‘ten foot’. The galvanised metal appearance, together with its
    utilitarian design, sometimes found on the boundaries of compounds or within
    industrial areas, appears incongruous against views of the rear sides of the terrace
    of properties, and harms the CA. I note that there are some similar fences abutting
    the ‘ten foot’, but they are negative features within the CA, and I am not aware of
    their planning history or whether they have planning permission. In any event their
    presence does not justify the harmful effect of the development to the CA.
15. The appellant has offered to paint the palisade fence in a recessive colour such as
    green or black or have a powder coating applied. Whilst that may dull down the
    raw appearance of the galvanised metal it would not address the unacceptable
    design and appearance of that fence. I was also not persuaded that a fence of that
    design was necessary for security reasons, and why no other more suitable
    boundary feature could not be proposed, particularly considering there is a further
    ‘inner fence’ within the rear garden of the appeal properties. In terms of that timber
    ‘inner fence’ immediately beyond the rear side of the appeal properties, given its
    distance from the ‘ten foot’ I was content that its siting, and appearance was not
    harmful to the CA.
16. I was not convinced by the point made about allowing the new palisade fence to
    screen views of the lower parts of render on the subject buildings, as the lower
    parts of the appeal properties were previously said to have been rendered, and it
    would not off-set the identified harm arising from the new palisade fence itself.
17. In view of the new windows in the rear side of the appeal properties having
    replaced windows that were said not to have been original, which were also said to
    be within unsympathetic modern frames, the Council did not raise objection. From
    my own site observations, I see no reason to disagree, and find the new windows
    in these circumstances to preserve the character and appearance of the CA.
18. Comments have been made regarding the use of the appeal properties for the new
    sui generis use, comprising 9 no. flats, with a degree of care being available for
    the occupiers along with an office use. It is noteworthy that the Council did not
    raise any objection in this regard and considered the new use not to be materially
    different to its previous residential use as 5 no. flats in either property. I similarly
    find no reason why the sui generis use, which is a net reduction of 1 no. flat,



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009857


      alongside office accommodation, would be harmful to the character or appearance
      of the CA.
19. Finally, representations, including reference to development plan policy no. 7 (no
    copy provided), have been made about refuse and recycling bins located across
    the frontages of both the appeal properties, including images from google street
    view showing no bins prior to 2025 and then a long row of them across the
    frontages, said to have coincided with the change of use having taken place. I also
    saw on my site inspection that there were refuse and recycling bins located across
    the frontages of other properties in the same terrace and on the opposite side of
    the road. I can appreciate the comments made, and the storage of bins and
    recycling can affect the character and appearance of the CA. Had I been minded
    to allow the appeal, a suitably worded condition could have been imposed to
    ensure adequate provision was made for bin storage, whether that be suitable
    screening to the front side or an area to the rear accessed by the ‘ten foot’, which
    the Council could have enforced, if necessary.
      Heritage Balance
20. The development in terms of the new render and palisade fence harms the
    significance of the CA. Policy HE6 of the Framework says that, when considering
    the potential effect of a development on the significance of a designated heritage
    asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation and requires
    public benefits to outweigh such harm.
21. Those benefits in this case would be the provision of external wall insulation to
    reduce carbon emissions; the re-use of an existing building in a well-connected
    sustainable location, and the provision of assisted living for vulnerable persons to
    support the wider delivery of community mental health services within Hull, and
    that the proposal can provide a long-term viable use for this building.
22. In this case the harm relates to the rear render and the palisade fence, there is no
    objection to the new use and accommodation for vulnerable persons. Moreover,
    the new render and palisade fence have not been demonstrated as necessary for
    the new use. Whilst Policy HE6 says important public benefits can include
    enabling energy efficiency and low carbon heating measures to be employed, the
    actual thermal improvements by the insulation and environmental benefits have
    not been quantified, and it is not clear if similar or greater benefits could not have
    been found from alternative sustainable technologies in a less harmful manner to
    the development undertaken. I therefore attach modest weight to these benefits,
    even when taken collectively.
23. Against this background, these public benefits do not outweigh the harm identified
    above to the significance of the designated heritage asset. Accordingly, there is
    conflict with the heritage protection policies of the Framework.
24. I therefore conclude that although the new rear windows, the change of use, and
    bin and recycling storage (subject to a condition), would not be harmful to the CA,
    the new render and palisade fence to the rear of the appeal properties would be
    harmful to the character and appearance of the CA, and that they would neither
    preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA, contrary to the duty in
    the Act. For the same reasons, there would be conflict with the relevant parts of
    policies 14,15, and 16 of the Hull Local Plan 2016-2032, adopted November 2017
    (HLP) that collectively seek to promote local distinctiveness, avoid harm to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009857


      significance of heritage assets, and ensure a high quality environment, including
      through the development’s design, scale, materials and detailing, and effect on the
      surrounding built form. In addition, the new render and palisade fence would also
      conflict with the objectives of the CATA as set out above, in terms of preserving
      and enhancing the character and appearance of the CA.
Other Matters
25. It is acknowledged that subject to conditions there are no unacceptable effects on
    flood risk, highway safety, and the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
    However, these are neutral matters that do not weigh in favour or against the
    development.
26. I note the comments from interested parties, in addition to the above main issue,
    including, but not limited to the effect on living conditions and the safety of
    neighbouring occupiers; parking issues; and that work was undertaken before the
    application was made. Whilst I can understand the concerns, subject to planning
    conditions as appropriate, there is no compelling evidence before me that would
    lead me to come to a different conclusion to the Council on these matters.
27. In addition, an interested party has raised the issue of crime and anti-social
    behaviour arising from the new use, including an event that is said to have taken
    place with an occupier of the appeal site. I also note Section 17 of the Crime and
    Disorder Act 1998 requires local authorities to do all that it reasonably can to
    prevent crime and disorder. The submitted crime data, which is said to show an
    increase in reported crimes after the new use commenced, is very basic, there is
    no detailed context or analysis to explain the actual causes of the data changes, I
    am not therefore certain that the purported increase can be attributed to the use of
    the appeal site itself.
28. Furthermore, the new residential and ancillary office use is not inherently in conflict
    with the surrounding residential uses. Whilst I can understand the concerns raised,
    including the event referred to; there is a lack of substantive evidence to show it is
    part of any pattern of crimes or anti-social behaviour arising from the new use at
    the appeal site. If I were minded to allow the appeal, a suitably worded condition
    requiring a comprehensive management plan for the new use, would likely have
    been an acceptable way of addressing these concerns. Such a condition would
    also likely satisfy the duty contained in Section 17 and comply with policies DP3
    criterion f. and P5 of the Framework, which require public spaces to be safe,
    secure accessible and inclusive to facilitate healthy lifestyles, and for proportionate
    mitigation in response to potential safety risks and the fear of crime, including for
    women and girls.
29. An interested party also referred to a supplementary planning document relating to
    Houses in Multiple Occupancy. I do not have a copy of that with the appeal
    documentation, and as the proposal is not an HMO proposal, I am therefore not
    certain that it would be directly applicable in this case.
Conclusion
30. In view of the above findings, the proposal conflicts with HLP policies 14,15 and
    16, which I consider to be consistent with the Framework. As a result, I find there
    to be conflict with the development plan taken as a whole.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009857


31. The Framework is an important material consideration, and in view of the harm
    identified on the main issue above, there would be conflict with Policy DP3 of the
    Framework insofar as it requires development proposals to respond to their
    context (the history, character and features of their site and its setting), so that
    they integrate with and enhance their surroundings; such as through the use of
    materials and architectural features, and the restoration, reuse and integration of
    heritage assets. Furthermore, section (2) of Policy DP3 says where there is conflict
    with this part of the policy, without clear justification (as in this case) the
    development should be refused.
32. Policy HO7 of the Framework says substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs
    assessments. Although in this case, there is no needs assessment provided to
    justify a need for it, and the development would result in a net loss of 1 no.
    residential unit. As such I am not able to attach the substantial weight from this
    policy. Furthermore, it is not certain that the substantial weight contained within
    Policy L2 of the Framework would apply relating to making better use of vacant
    and under-utilised land and buildings for residential purposes, because I am not
    certain that the property was vacant before the appellant’s acquired it and changed
    its use, and even if it was vacant.
33. Policy DP3 b. of the Framework supports materials which conserve energy and
    other resources, and which minimise risks from the impacts of climate change.
    Framework Policy CC2 criterion c. promotes design approaches which conserve
    energy and other resources and the re-use of existing structures and materials,
    and says substantial weight should be given to the benefits of improving the
    energy efficiency of existing buildings. The external insulation in this case would
    attract the substantial weight provided by Policy CC2.
34. Policy S3 of the Framework has a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development, and Framework Policy S4 says development within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies within this Framework. However, it further states that where there
    is conflict with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused, this is likely to indicate the benefits are
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects. The support for the development
    including the substantial weight to be afforded as outlined above, along with the
    arguments made in support of the development are not considered to outweigh the
    conflict with the policies related to character and appearance and heritage
    protection within the Framework.
35. Accordingly, there are no other considerations, including the Framework and those
    points raised by the appellant that indicate a decision should be made other than
    in accordance with the development plan. I therefore dismiss the appeal.



A Hunter
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
