Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009933
219 Fullingdale Road, Northampton, West Northamptonshire, NN3 2QH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Amjud Khiaq against West Northamptonshire Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/4860/FUL.
•   The development proposed is increase of 8 occupant house in multiple occupation to 10 occupants,
    including loft conversion and rear dormer.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application the Government issued the new revised
   version of the National Planning Policy Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not
   consider there any need to revert to the main parties regarding this change. The
   new policies for decision making do not substantially alter matters relating to the
   main issues which are the subject of this appeal.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the impact of the proposal upon i) the character of the area
   and amenity, ii) visual amenity with regard to the proposed rear dormer and iii)
   residential amenity with regard to overlooking.
Reasons
Character of the area
4. The appeal site is a semi-detached dwelling with an existing two storey side
   extension. It is located within a residential area, comprising similar properties
   typically occupied as small family units, and benefits from a short driveway with
   parking for one vehicle to the front of the site. The appeal site is acknowledged, as
   an existing house in multiple occupation (HMO) meaning that the principle of
   development is already established with a low concentration of existing HMOs
   within the vicinity. The proposal seeks to increase the capacity of the HMO from 8
   to 10 occupants and, in order to facilitate this, the proposal includes the proposed
   construction of a flat roof dormer across the whole rear roof slope.
5. The Council note the proposed increase in occupants is 2 (from 8 to 10) and that
   there is an extant permission to increase occupancy from 6 to 8 (25/1949/FULL)
   but outline that there is a point at which successive incremental increases in
   occupancy become unacceptable in terms of character change and impacts on

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009933


     neighbouring residential amenity. There are a number of public comments which
     have been received during the application period, and it is understood that the site
     is already subject to formal complaints relating to noise and antisocial behaviour.
     HMOs are noted to provide a valued part of the overall housing mix. Despite this,
     and the acknowledged demand, provision of HMOs must be balanced against their
     ability to appropriately integrate within their immediate locality as well as being
     appropriate for the character of an area on a case-by-case basis.
6. The ability to physically increase the number of occupants, to 10, is a result of the
   proposal including a corresponding increase in the internal floor space as a result
   of three new bedrooms to be provided in the loft space. The proposal provides for
   one resident per bedroom. I consider this level of occupation to be excessive when
   considering the setting of the appeal site which is generally characterised by similar
   properties typically occupied as family homes. The proposal would be
   uncharacteristic in terms of the intensive nature of the increased occupation arising
   from the comings and goings which differ to a standard family dwelling and would
   be exacerbate by additional occupants. This would not be changed as a result of
   the management plan now submitted by the appellant at the point of appeal as,
   presumably, the management plan is failing to work with current use of the site.
7. Whilst the concerns raised by the neighbours may be management issues, they are
   indicative of issues already experienced at the appeal site resulting in levels of
   activity and disturbance which, if increased, would have a detrimental impact on
   existing character and neighbouring residential amenity. The appellant has
   submitted examples of the Council having granted permission for comparable
   proposals involving increases in occupancy within existing HMOs. In those cases,
   it is stated, by the appellant, that the Council concluded that the increase would not
   give rise to unacceptable harm to neighbouring amenity or character of the area
   and therefore that there was no consistency in decision making.
8. Within the example at 2 Marriott Street (2025/2322/FULL) the site was not subject
   to neighbour or third-party responses nor historic complaints relating to the site.
   Comparably, to the appeal site there was no evidence of existing issues which
   could arguable be exacerbated by an increase in persons occupying the site.
   Other examples are noted, for example 31 Newton Road (2025/4862/FULL),
   however, the increase, in that case, was not considered to have an adverse
   impact and, again, that site did not appear to have the historic issues which are
   being raised, extensively, with the appeal site that is before me. Other examples
   are noted including 152 the Headlands (2026/0644/FULL), and N/2020/1459 (14
   Bush Hill – Northampton Borough Council) but ultimately each case should be
   considered on its own merits and within the examples provided there was no
   evidence to suggest that occupiers of the HMO, at increased density, would create
   more impact in terms of noise, antisocial behaviour etc.
9. In the case of the site that is before me, there is notable evidence as to existing
   issues at the appeal site having a negative impact on the existing character and
   neighbouring residential amenity. To intensify this use would, therefore, provide
   clear opportunity for exacerbation of the existing issues experienced with the
   addition of two further occupants as part of what would, cumulatively, be
   incremental increases of occupancy levels. I find that there are material differences
   in the evidence within this appeal compared to the other schemes noted by the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6009933


     appellant which, in this case, provide a clear planning basis for reaching a differing
     conclusion as to the proposed increase at the appeal site.
10. The proposal is accompanied by a parking survey which demonstrates low parking
    stress in the vicinity of the site with the site also acknowledged to be sited within a
    sustainable location. The parking survey which has been submitted is dated
    November/December 2023 for an application which was submitted in November
    2025. At the point of application, the parking survey was, arguably, two years out
    of date with regard to the actual utilisation of on-street parking within the locality of
    the appeal site. It is not uncommon for changes in occupation and car ownership
    to occur and I consider that there is therefore potential for the parking survey to be
    effectively out of date with regard to the actual situation round the appeal site when
    taking into account the responses, and evidence, received during the application
    period which clearly illustrate parking issues outside of the property.
11. Whilst I acknowledge the inclusion of a parking survey, for the reasons outlined
    above, I have strong concern as to its age and representation as to the actual
    issues experienced around the site at the point of application (and now
    determination) when faced with more recent evidence received during the
    consultation period. A combination of these factors means, therefore, that the
    proposal is likely to lead to parking stress directly outside the property despite the
    lack of objection in this case from the local highway authority as a consultee.
12. Overall, I find the proposal is located within an established residential area
    characterised by modest three-bed houses largely occupied by smaller family units.
    Whilst some increases to levels of occupation can successfully be accommodated
    on existing HMO sites, as evidenced by the appellant, each case falls to be
    considered on its own merits. In this case, the cumulative increases, combined
    with evidence as to the existing occupation already having a detrimental impact on
    existing character and neighbouring residential amenity, means that I find the
    proposal would be unacceptable in relation to such matters.
13. The proposal would be contrary to West Northamptonshire Joint Core Strategy
    Local Plan Part 1 (CS) Policy H1 which requires proposals to have regard for the
    existing character and density of the local area and the impact on the amenity of
    occupiers of neighbouring properties and CS Policy BN9 which seeks to reduce the
    adverse impacts of noise. The proposal would also be contrary to Houses in
    Multiple Occupation Supplementary Planning Document 2019 (SPD), Principle 1,
    which advises that applications for HMOs should not result in a material change or
    adverse impact on the character and amenity of the area. The proposal would also
    be contrary to National Decision-Making Policy DP3 which requires development
    appraisals to respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings.
Visual amenity
14. The proposal would include a flat roof dormer which would be set across the entire
    rear roof slope, including that of the existing two storey side extension, with a small
    set-back off the eaves and sides. The proposal would give the visual appearance
    of a flat roofed three storey block which would be entirely out of keeping with the
    character and appearance of properties within the locality. The proposed
    configuration of windows fails to line up with, or match, the existing windows on the
    lower floors of the host dwelling which results in a proposal which would be poorly


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision 6009933


     designed and incongruous undermining the character and visual amenity of the
     area. It is acknowledged that the first-floor windows already differ from each other,
     however, the differing windows would contribute to cumulative extensions and
     alterations which effectively fail to respect the original host dwelling.
15. Flat roof dormers can be established features of suburban environments due to
    their ability, within the confines of the legislation, to be constructed under permitted
    development1. Despite this, I do not find flat roof dormers are characteristic for the
    locality, and, in this case, I do not find that the proposal would be visually contained
    or appear as a subordinate addition. The resulting dormer, regardless of the use of
    hanging tiles, would fail to integrate appropriately with the host dwelling and would
    be visible beyond the appeal site boundary within the public domain.
16. At the time of my site visit I sought to view the appeal site from both Grange Road
    and Thirlmere Avenue, respectively. I find that the proposal would be limited in
    general views from Thirlmere Avenue, however, it would be clear in views along
    Grange Road and not just at some distance or an oblique angle. The roof would be
    visible in views within the wider street scene from the rear in longer range views
    than that shown within figure 3 of the appellant’s statement of case.
17. The proposal which is before me is submitted as a planning application and falls to
    be assessed as such and, for the reasons outlined above, I find the proposed
    dormer would represent a visually incongruous built form that undermines the
    character and visual amenity of the area. With regard to the fallback position
    progressed by the appellant - the proposal would extend over the existing two-
    storey side extension which would not be permitted development. I therefore place
    limited weight on the fallback position with regard to a dormer as, design aside, the
    dormer proposed would be notably beyond that able to be considered permitted
    development on the main (original) roof slope only and would result in greater
    potential impacts and issues as outlined.
18. The proposed rear dormer, due to size and design, would be contrary to
    Northampton Local Plan Part 2 2023 (LP) Policy Q1 which seeks proposals to be
    designed to promote and contribute to good placemaking through high-quality
    design and LP Policy Q2 which requires development to not be overbearing upon
    existing buildings or open spaces. The proposal would also be contrary to the
    overarching guidance of the Council’s Supplementary Planning Documents which
    seek to ensure that development is suitably sized and located, is in keeping with
    the surrounding built environment and does not dominate the roof.
Residential amenity
19. The appeal site has a wide and deep garden with the appellant illustrating straight
    views, from the dormer. I acknowledge that natural views, from within the rooms
    themselves, would generally be down the appeal site’s garden. Despite this there
    would be oblique views to either side from the new dormer windows and whilst
    some degree of intervisibility is to be expected in a residential area of this nature, in
    this case I find that the perception of increased overlooking, and well as actual
    overlooking, into neighbouring gardens would be unacceptable. There would be
    clear opportunity for overlooking than is currently the case due to the increase
    height of the proposal compared to the existing windows. I find therefore, that the

1
 The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 Schedule 2, Part 1,
Class B (the GDPO)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6009933


     occupation of the three bedrooms in the loft, would be more intensive (as the
     occupants only form of habitable space) compared to lower density occupation of a
     dwelling as a family home or smaller HMO as is the existing use of the appeal site.
20. The appellant provides further reference to examples from 152 The Headlands and
    14 Bush Hill. Again, acknowledging the potential for a permitted development
    fallback (over the main roof only), I acknowledge the appellant’s ability to construct
    a dormer beyond the control of the Council. Despite this, in this case, the
    construction of the proposed dormer exceeds that able to be constructed under
    permitted development and is intrinsically linked to the proposed creation of
    additional bedrooms in the loft space. In addition, as noted above, the fallback
    potential for a dormer is not realistically comparable to that proposed. The potential
    impact of the fallback position as a result of its containment to the original roof form
    would not result in the same impacts as the appeal proposal in the context of this
    third main issue.
21. The proposal would be contrary to CS Policy H1 which requires proposals to have
    regard for the impact of the amenities of occupiers of neighbouring properties and
    principle 1 of the HMO SPD which requires proposals to not result in adverse
    impact on the amenity of the area. The proposal would also be contrary to the
    overarching guidance within the Residential Extensions and Alterations Design
    Guide 2011 SPD which requires proposals to not unduly affect neighbouring
    amenity.
Other Matters
22. I note third party comments which have been received at both application and
    appeal stages. I have dealt with the main issues raised within the comments within
    the main body of this decision. The Council’s report confirms that the site stands
    within the Upper Nene Gravel Pits Area which requires a relevant SAMMS
    (Strategic Access Management and Monitoring Strategy) payment prior to
    determination. This is not challenged (or acknowledged) within the appellant’s
    submissions. No documentation relating to a planning obligation or similar
    mechanism to secure this has been received as part of this appeal, however, given
    the main issues identified and that I am minded dismissing the appeal on the basis
    of those issues, the lack of such a payment is not a determinative issue.
23. The appellant’s original planning statement is noted to include a more extensive list
    of properties than those discussed within the statement of case with the latter being
    supported by copies of the relevant decision notices, location plans and delegated
    reports as appropriate. Comparably, the local planning examples provided within
    the original planning statement are not accompanied by such information and in the
    context of this appeal, it therefore limits my ability to consider the specific
    circumstances behind some of those examples in the context of this appeal.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        5
