Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by Barry John Lomax MPLAN (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009966
Chedworth, Coopers Hill Road, South Nutfield, Redhill, Surrey RH1 5PD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Dave Kemp against the decision of Tandridge District Council.
•    The application Ref is TA/2025/954.
•    The development proposed is the erection of up to 5 dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
       the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
       suitable in-principle and the second stage (technical details consent) is when the
       detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
       these 2 stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development proposed1. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     The application is accompanied by a location plan2, which adequately identifies the
       land to which the application relates and therefore satisfies the requirements of
       Article 5D of the Town and Country Planning (permission in principle) Order 2017
       (as amended). The submission also includes 4 site layout plans comprising 2
       alternative layouts for a 3-unit scheme and 2 alternative layouts for a 5-unit
       scheme.
5.     Two of those plans, one illustrating a 3-unit layout3 and one illustrating a 5-unit
       layout4, show development extending beyond the site boundary identified on the
       location plan. As the location plan defines the extent of the application site, any
       development shown outside that boundary does not form part of the application
       before me. Consequently, I have attached no weight to those plans in reaching my


1
  Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615
2
  Drawing Number 0259(00)000
3
  Drawing Number 0259(11)011
4
  Drawing Number 0259(11)012

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009966


        decision and have considered the application on the basis of the remaining plans
        only.
6.      A previous planning appeal5 against the refusal of Tandridge District Council
        (TDC) to grant permission in principle for the erection of 9 dwellings at the appeal
        site was dismissed on 17 November 2025. I have had regard to the findings of that
        decision insofar as it relates to the matters before me.
7.      On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the 2026
        Framework) was published. Annex A makes clear that the policies in the Framework
        are material considerations which must be taken into account in decision-making from
        the date of publication. The main parties were given the opportunity to comment on
        the revised Framework. I have taken any comments received into account in reaching
        my decision.
8.      For clarity, references to the Framework in this decision are to the August 2026
        version.
Main Issues
9. The main issues are, with specific regard to location, the proposed land use, and
   the amount of development:
       •   whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
           having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan policies,
           with particular regard to whether the proposal is in a sustainable location;
       •   the effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt;
       •   the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area; and
       •   if the development is inappropriate whether the harm by reason of
           inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by other
           considerations so as to amount to the very special circumstance necessary to
           justify the development.
Reasons
Whether the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt,
with particular regard to the sustainability of its location
10. The appeal site is located within the Green Belt and outside any recognised
    settlement. Paragraph 10.5 of the supporting text to the Tandridge Local Plan Part
    2: Detailed Policies (2014) (the Local Plan) states that the construction of new
    buildings within the Green Belt constitutes inappropriate development unless it
    falls within one of the exceptions set out in the National Planning Policy
    Framework (the Framework). Policy DP10 of the Local Plan states that permission
    for inappropriate development, which is by definition harmful to the Green Belt, will
    normally be refused unless there are considerations that clearly outweigh the harm
    to the Green Belt arising from its inappropriateness, together with any other harm,
    so as to amount to very special circumstances (VSCs).
11. Policy DP13 of the Local Plan sets out a list of exceptions to the general
    presumption against development in the Green Belt. Paragraph 10.6 of the

5
    APP/M3645/W/25/3371822


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009966


       supporting text to the Local Plan confirms that the policy was drafted to replicate
       the exceptions then found at paragraph 89 of the 2012 Framework. In this respect,
       the policy is now inconsistent with current national policy. The revised Framework
       has, in part, widened the range of exceptions and, in some cases, amended the
       wording of those exceptions.
12. In relation to the appeal proposal, the relevant differences concern the
    redevelopment of previously developed land within the Green Belt, and the
    provision of housing on grey belt land within the Green Belt. Given the
    inconsistency between Policy DP13 and the Framework, I have applied the
    relevant exceptions as set out in the Framework.
13. The Planning Statement submitted with the application refers to the exception at
    paragraph 154(g) of the 2024 Framework, the limited infilling, or partial or
    complete redevelopment, of previously developed land (PDL). This has now been
    replaced by policy GB7 of the Framework. However, that case is not pursued in
    the appellant's Appeal Statement. In any event, the evidence before me does not
    demonstrate that the appeal site comprises PDL. The application form describes
    the site as a paddock and there is no substantive evidence that it was previously
    occupied by a permanent structure or by any fixed surface infrastructure.
    Furthermore, no such features were apparent during my site visit. Consequently,
    the site does not comprise PDL for the purposes of the Framework and the
    exception in policy GB7 1(e) is not satisfied.
14. Policy GB7 1(g) of the Framework states that the development should not be
    regarded as inappropriate in the Green Belt where all of a number of criteria apply.
    I shall deal with those relevant to this case.
15. It is common ground between the main parties that the site comprises grey belt
    land. I agree with that position.
16. It is common ground between the main parties that the development of the land
    would not fundamentally undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining
    Green Belt across the area of the plan. I agree with that position. Consequently,
    criterion i) of policy GB7 1(g) of the Framework is satisfied.
17. It is also common ground that the Council is unable to demonstrate a 5-year
    supply of deliverable housing land and that there is therefore an unmet need for
    additional housing. Consequently, criterion ii) of policy GB7 1(g) of the Framework
    is satisfied.
18. Criterion iii) of policy GB7 1(g) of the Framework requires development to be in a
    sustainable location, with particular regard to policy TR3 of the Framework.
19. The appellant contends that the site is sustainably located and has referred to a
    number of recent permissions and decisions6 in support of that position. However,
    those permissions and decisions relate to different sites with differing locational
    characteristics, development proposals and planning circumstances. Moreover,
    limited information has been provided regarding the particular considerations that
    led to those decisions and, in any event, planning applications must be determined
    on their individual merits. Consequently, I attach limited weight to those
    permissions.
6
 Application Reference 2025/499, 2018/1996, APP/M3645/W/24/3352066, APP/M3645/W/25/3366613,
APP/M3645/W/25/3372745, APP/M3645/W/24/3347328, and APP/M3645/W/24/3347815


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6009966


20. The Council has provided details of 2 recent appeal decisions7 in support of its
    position, including a dismissed appeal8 concerning the refusal to grant permission
    in principle for 9 dwellings on the appeal site. Only limited information has been
    provided regarding the circumstances and considerations that informed those
    decisions. Consequently, I attach limited weight to the appeal decision relating to
    the different site, and I have had regard to the decision concerning the appeal site
    insofar as its findings are relevant to the matters before me.
21. The appeal site lies outside any defined settlement boundary, the nearest being
    South Nutfield. The edge of the settlement is approximately 800m from the site,
    with the first services and facilities located a similar distance beyond. From my site
    visit, I observed that accessing these facilities would involve a relatively long walk
    or cycle. Access between the site and South Nutfield would primarily be via
    country roads, notably Coopers Hill Road and Kings Cross Lane. These roads are
    subject to speed limits of 40mph and 30mph respectively and lack continuous
    footways and street lighting. As a result, pedestrians and cyclists would be
    required to share the carriageway with vehicular traffic for much of the journey.
    Collectively, these factors would materially diminish the attractiveness of walking
    and cycling as realistic alternatives to the private car for accessing day-to-day
    services and facilities.
22. The appellant has provided information regarding a hail-and-ride bus service;
    however, limited evidence has been submitted concerning the frequency, hours of
    operation, all destinations served, or reliability of that service. In the absence of
    such information, I cannot be satisfied that it would provide a convenient and
    attractive alternative to the private car for day-to-day journeys.
23. Overall, these factors would materially reduce the attractiveness of walking,
    cycling and public transport as realistic alternatives to the private car for day-to-
    day journeys.
24. In dismissing the previous appeal on this site, the Inspector concluded that the
    proposal would not be in a suitable location.
25. Having regard to the evidence before me, including the matters advanced by the
    appellant, and the revised Framework, I find no material circumstances that would
    justify reaching a different conclusion from that of the previous Inspector in respect
    of the sustainability of the site. Consistency in decision-making is an important
    principle and, in the absence of any material change in circumstances, or
    compelling new evidence, I see no sound basis for departing from that earlier
    conclusion. In particular, there is no evidence before me to indicate that the
    accessibility of the site, the surrounding highway network, the opportunities for
    active travel, or the availability of public transport have materially changed since
    the previous decision. While each appeal must be determined on its own merits,
    the circumstances of the previous appeal are materially similar and I therefore
    attach significant weight to that decision.
26. Reference is made to planning permission 2018/1996 at Chedworth, which
    allowed the change of use of a storage building to a bungalow. Limited information
    has been provided regarding the particular considerations that led to that decision.


7
    APP/M3645/W/25/3364704, APP/M3645/W/25/3371822
8
    APP/M3645/W/25/3371822


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
Appeal Decision 6009966


       In any event, planning applications must be determined on their individual merits.
       Consequently, I attach limited weight to that permission.
27. In relation to Policy TR3 of the Framework, the proposal would provide up to 5
    dwellings and, as such, would be expected to generate only a modest level of
    movement. Accordingly, the proposal does not engage criterion (a) of the policy to
    the same degree as a larger-scale development that would give rise to significant
    travel demand. Nevertheless, Policy TR3 must be read as a whole. In this regard,
    the proposal would not promote sustainable patterns of movement, would fail to
    limit the need to travel, particularly by private car, and would not provide future
    occupants with a genuine choice of transport modes. Whilst some reliance on the
    private car is to be expected in a rural location, the particular circumstances of the
    appeal site would result in that reliance being especially pronounced. Taking these
    matters together, I conclude that the proposal conflicts with Policy TR3 of the
    Framework when read as a whole.
28. In light of the above and taking account of the limitations of the routes linking the
    site to local services and facilities, the absence of attractive opportunities for
    walking, cycling and public transport use, and the consequent reliance upon the
    private motor vehicle, I conclude that the proposal would not support sustainable
    patterns of movement, and would not therefore be in a sustainable location.
    Accordingly, criterion iii) of policy GB7 1(g) of the 2026 Framework is not satisfied.
29. As criterion iii) is not satisfied, the proposal does not benefit from the exception
    provided by policy GB7 1(g).
30. Consequently, the proposal amounts to inappropriate development in the Green
    Belt. In accordance with Policy DP10 of the Local Plan and policy GB6 of the
    Framework, inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt
    and should not be approved except in very special circumstances.
31. In addition, the site is located in an unsustainable location and would be contrary
    to Policy DP5 of the Local Plan, which, insofar as relevant, seeks to ensure that
    development promotes access by public transport, foot and bicycle to nearby
    residential, commercial, retail, educational, leisure and recreational destinations.
32. The Local Plan is consistent with the policies in the Framework with regard to
    Green Belt development and locating development in sustainable locations.
Effect on openness and purposes
33. The site currently comprises an undeveloped paddock and, in spatial terms, the
    proposed land use and quantum of development would materially reduce its
    openness. In visual terms, although views of the site from Coopers Hill Road are
    largely screened by a mature tree belt, the site remains visible from the motorway,
    albeit in limited views and with some screening provided by a timber fence.
    Nevertheless, the proposed land use and quantum of development on this
    currently undeveloped site would erode its open and spacious character. Taking
    these factors together, I conclude that the proposal would result in significant harm
    to the openness of the Green Belt. Furthermore, by introducing residential
    development onto an undeveloped paddock, the proposal would conflict with the
    Green Belt purpose of safeguarding the countryside from encroachment.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009966


Character and appearance
34. In the context of this appeal for permission in principle, consideration of character
    and appearance is necessarily limited to the proposed land use and amount of
    development. Matters relating to detailed layout, scale, appearance and
    landscaping would fall to be considered at the technical details consent stage. My
    assessment therefore relates only to the effects arising from the introduction of up
    to 5 dwellings as a land use on this site.
35. The appeal site comprises an undeveloped and open parcel of land currently used
    as a paddock. It adjoins existing built development to the south. A mature tree belt
    defines the eastern boundary of the wider site. The site makes a positive
    contribution to the area's open and spacious character and appearance. Its
    undeveloped nature reinforces the rural qualities of the locality and helps to soften
    the visual influence of the motorway, contributing to a gradual transition between
    the transport corridor and the surrounding countryside.
36. Notwithstanding the absence of detailed design information, the introduction of
    residential development comprising up to 5 dwellings on this currently
    undeveloped paddock would, by reason of the proposed land use and amount of
    development, introduce a domestic and urbanising influence into an otherwise
    rural location. I therefore find that the proposal would fail to conserve the existing
    rural character of the site and its immediate surroundings.
37. Accordingly, the proposal would be contrary to Policy DP7 of the Local Plan and
    Policy CSP18 of the Tandridge District Core Strategy 2008 (the Core Strategy).
    Those policies, in so far as relevant, require development to integrate effectively
    with its surroundings to reinforce local distinctiveness and landscape character.
38. The Local Plan and the Core Strategy are consistent with the policies in the
    Framework with regard to character and appearance matters.
Other considerations
39. The proposal would deliver up to 5 dwellings. This would support the
    Government's objective of significantly boosting the supply of homes and, in the
    context of the Council's significant housing land supply shortfall, would make a
    small but meaningful contribution towards meeting housing need. I therefore attach
    substantial weight to this benefit.
40. It would also give rise to economic benefits during both the construction and
    occupation phases, which attract moderate weight. I further recognise the
    economic benefits found in the support for small and medium-sized enterprises
    through the delivery of small sites; this is a benefit to which I attach moderate
    weight.
Other Matters
41. I have had regard to the representations concerning highway safety, particularly in
    relation to the provision of visibility splays. However, no substantive evidence has
    been provided to demonstrate that the required visibility splays could not be
    achieved. Accordingly, had I been minded to allow the appeal, this matter could
    appropriately be addressed through the technical details consent process.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009966


42. I have also had regard to the representation concerning the potential effects of the
    proposed residential development on a neighbouring business. However, no
    substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that the development
    would or could result in unreasonable restrictions on, or otherwise prejudice, the
    operation of that business. In the absence of such evidence, I afford this
    consideration limited weight in my assessment.
43. I have also had regard to the appellant's submission in respect of the consultation
    response submitted by the County Highway Authority (CHA) in response to the
    proposal, particularly the contention that the CHA exceeded its powers in providing
    comments of that nature. I afford this argument little weight. There is no substantive
    evidence before me to indicate that the CHA was constrained from commenting on
    the matters raised within its consultation response. In any event, and
    notwithstanding the appellant's concerns, I have concluded, on the basis of the
    evidence before me, that the proposal would not occupy a sustainable location
    irrespective of the CHA's consultation response. The consultation response has
    merely reinforced and substantiated that conclusion.
Green Belt conclusion
44. The proposal represents inappropriate development which, by definition, is harmful
    to the Green Belt and attracts substantial weight. In addition, the proposal would
    result in a substantial reduction in openness and conflict with the Green Belt
    purpose of safeguarding the countryside from encroachment. These harms attract
    substantial weight. Separately, I have found that the introduction of residential
    development on the site would harm the character and appearance of the area
    through the urbanising influence associated with the proposed land use and
    amount of development. This is a distinct planning harm to which I attach significant
    weight. In addition, the location of the proposed development would not be suitable
    and would result in unsustainable patterns of travel, a consideration of significant
    weight.
45. While the identified housing benefits carry substantial weight and the economic
    benefits carry moderate weight, they are insufficient to clearly outweigh the Green
    Belt, openness, sustainability and character harms.
46. As such, the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt
    and there are no considerations taken individually or in combination that would
    clearly outweigh that harm to the Green Belt and any other harm so as to amount to
    very special circumstances.
47. Accordingly, the proposal conflicts with Policies DP10 and DP13 of the Local Plan
    and with the Framework which, insofar as relevant, states that inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt should not be approved except in very special
    circumstances. This is consistent with policies in the Framework.
48. The Council has referred to Policy DP14 of the Local Plan. However, having regard
    to the wording of the policy and its supporting text, I find that it is directed towards
    proposals for garages and other ancillary domestic buildings associated with
    existing dwellings within the Green Belt. The appeal before me concerns
    permission in principle for new residential development and not the erection of
    ancillary structures serving an existing dwelling. In these circumstances, I conclude
    that Policy DP14 is not directly applicable to the proposal and therefore carries very
    limited weight in the determination of the appeal.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009966


Planning Balance
49. Policy S3 of the 2026 Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply the presumption in favour of sustainable development. In relation to
    the appeal before me this means policy S5 of the 2026 Framework should be
    applied.
50. Policy S5 states that development proposals outside of settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework. However, paragraph 5 of the policy makes clear that the policy
    does not apply to development proposals in the Green Belt, which should instead
    be determined in accordance with policy GB7. The policy further confirms that,
    where development would not be inappropriate in the Green Belt following the
    application of policy GB7, proposals should be approved unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse impacts. For the
    reasons set out above, the proposal would amount to inappropriate development
    in the Green Belt for the purposes of policy GB7. Consequently, the proposal does
    not benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable development.
Conclusion
51. Drawing all matters together, the proposal would be contrary to the development
    plan when taken as a whole, and no other material considerations, including the
    Framework indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with
    it.
52. For the reasons given, the appeal is dismissed.

Barry John Lomax
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
