 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 25 July 2026
 by A. J. Boughton MA (IPSD) Dip.Arch. Dip.(Conservation) RIBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 2 September 2026

 Appeal Ref: 6009970
 1 & 1A Lytton Avenue, Enfield EN3 6EL.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Lakh Dollay against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Enfield.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00380/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is Change of use from Use Class C3 (dwelling house) to one 4-bedroom
     and one 5-bedroom House in Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis) involving changes to fenestration
     (part retrospective).


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Plans submitted with the appeal clearly show the two properties which are the
   subject of this appeal, 1 & 1A Lytton Avenue, although conjoined, would be
   physically separate with no interconnecting doors or shared facilities. This means an
   occupier of one of the two houses would have to leave that property in order to gain
   access to the interior of the other, I therefore consider it would not be reasonable to
   determine the matter other than on the basis that the result of the development
   would be two separate HMOs. Following consultation with the appellant the
   description has been amended to accord with the plans that are sought to be
   approved.

3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026. I
   have taken this into account in the consideration of the matters raised.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the occupiers of the development would enjoy
   acceptable living conditions having regard to the size and availability of the
   communal facilities provided.

Reasons

5. The appeal site comprises two adjoining residential buildings (No.1 and No.1A)
   which were originally erected and until recently used, as two separate
   dwellinghouses in a well-established residential area. The appeal seeks planning
   permission for development which has already been largely undertaken, namely the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6009970


      conversion of these buildings to use as Houses in Multiple Occupation (sui generis)
      (HMO). The proposal does not integrate the two former dwellinghouses into a single
      unit, as each house retains independent access with similar layouts except that
      whilst No.1 includes 5 bedrooms, including two on the ground floor, No.1A has a
      total of 4 bedrooms including a Lounge and one bedroom on the ground floor. In
      addition, both buildings have one communal kitchen (containing a small surface for
      eating1) together with two shared and one ensuite bath/shower rooms. The
      Council’s assessment appears to ignore the possibility of the ‘Lounge’ being used
      for eating, however, it is reasonable to assume that occupants will use this
      communal space flexibly.

6. I note that the Council indicate that the appellant has applied for two HMO Licences,
   one for each property and I note reference to previous Licencing of the properties.
   Whilst the appellant has included a Notice under the Housing Act of the Council’s
   intention to grant a Licence in respect of 1A Lytton Avenue, this Notice does not
   correspond to the submitted plans for this matter and therefore attracts little weight
   in support of the suitability of the accommodation. No similar documentation is
   produced in relation to No.1 Lytton Avenue.

7. Further, whilst I note the appellant’s comments, Enfield Council HMO Standards
   (March 2021) document (HMO Standards) states “issuing of a licence does not
   imply that the property has the appropriate planning that or building control
   permissions for its present use. Nor will it have any bearing on the matter, should
   the planning or building control departments consider it necessary to take formal
   action”. Whilst the Licencing regime for HMOs is separate from that of planning it is
   nevertheless appropriate that the grant of planning permission should reflect the
   way buildings are intended to be used. I have considered the matter on the basis
   that there would be two separate HMOs.

8. The appropriate starting point in this matter is Policy DMD5 of the Enfield
   Development Management Document (November 2014) (Enfield DMD). This policy
   directly addresses residential conversions to Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO).
   Whilst acknowledging the contribution made to housing supply, the Policy requires
   that such development should be of high quality, also setting out restrictions to
   prevent clustering, disturbance, and parking. The Council have not raised concerns
   with regard to these latter matters.

9. The Nationally Described Space Standards2 (NDSS) do not directly apply to HMO
   premises, however, the gross internal areas of each building appears to achieve the
   minimum area specified by the NDSS for a 5-bed three storey house (6-person),
   allowing for some discrepancy in the method of calculation3 used by the Council. I
   therefore conclude that Nos.1 &1A each provide an adequate total internal floor
   area for the use described and thereby meet the requirements of Policy DMD5(a)
   with particular regard to the suitability of each building, as a whole, for the intended
   use.



1
  According to the submitted plans
2
  As included in the London Plan
3
  The Council calculation of GIA excludes staircases and any other area which is incapable of practical use whereas
the NDSS allows for the additional space needed for staircases. The building in this case is three storey.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                     2
    Appeal Decision 6009970


10. The Enfield HMO Standards document (March 2021) has been partly superseded
    by online advice4 primarily directed at the standards appropriate to licencing of
    HMOs but those standards also provide some guidance relevant to design and
    internal layout, matters which affect the living conditions of occupiers and therefore
    material to this appeal. These include the need for ready access to the kitchen from
    bedrooms and the availability of somewhere to sit and eat. The document includes a
    stipulation that kitchen facilities should ‘preferably be sited no more than one floor
    distant from the bedroom’5. It is also indicated that where no separate dining room is
    available, that being the case for No.1, a ‘dining kitchen’ of a specific size should be
    provided, the relevant area being 8.5m2 for up to 5 persons. Although the plan
    identifies an area of 13.85m2 for the dining kitchen of No.1, this appears to be
    incorrect, nevertheless, even excluding the access passage to the rear entrance
    door, the effective area of the dining-kitchen in No.1 exceeds, by a small margin, the
    minimum area stipulated in the HMO Standards (2026) of 8.5m2.

11. Consequently, although the Council’s refusal reason refers to an inadequacy of
    communal living space, I consider that the floor areas of accommodation for No.1,
    according to the plans provided and noting that the top floor bedroom in No.1 has its
    own kitchenette, is adequate for the occupancy of No.1 by 5 persons, such limit
    arising from the limited area of the dining kitchen in No.1 which could be imposed by
    condition.

12. However, in addition to the general reference to space standards, Policy DMD5 (a)
    of the DMD 2014 requires that HMO attain a ‘high quality form of
    accommodation…..’, indicating that the development plan requires an assessment
    as to the quality of accommodation and, therefore, that the suitability of the
    accommodation does not rest solely on the amount of internal floor area, a matter to
    which I now turn.

13. I have previously explained that my assessment of the accommodation addresses
    provision that exists in two unconnected parts. Whilst occupation of a dwelling by
    related members of a household would tend to prioritise shared space such as living
    rooms or kitchens, over bedrooms, different conditions prevail in an HMO where
    private space in the individual letting room is likely to be more desirable to the
    individual occupier. Nevertheless, the quality of an essential facility such as a
    kitchen is material to the living conditions for occupiers and this is not determinable
    solely on the basis of floor area and equipment.

14. The plans do not indicate any means of natural ventilation to the kitchen areas,
    providing only an external access door with corridor access. Whilst the Lounge Area
    in No.1a would provide some relief in regard to the intensity of use, the submitted
    plans indicate that each kitchen or kitchen-dining room is expected to be suitable for
    the preparation and consumption of meals by up to five, or possibly six6, unrelated
    people. This differs from the character of use by a related family as it introduces a
    likelihood of different meals being prepared and cooked simultaneously with a
    likelihood of concentrations of steam and moisture.


4
  Enfield HMO Standards 2026 https://www.hmokit.co.uk/hmo-standards/enfield
5
  Thereby excluding bedroom 5 in No.1a as the plans submitted do not indicate that the top floor rooms have a
kitchen facility although a kitchenette is apparent in the images provided for the top floor room in No1
6
  According to the grant of HMO licence for No.1A


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   3
    Appeal Decision 6009970


15. In such circumstances, whilst there is no requirement to have a view from a kitchen,
    the lack of an openable window for additional ventilation7 has a number of
    implications for living conditions. The dining-kitchen of No.1 is a habitable room
    arranged such that users would be remote from its only source of daylight and
    ventilation, a door. Also it is unlikely that occupiers of either house would consider it
    safe to leave the external door open for ventilation, except when the kitchen is
    actually in use, thereby limiting the opportunity for air changes to take place. Even if
    mechanical ventilation were introduced by condition I have nothing before me to
    indicate the adequacy of such an arrangement or that it would address concerns as
    to air quality or odour.

16. I consider the very limited airflows that would likely arise from the proposed
    arrangement are an identifiable risk factor for significant condensation and mould
    particularly where a kitchen is intensively used as would be the case from time to
    time. I conclude that the proposed arrangement creates an unacceptable risk of
    unhealthy condensation and poor air quality, a factor to which I attach significant
    weight in terms of living conditions for occupiers. I have considered whether these
    shortcomings could be overcome by the application of suitable conditions, but as
    amendments to external appearance might be necessary, that would not be
    appropriate.

17. Overall, and notwithstanding the adequacy of room sizes, I conclude that the
    internal layouts of the ground floor fail to attain either the high-quality form of
    accommodation required by Policy DMD5(a) of DMD 2014 or the well-designed
    functional layouts required by Policy DMD8(e). The National Planning Policy
    Framework (August 2026) indicates that the effective use of land8 should not
    diminish healthy living conditions. Consequently, taking all matters raised into
    account my reasoning directs that the development does not accord with the
    development plan as a whole and that, in consequence, the appeal cannot succeed.


Andrew Boughton
INSPECTOR




7
    As the submitted plans show,
8
    Heading to Section 12: Including the intensification of residential occupation such as the use as HMO


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                       4
