Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Alison Fish BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 19 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009129
Agricultural Building at Paddock Farm, Bowridge Hill, Gillingham, Dorset SP8
5QS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mr Steven Fear of Lone Wolf Planning Ltd against the decision of Dorset
    Council.
•   The application Ref is P/PAAC/2026/01142.
•   The development proposed is change of use and conversion of agricultural building to 2no.
    dwellinghouses (Use Class C3).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
   3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for change of use
   and conversion of agricultural building to 2no. dwellinghouses (Use Class C3) at
   Agricultural Building at Paddock Farm, Bowridge Hill, Gillingham, Dorset SP8 5QS
   in accordance with the application P/PAAC/2026/01142 and the details submitted
   with it including the revised location and block plan accompanying the appeal, and
   subject to the following additional conditions:
     1) Prior to first occupation of the dwellings hereby permitted, details of the
        positions, height, design, materials and type of boundary treatment to be
        erected shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
        authority. The boundary treatment shall be completed in accordance with the
        approved details before any dwelling is first occupied and thereafter retained.
     2) Prior to first occupation of the dwellings hereby permitted, details of a scheme of
        landscaping and a timetable for its provision shall have been submitted to and
        approved in writing by the local planning authority. All planting, seeding or
        turfing comprised in the approved details of landscaping shall be carried out in
        accordance with the approved scheme and timetable; and any trees or plants
        which within a period of 5 years from the completion of the development die, are
        removed or become seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the
        next planting season with others of similar size and species.
Preliminary Matters
2. I have taken the description of development from the Council’s decision notice as
   one was not provided on the application form.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009129


3. The Council’s third reason for refusal (RfR) relates to a discrepancy between the
   submitted drawings with particular reference to the annotation ‘building to be
   demolished’ on the proposed location and block plan ref: 2423/4. The Council
   acknowledge that a revised plan removing this annotation would overcome their
   concerns and that they would not seek to defend RfR3. A revised drawing was
   submitted by the appellant in their appeal statement of case1 which the Council
   have had the opportunity to comment on. Consequently, I have determined the
   appeal on this basis and referred to the amended plan in the formal decision above.
Background and Main Issues
4. The appeal relates to proposals advanced under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part
   3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development)
   (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (“the GPDO”). Class Q permits the change of
   use of a building that is or was part of an established agricultural unit and any land
   within that building’s curtilage, to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of
   Schedule 1 to the Use Classes Order.
5. The Council’s case is that works have been carried out to the building in the
   preceding 10 years which constitute development under Class A(a) or Class B(a) of
   Part 6 (agricultural buildings and operations) and thereby not permitted by
   Paragraph Q1(g) of the GPDO.
6. If the proposal is found to be permitted development, then Paragraph Q2 (1)(e) of
   the GPDO requires the developer to apply to the local planning authority for a
   determination as to whether prior approval will be required. Amongst other things,
   this would be as to whether the location or siting of the building makes it otherwise
   impractical or undesirable for the building to change from agricultural use to a use
   falling with Class C3.
7. Consequently, the main issues in this appeal are: i) whether the proposals
   constitute permitted development under Class Q of the GPDO, and if so, ii) whether
   prior approval should be granted with particular regard to whether the location or
   siting of the building makes it otherwise impractical or undesirable for the building
   to change to a C3 dwelling.
Reasons
Permitted development
8. Section 55 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the Act) sets out that the
   meaning of “development” and “new development” is the carrying out of building,
   engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land. Section 55 (2)
   lists operations that shall not be taken for the purposes of the Act to involve
   development, which amongst other things, includes the carrying out for the
   maintenance, improvement or other alteration of any building of works which—(i)
   affect only the interior of the building, or (ii) do not materially affect the external
   appearance of the building.
9. There is no dispute between the main parties that recent works have been carried
   out to the building. This has included replacement roofing sheeting, high level
   timber cladding to the front of the building and the installation of additional timbers
   to the internal metal frame.
1
    At Appendix 2


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009129


10. The replacement roof sheeting covers only part of the roof, and I am told was a
    like-for-like replacement for material lost by storm damage. The high-level timber to
    the front elevation covers a relatively small area, with a similar profile to the
    material it replaces. The appellant’s explanation that new internal timbers were
    required to secure these replacement materials to the frame would seem
    reasonable.
11. The works which have been carried out are visible from the adjacent public footpath
    particularly as the new material has not had time to weather. However they relate to
    only a small area of the overall building and none of the works carried out alter the
    shape, size, form or scale of the building.
12. For these reasons, the works carried out do not materially affect the external
    appearance of the building. Consequently, they do not comprise development
    under the Act. It follows that paragraph Q1(g) is not applicable in this case. The
    Council has found the proposal complies with the other conditions and limitations
    under Class Q. I see no reason to disagree. As such, the proposal amounts to
    permitted development.
Prior approval
13. The site occupies an exposed rural location immediately adjacent to a public
    footpath. For reasons of security and privacy, future occupiers are likely to require
    substantial boundary treatment, such as 1.8m high close-boarded fencing along the
    footpath boundary. While such fencing would help to screen domestic activities
    associated with the dwelling, it would nevertheless appear stark and introduce a
    suburban character into the surrounding rural area.
14. In contrast, less solid forms of boundary treatment may be preferable along the
    other rear boundaries to enable future occupiers to benefit from the views the
    elevated position of the building would afford them. An appropriate level of
    screening of the residential curtilage could still be achieved with traditional rural-
    style fencing and additional landscaping. This means that the extent of suburban-
    style fencing across the site is likely to be limited and landscaping could assist with
    screening this to some extent.
15. Whilst the appellant has not submitted details of what fencing would be proposed,
    Paragraph W.(13) of the GPDO enables prior approval to be granted subject to
    conditions that are reasonably related to the matters requiring prior approval. In this
    case, conditions could secure the submission and approval of details of all
    boundary treatments, together with a comprehensive landscaping scheme. This
    would ensure that the visual impact of the development is appropriately mitigated to
    an acceptable extent.
16. Whilst I am told that a previous appeal decision2 relates to the same building, I
    have very limited information before me to make comparisons with the appeal
    proposal. In any event, the appeal was against a refusal of planning permission and
    considered against development plan policies, rather than prior approval, where the
    principal of residential use in a rural location is established through the grant of
    permission by the GPDO.



2
    Appeal Ref: APP/D1265/W/3344025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009129


17. I therefore conclude that with the imposition of appropriate conditions, neither the
    location nor siting of the building would be undesirable for the building to change to
    a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses)
Conditions
18. In addition to the conditions imposed by the GPDO, it is necessary, for the reasons
    set out above to secure the submission, implementation and maintenance of
    boundary treatment and a landscaping scheme.
Conclusion
19. As the proposal meets the requirements for prior approval and is permitted
    development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GDPO, I therefore conclude
    that the appeal should succeed, and prior approval is granted.

Alison Fish
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
