Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 July 2026
by D Marley BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009062
Woodcote House Farm, Kidderminster Road, Woodcote Green, Dodford,
Worcestershire B61 9EQ
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part
           3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
           Order 2015 (as amended).
     •     The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Abley against the decision of Bromsgrove District Council.
     •     The application Ref is 26/00107/CUPRIO.
     •     The development proposed is the change of use of an agricultural building to two residential
           units (Class C3) and associated operational development.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
      3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General
      Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for the change of
      use of an agricultural building to two residential units (Class C3) and associated
      operational development at Woodcote House Farm, Kidderminster Road,
      Woodcote Green, Dodford, Worcestershire B61 9EQ in accordance with the
      application 26/00107/CUPRIO, and the details submitted with it including plan nos
      25-842-2, 25-842-3 and 25-842-4 P3, and subject to the following conditions:
           1. The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the vehicle
              parking spaces have been provided in accordance with drawing nos 25-
              842-3 and 25-842-4 P3. Thereafter those spaces shall be retained for the
              parking of vehicles only.
           2. Any contamination that is found during the course of the construction of the
              development hereby permitted that was not previously identified shall be
              reported immediately to the Local Planning Authority.
                If contamination is found, except for work required to be carried out as part
                of an approved remediation scheme, development on the part of the site
                affected shall be suspended until the following requirements have been
                complied with:
                 i.    a site investigation and risk assessment has been carried out in
                       accordance with the Environment Agency's 'Land Contamination: Risk
                       Management' guidance (or equivalent if replaced), and a written report
                       of the findings has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
                       Local Planning Authority. The site investigation and risk assessment
                       shall assess the nature and extent of suspected contamination;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009062


                 ii.   where unacceptable risks are found, a remediation scheme has been
                       carried out in accordance with details that have been submitted to and
                       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The remediation
                       scheme shall identify measures to bring the site to a condition suitable
                       for the intended use by removing unacceptable risks to identified
                       receptors and shall ensure that the site will not qualify as Contaminated
                       Land under Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 in
                       relation to the intended use of the land after remediation; and
                iii.   following the completion of any measures identified in the approved
                       remediation scheme, a verification report for all the remediation works
                       has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
                       Authority.
                 In the event a remediation scheme is required to be carried out, the
                 development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the verification
                 report has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
                 Authority.
Background and Preliminary Matters
2.    I have taken the description of development from the decision notice, subject to
      the removal of wording that does not constitute a description of development, as it
      more accurately describes the proposal than that given on the application form.
3.    Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q (‘Class Q’) of The Town and
      Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (the
      ‘GPDO’), development is permitted for the change of use of a building and any
      land within its curtilage, from use as a building that is part of an established
      agricultural unit to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) together with
      building operations reasonably necessary to convert that building, subject to
      certain limitations and conditions.
4.    On the evidence before me, the site falls within the provisions of Paragraph Q of
      Class Q, and would not be subject to an exclusion or limitation set out in
      Paragraph Q1 of Class Q. In its decision notice and subsequent statement, the
      Council identifies that it considers the proposal would fail to accord with prior
      approval matters set out in condition Q.2.(1)(a) and Q.2.(1)(f) of Schedule 2, Part
      3, Class Q of the GPDO.
5.    During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
      ‘Framework’) was published on 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered, any
      considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I
      am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard to the
      latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
6.    In light of the above, the main issues are, therefore, whether prior approval is
      required and should be granted, with particular regard to the transport and
      highways impacts of the development, and the design or external appearance of
      the building.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6009062


Reasons
Transport and highways impacts
7.    The site is accessed by a track off Kidderminster Road, and I observed the track
      was largely surfaced in light gravel or compacted stone. The speed limit in
      proximity to the access is 50mph, and at my site visit I observed vehicles travelling
      at speeds likely commensurate with the speed limit. When viewed from the appeal
      site towards Berry Lane, Kidderminster Road curves in proximity to the appeal site.
      There is a wide verge next to Kidderminster Road that at my site visit appeared
      well maintained and included highways furniture.
8.    There is a nearby residential dwelling, for which planning permission was granted
      in the recent past. On the evidence before me this dwelling utilises the access
      point that would be used by the proposed dwellings. The access is also used for
      agricultural purposes. The proposal would result in the change of use of the barn
      to 2 dwellings.
9.    Whilst the road curves in proximity to the appeal site, the access is visible for
      some distance in both directions. I am mindful of the existing use of the access for
      residential purposes, and no evidence is before me to suggest that the current use
      of the access by the existing dwelling has raised issues of road safety. Equally,
      there is no suggestion that the existing access was considered inadequate when
      planning permission was granted for the nearby dwelling, nor has evidence been
      presented to suggest that circumstances have materially changed since that grant
      of permission.
10. The site is also currently used by agricultural vehicles, and given the presence of
    the wide verge, the visibility of a motorcycle or car associated with the
    development would not be so different to that of a larger agricultural vehicle to an
    extent that harm to highway safety would be likely to occur.
11. Given the existing residential and agricultural use of the access, the comings and
    goings of vehicles associated with 2 additional properties would not be such that
    the use of the access would be materially intensified. As such, the number and
    type of vehicles accessing or egressing the site would not be significantly different
    when compared to the current situation, and highway safety would not therefore be
    compromised in this regard.
12. I have not been provided with precise measurements of visibility splays by either
    party, and the proposal may not meet the visibility splay distance sought by the
    Council and which they identify as being sought by the guidelines of the
    Worcestershire Streetscape Design Guide (the ‘Design Guide’). However, in the
    specific context of the site, the existing access, and its existing uses, I cannot
    conclude that harm to highway safety would occur were the access to be used by
    a further 2 residential dwellings. Taken together, the above matters provide clear
    justification to depart from the standards sought by the highways authority and
    therefore I afford any conflict with the Streetscape Design Guide in this regard
    limited weight.
13. Neither party has provided precise details with regards land ownership. However, I
    also have no evidence to suggest that the current arrangement is likely to change
    in a manner that would affect visibility nor, given my observations at the site, that
    visibility would be through land outside the control of either the appellant or the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009062


      highways authority. As such, the lack of detail before me as to land ownership
      arrangements does not lead me to an alternative conclusion on this issue.
14. Given the above, and with regard to the existing situation, I do not consider the
    proposal would result in a significant increase in the potential for conflict between
    road users that could result in crashes or injuries. As such, the proposal would not
    have an unacceptable impact on highway safety, and safe and suitable access to
    the site can be achieved. Therefore, the proposal would be acceptable with regard
    the transport and highways impact of the development and would be acceptable
    with regard Paragraph Q2.1(a). For the same reasons, the development would
    comply with Policy TR6 of the Framework that states that development proposals
    should be refused if they would have an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Design or external appearance
15. The existing barn is largely open-sided on one elevation. The proposal would
    include the provision of an area identified as amenity space within the barn itself,
    adjacent to this largely open-sided elevation. This area of amenity space would be
    otherwise enclosed by walls and a roof.
16. The Council identifies that the proposal would fail to provide satisfactory living
    conditions for future occupiers, and raises concerns with reference to the
    ‘Framework that the proposed amenity space located inside the barn, though
    external to the inside living areas, would fail to provide satisfactory outlook and
    daylight. The Council raises an objection under matters of prior approval related to
    design and external appearance.
17. For prior approval applications, the GPDO requires the decision maker to have
    regard to the Framework, so far as relevant to the subject matter of the prior
    approval. The GPDO does not provide a definition of the matter of design and
    external appearance. However other classes within the GPDO do include prior
    approval matters related to the effect of a prior approval application on the amenity
    of new, existing or neighbouring premises, and include specific matters for
    consideration such as overlooking or privacy. Such provisions do not feature within
    Class Q.
18. Equally, whilst not specifically applicable to the matter of the identified amenity
    areas, Q2.1(g) sets specific requirements on the provision of adequate natural light
    to be provided to all habitable rooms. The matter of natural light is not included
    within Paragraph Q2.1(f).
19. Whilst design and external appearance in broad terms relate to the visual
    appearance and function of the building, to extend this to include a broad
    assessment of the living conditions of future occupiers akin to that undertaken in
    the determination of a full planning application would, to my mind, go beyond the
    provisions of the subject matter of the prior approval. Therefore, although the
    Framework broadly continues to seek a high standard of amenity for existing and
    future users through its design policies, it is not directly relevant to the subject
    matter of the prior approval application.
20. Therefore, in design terms I find that the design and external appearance of the
    area identified as amenity space is acceptable. No other concerns have been
    raised with regards the design or external appearance of the building. Given this,
    the proposal would be acceptable with regards Q2.1(f).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009062


Other Matters
21. Reference has been made to a watercourse that may run through the site. No
    concerns have been raised in relation to flood risk, and the securing of a Land
    Drainage Consent would in any event be a separate matter to the prior approval. I
    therefore have no reason to conclude that matters relating to flooding risks on the
    site would not be acceptable.
22. Whilst reference has been made to the potential for noise to occur from a
    residential use, the barn is of sufficient distance from existing residential
    development such that harm arising from this matter would be unlikely to occur. A
    residential use would not be likely to result in significant noise generation in any
    event. It is noteworthy that the Council did not raise an objection in this regard.
Conditions
23. The GPDO imposes conditions on planning permissions granted under Class Q,
    and Paragraph Q2.(4) identifies that development under Class Q is permitted
    subject to the condition that it must be completed within a period of 3 years starting
    with the prior approval date, which it is not necessary to restate in my formal
    decision.
24. I have also had regard to the further conditions suggested by the Council insofar
    as these relate to the subject matters of the prior approval. I have additionally
    made a number of amendments in the interest of precision and enforceability, and
    with reference to the other relevant tests.
25. Whilst parking is shown on the plans, a condition is necessary to secure their
    retention to ensure adequate spaces are provided for the lifetime of the
    development, and to ensure that harm to highway safety is avoided. I have
    imposed a condition in this regard. I consider this condition sufficient to ensure that
    future occupiers would be unlikely to park in such a manner that would adversely
    affect neighbouring occupiers, and as such a condition specifying where parking
    could not occur would not therefore be necessary. Given the detail of the plans
    and the flat arrangement of the site, it is not necessary to specify the gradient of
    the parking spaces.
26. Given the nature of the previous use, it is necessary to impose a condition
    requiring works to cease and remediation to be undertaken in the event
    contamination were to be found, to avoid risk to future occupiers by ensuring
    matters related to contamination risks on the site are remediated where
    appropriate. Whilst the Council’s suggested wording includes an encouragement
    to seek professional advice and for reports to be prepared by competent persons,
    this would not be precise or enforceable, and I have excluded these elements from
    the condition imposed.
27. Whilst the Council suggested a condition requiring the access to be surfaced in a
    bound material, the access is already in residential use. There is no evidence
    before me to indicate that the current arrangements result in significant volumes of
    material being deposited on the highway, and two further dwellings and their
    associated residential movements would be unlikely to materially alter this to the
    extent that harm to highway safety would occur. Equally, I have no reason to
    conclude the existing arrangement would be insufficient in wetter months, and the
    provision of hard surfacing would urbanise an access along a country road that is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009062


      already being used for residential purposes. Given these identified matters, the
      proposed condition would not be necessary, and departure from the identified
      guidelines of the Design Guide would be justified in this instance in the context of
      the prior approval matter in Paragraph Q2(1)(a).
28. Whilst reference is made to the submission of additional details related to cycle
    parking to comply with the Council’s parking standards, I have been provided with
    no details as to what harm would arise in the absence of the proposed condition.
    Nor have I been directed to the relevant prior approval matter to which such a
    requirement would be reasonably related. As such, I do not consider the condition
    to be necessary or reasonable.
29. Whilst the Council suggests a condition requiring additional details to be provided
    relating to the boundary treatment between the parking and amenity area, for the
    reasons I have already set out the matter of the amenity area does not fall within
    the relevant prior approval matter, and as such, I do not consider the proposed
    condition to be reasonably related to that prior approval matter.
Conclusion
30. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed and
    prior approval should be granted.

D Marley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
