Appeal Decision
Site visit made 7 September 2026
by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009997
Erith Cottages, Main Road, Lacey Green, HP27 0QN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Dell, of Dell Brothers Ltd, against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 24/07369/FUL.
•    The development proposed is Erection of 4no. detached dwellings.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
      in August 2026. Main parties have been provided with the opportunity to comment
      on the implications of the revisions to their cases. I have taken account of the
      revised Framework, and any comments made, in my determination of the appeal.
3.    Upon review of the Framework the Council finds that the proposal would be
      regarded as Grey Belt and would comply with the Framework’s policy GB7(1)(g).
      As such, it no longer seeks to defend Reason for Refusal 1. Based on my own
      assessment of the evidence, I see no reason to disagree with this view and shall
      therefore consider this matter as having been addressed.
4.    The appeal site is within the Chilterns National Landscape (NL). Section 85 of the
      Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (as amended)(the CRoW Act) required
      decision makers to have regard to the purpose of conserving and enhancing the
      natural beauty of the area. Since 2023, Section 245 of the Levelling-Up and
      Regeneration Act (LURA) amended the duty on relevant authorities in respect of
      their interactions with statutory purposes of Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
      (AONBs – now NLs), as set out in The CRoW Act. In so far as it relates to this
      appeal, the amendment now requires relevant authorities “must seek to further the
      purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the AONB”.
Main Issues
5.    The main issues are:
      •     The effect of the proposal on highway safety, with respect to internal
            manoeuvring space for large vehicles, visibility at access and the extent of
            parking provision,



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009997


      •     Whether the proposal would result in the loss of a business use and if so the
            policy implications of this,
      •     The effect of the proposed development on the Character and appearance of
            the site and its surroundings, with particular regard to its effect on the Chilterns
            National Landscape, and
      •     Whether the proposal would provide adequate living conditions for future
            occupiers with particular regard to bin storage for future occupiers of plots 3
            and 4.
Reasons
Highway safety
      Parking provision
6.    The proposed scheme indicates parking provision for 12 vehicles. The Council’s
      parking guidance [2015] requires, at table 6 (for residential schemes up to 10
      dwellings), that 1-5 habitable rooms/ 1-2 bedroom should have 2 spaces, 6-7
      habitable rooms/3-4 beds should have 3 spaces, 8+ habitable rooms/5 beds
      should have 4 spaces. However, it also states that the car parking standards are
      optimum standards, where the required level of parking should be provided unless
      specific local circumstances can justify deviating from them. Based on the
      guidelines, main parties agree that the proposed plots would provide a shortfall of
      around 2 spaces. As such, on-plot parking could well be insufficient, resulting in
      some modest overspill parking.
7.    However, the site layout includes an extremely long access road, serving the four
      plots, which would be 5.5m wide. This would both allow opposing vehicles to pass
      safely, and to accommodate ad hoc parking without interrupting the free-flow of
      traffic within the small estate. Accordingly, I find it would be highly unlikely that
      overspill parking on the access road would occur close enough to the site access
      to prevent vehicles from entering and exiting the site in an efficient manner or
      occur on Main Road. As such, adequate space would exist within the site to
      accommodate any overspill parking requirement on site. This would prevent
      overspill parking onto Main Road and prevent the creation of any significant
      adverse impacts on the public highway, justifying deviation from the required
      standards. As such, the proposal would comply with the Council’s Countywide
      Parking Guidance Policy [2015].
      Turning for large vehicles
8.    The appellant’s updated layout plan, and turning head diagrams, show the turning
      arc for a fixed base large vehicle, such as a fire tender or bin lorry, within the site.
      This illustrates how such vehicles could enter and leave the site in a forward gear.
9.    The tracking details demonstrate how a large vehicle would manoeuvrer within the
      site, but do not show movements around the access into and out of the site.
      However, the access does not create a particular pinch-point that might make
      manoeuvring in and out of the site hazardous to highway safety in geometry terms.
      As such, I find the submitted details to be sufficient to demonstrate that a large
      vehicle could manoeuvrer through the site safely.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009997


      Visibility splays
10. Main Road is subject to a 30mph speed restriction passing the site. The Council
    identify that the existing use would generate 4 vehicle movements a day compared
    to the proposed use which would generate around 20 movements. This would
    therefore result in an intensification of the use of the access, albeit modest, of the
    current access. Consequently, despite the site being served by an established
    existing access, it is necessary for the proposal to demonstrate that safe access
    can be provided for the proposed use.
11. Main Road curves in front of the appeal site, providing restrictive views along the
    highway in both directions for emerging vehicles. The access onto Main Road
    would be on the northern side of the site’s frontage. A footpath runs in front of the
    site which appears to be around 1.5m wide. The appellant’s layout plan shows a
    2.4m by 43m visibility splay at the access onto Main Road.
12. To the southeast boundary of the site a post and rail fence can be seen on the
    shared boundary with 2 Erith Cottages. The appellant’s updated location plan
    demonstrates that the adjacent properties of ‘Robmau’ and 1 and 2 ‘Erith cottages’
    are also under the appellant’s ownership. The visibility splay to the southeast,
    would include land in front of 2 ‘Erith Cottages’, currently bound by a post and rail
    wooded fence. The fence obstructs distant views of approaching vehicles within
    the visibility splay. Nonetheless, the provision of an acceptable southeast visibility
    splay could be secured through the imposition of a condition, requiring the view to
    be unimpeded by the fence.
13. The northwest site boundary consists of a hedge which runs alongside the access
    to the Old Methodist Chapel’s access road. The appellant asserts that the visibility
    splay does not encroach onto land under the ownership of the neighbouring plot.
    However, and despite the appellant’s assertion, it appears that the visibility splay
    would require some third-party land, occupied by the hedge, to function properly
    as demonstrated by the Highway Authority.
14. Due to the proximity of the hedge and the curvature of the road, views for
    motorists exiting the site and looking northwest would be substantially
    compromised. This would be further compromised should the owners of the
    adjacent land chose to change the front boundary details of their plot in the future,
    beyond the control of the appellant. This therefore raises concern as to the safe
    use of the access, for future residential occupiers and larger delivery/service
    vehicles. As a result, the appellant has failed to demonstrate how a suitable
    visibility splay can be achieved without crossing third party land.
15. Consequently, whilst the scheme would include sufficient parking and
    manoeuvring space for a large vehicle it has not been demonstrated that it would
    provide a safe means of access for emerging vehicles, resulting in a significant
    adverse highway safety impact.
16. As such, the proposal would conflict with LP policy DM33, the Council’s Local
    Transport Plan [2016], the Highways Development Management Guidance
    document [2018] with respect to matters of highway safety. These seek, among
    other matters, for development to provide safe and convenient access to the local
    highway.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009997


Effect on any on-site business
17. The appeal site includes an existing building, and waste material is noted as being
    stored in various locations around the building. The appellant notes that the site
    includes extensive areas of surface infrastructure, which I take to refer to
    hardstanding, and related open storage. During my site visit the site appeared
    unkempt and unused with evidence of some historic storage of building materials
    but this seemed low-key and subtle.
18. The Council identify the site is occupied by a builder’s yard, and therefore an
    employment use, that policy DM5, of the Site and Allocations Plan [2013](SAP),
    seeks to retain. This policy seeks to retain scattered business sites and to only
    allow their redevelopment if it can be demonstrated that its use is no longer
    practicable to be retained in an employment related use. This requires the site to
    be marketed for a sufficient period of time, at a reasonable price for employment
    use and be unencumbered by any sales agreement that favours redevelopment.
    However, the appellant asserts that the site is not a builder’s yard.
19. During my visit I saw no clear evidence that an active business, of even small
    scale, was taking place on site or had recently taken place. The Planning history,
    within the officer’s report demonstrates that site was subject to planning
    permission for a builder’s yard and shed in the 1950’s. However, without more
    contemporary planning history it is unclear how the site has been used for the last
    75 years. Ariel photographs, provided by the Council at appendix D, do not provide
    much greater clarity on this matter, simply showing that the site has been used in
    the past for the ad hoc storage of materials. I also note that the Council has
    provided the trade details of ‘Dell Bros’ but this does not demonstrate that the site
    has been used as a builder’s yard. I therefore do not find the site to be a scattered
    business site where SAP policy DM5 would be engaged. As such, this policy
    weighs neither for nor against the proposal.
Character and appearance
20. Main Road predominantly consists of two-storey houses and dormer bungalows of
    various sizes and traditional styles. The settlements of Looseley Row and Lacey
    Green are linear in form, with several small spurs of housing standing within
    modest housing estates, off each settlement’s main roads. The appeal site is
    formed by several parcels consisting of both residential gardens and the existing
    builder’s yard and is a narrow, linear plot in the centre of Lacey Green. Due to its
    rather untidy state, the site makes a neutral contribution to the character and
    appearance of the area.
21. The proposed scheme consists of four dwellings, which are two-storey with pitched
    roofs. Having a traditional design and being set within generous plots, the design
    and general space around the dwellings would complement the general style and
    density of local development. Furthermore, being linear in form, the proposal
    would create a new cul-de-sac, similar to other spurs of development seen locally
    along Main Road.
22. Plot 4 would be occupied by a relatively large two-storey dwelling, with rooms in its
    pitched roof. It would be within a large plot, with sizeable garden areas, especially
    to its rear. As a result, the dwelling would not appear cramped or out of place
    within its plot and would have no adverse effect on the streetscene. It would be at
    the end of the new roadway and separated visually from plots 1, 2 and 3.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009997


      Nonetheless, as backland development it would be within an area with a dispersed
      pattern of development where other neighbouring plots also consist of backland
      sites and small spurs of development. As a result, the dwelling would be
      characteristic of the area, relating well to the surrounding pattern of development.
23. The Council assert that the proposed dwellings would be likely to be visible from
    footpaths LAG/4/1, LAG/4/2 and LAG/8/3, the locations of which are shown at
    figure 1 of the appellant’s Statement of Case. These routes are set away from the
    site, with LAG/8/3 the closest running to the west of the site. Nonetheless, I found
    the site to be only partially visible from nearby footpaths with dense surrounding
    vegetation. As such, the proposed dwellings would only be seen in glimpsed views
    amongst the existing built form of surrounding development, causing no material
    adverse visual effect for users of the footpaths.
24. With regards to the NL, the site forms part of the Walter’s Ash and Naphill Settled
    Plateau typology (LCT 16.2) of the Council’s Landscape Character Assessment
    (2011). Its characteristics include that it contains elevated, gently undulating
    plateau of chalk overlain by clay flints, consists of a mosaic of arable fields, rough
    grazing and paddocks defined by hedgerows and rural fencing.
25. The valued attributes of the relevant NL include special qualities as having areas
    of flower-rich downland, broadleaved woodlands, commons, tranquil valleys, the
    network of ancient routes, villages with their brick and flint houses, globally rare
    chalk streams and a rich historic environment of hillforts and chalk figures. The
    Chilterns has areas of tranquillity and remoteness along with visually sensitive
    skylines, geological and topographical features as which contribute towards
    making this a special landscape. Being within a settlement and surrounded by
    buildings of various styles and ages, the special qualities of the NL would be
    unaffected by the development. As such, it would not cause harm, through the
    introduction of additional built form within the settlement, to its associated
    attributes.
26. Accordingly, the proposal would be of an appropriate scale and design in
    consideration of the surrounding area and not result in over-development. It would
    therefore complement the character and appearance of the area and would not
    cause harm to the NL. The proposal would therefore comply with LP policies CP9,
    DM30, DM32 and DM35 and the Council’s Residential Design Guide SPD [2017].
    These seek, among other matters, for development to create attractive buildings
    and space, provide a positive response to its context and conserve the natural
    beauty of the Chilterns AONB. Also, having a neutral effect on the NL, the appeal
    proposal would conserve its beauty, in accordance with the promotion of the
    statutory purposes of conserving and enhancing the NL’s natural beauty as
    required by the CRoW Act.
Living conditions of future occupiers, regarding waste management
27. The Council’s Waste Management Planning Guide directs applicants to Part H of
    the Building Regulations, with respect to waste management requirements, and
    explains container dimensions for waste receptacles. The guidance identifies, for
    private roads, that a collection point should be provided where the private road
    meets the public highway. This presents the Council’s preferred method for waste
    collection for a private road, such as seems to be proposed for this scheme.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009997


28. The Council asserts that plots 3 and 4 would have inadequate provision for waste
    and recycling facilities due to bin travel distances. It has referred to the
    requirements of Building Regulations. This identifies that householders should not
    be required to carry refuse more than 30m from their home and that containers
    should be within 25m of the waste collection point specified by the waste collection
    authority. However, the Framework is clear that matters which are controlled by
    separate regulatory regimes may only be a material consideration where they have
    land-use implications, which is not relevant in this case. It states that decision-
    makers should assume that, unless there is clear evidence to the contrary, those
    separate regimes will operate effectively.
29. The proposal has adequate space along the roadway to accommodate refuse
    collection points that may be required by the Council. Furthermore, if not suitable
    to the Council, refuse could be collected by a private contractor in small vehicles
    which could enter the site. In either event, the details of a suitable refuse collection
    strategy could be adequately addressed by the imposition of a condition.
30. Accordingly, the proposal would be capable of accommodating suitable refuse
    facilities to enable the scheme to function well and prevent adverse effects to the
    living conditions of future occupiers. As a result, the proposal would comply with
    LP policies DM20, DM33 and DM35 and the Council’s Residential Design Guide
    SPD [2017] with respect to refuse collection. These include the requirement for
    development to take a comprehensive approach to site layout and design.
Planning balance
31. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with development plan LP policy
    DM33 and the associated supplementary planning documents concerned with
    highway safety and would conflict with the development plan when taken as a
    whole. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be
    determined in accordance with the development plan unless material
    considerations indicate otherwise.
32. The National Planning Policy Framework (2026), at policy H07, requires
    substantial weight to be given to the benefits of providing homes which will
    contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community. This is especially pertinent in a district where the Council is not
    meeting its required 5-year supply of housing land, with a provision of only 1.98
    years.
33. Furthermore, Policy S03 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. Policy S04, for development within a settlement, states
    that such development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
34. The proposal would deliver some modest economic benefits during construction
    and where future occupiers would spend in the area. The scheme would also aid
    in social cohesion to the local village to a moderate extent.
35. The appeal site is within a settlement, and the proposal would provide infill
    development for 4 dwellings in an accessible location, making use of underutilised
    land in an efficient manner at an appropriate density. The site is within walking
    distance of bus stops, that serve a high frequency service between High Wycombe

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009997


      and Aylesbury located around 65m and 155m north of the site respectively. These
      sustainable locational benefits of the site are consistent with the Framework which
      seeks development to support sustainable patterns of movement, enabling good
      accessibility for different users and make the most of existing and proposed
      transport infrastructure. Furthermore, the proposed dwellings would provide
      accommodation of an acceptable size to meet the Council’s internal and external
      size requirements.
36. Nonetheless, the proposal would use an access that has not been shown to able
    to be used in a safe manner, increasing the risk of accidents in the area and
    causing a significant adverse impact to highway safety. This would therefore fail to
    comply with policy TR6 (4) of the Framework which states that development
    proposals should be refused if it would have an unacceptable impact on highway
    safety. The proposal would also fail to accord with policy TR3(1)(c) which states
    that any significant adverse impacts from the development on the transport
    network, or on highway safety, should be mitigated to an acceptable degree using
    a vision led approach. Furthermore, the scheme would not allow for the efficient
    delivery of goods, and ease of access by service and emergency vehicles, in ways
    which do not compromise key place-making principles in conflict with policy
    TR4(1)(d) of the Framework.
37. In this instance, the benefits of the proposed development, would be substantially
    outweighed by the identified adverse effects of the proposal, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. As
    such the presumption in favour of sustainable development would not apply.
    Accordingly, the identified conflict with the development plan would not be
    outweighed by material considerations, including the Framework.
Conclusion
38. For the above reasons the appeal is dismissed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
