 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 1 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009605
 17 Bournewood Road, Orpington BR5 4JN
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mark Bishop against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Bromley.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00185/FPA.
 •    The development is change of use from Use Class C3 dwelling house to sui generis use as House in
      multiple occupation for 8 persons.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A house in multiple occupation (HMO) for 8 persons is sui generis under the Use
   Classes Order 1987 (as amended), as an HMO falling under Class C4 is limited to
   between 3 and 6 persons. I have therefore amended the description of
   development in the header above to correspond with the amendment made by the
   Council at the application stage.
3. The information provided on the application forms state that the development had
   been completed prior to the date of the application submission. However, at the
   time of my site visit, and although the internal works appeared largely complete, the
   property did not appear to be occupied for its intended use. I shall therefore treat
   this as a proposed development, rather than an application for development
   already carried out.
4. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
   2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December 2024 and all
   other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the Appellant and the
   Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal and have taken their
   further representations into account in my determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
5. The main issues in this appeal are:
          •    Whether the development would provide satisfactory living standards for
               occupiers of the development, and



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009605


         •    The effect of the proposed development on the living standards of
              neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
Living Standards: residents

6. The appeal property is a semi-detached property which has been extended and
   altered, on the north-east side of Bournewood Road and within a predominantly
   residential area. The scheme relates to its proposed use as an eight bedroom
   HMO.
7. Policy D6 of the London Plan 2021 (London Plan) sets out that housing
   developments should be of high quality design with adequately-sized rooms with
   comfortable and functional layouts which are fit for purpose and meet the needs of
   Londoners without differentiating between tenures. Policy 9 of the Bromley Local
   Plan 2019 (Local Plan) addresses Residential Conversions including for non self-
   contained accommodation and sets out criteria to be satisfied, including criterion b
   that the resulting accommodation will provide a high quality living environment for
   the intended occupiers.
8. Most of the individual rooms are of a generous size, with adequate light and
   ventilation and completed to a high standard. Most of the bathrooms are internal,
   which is not an unusual occurrence in house conversions. The Environmental
   Health Officer (EHO) has noted that in such situations mechanical ventilation is
   required. At my site visit I noted that the bathrooms were all fitted with mechanical
   ventilation. Furthermore, this would be a matter to be confirmed under other
   legislation.
9. The one room which appears substandard in terms of light and ventilation, given
   the ratio of floor space to window, is the top floor room and there is no technical
   information and assessment before me to conclude that it would provide a
   satisfactory standard of accommodation for future occupiers, particularly taking into
   account that the nature of the accommodation whereby the individual rooms would
   serve as both a living and bedroom space.
10. The submitted plans indicate the kitchen to be an indicative layout only and the
    EHO has noted that there appears to be insufficient facilities to serve all the
    residents. The supporting documentation from the Appellant refers to a combined
    kitchen, living and dining space with two or three sets of appliances, sinks and
    cupboards, together with dining table seating for up to 8 occupants and comfortable
    living area with appropriate seating.
11. At my site visit, and as shown in some of the submitted photos from the Appellant
    the kitchen is generously fitted out with household appliances and
    cupboard/storage space. However, as a result there is very limited communal
    dining and living space available in the kitchen area, which is the only communal
    area to serve the residents, apart from the study space at second floor level. As a
    result of the layout the communal living space appears very limited and cramped
    for its intended use to serve 8 residents.
12. There is a good sized garden to serve the residents. There is indicated on one of
    the plans to be some limited cycle parking at the front of the house, although not
    yet provided. However, the principal cycle storage for the residents would be at the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
 Appeal Decision 6009605


     rear of the house in the rear garden. However, to utilise this cycle parking area, and
     given the site layout, it would be necessary to bring bikes through the house and
     through the kitchen / communal space. Given the constraints of the communal area
     in terms of its layout, and lack of communal living and dining space, this would add
     to my concerns that the space is not large enough to provide a high quality
     environment to serve the intended number of occupants.
13. I therefore conclude that the accommodation would not provide a satisfactory
    standard of accommodation and living environment for the residents, with particular
    regard to the kitchen and communal living room. Furthermore, I am not satisfied on
    the limited information before me that the room on the second floor would provide a
    satisfactory standard of accommodation and living environment for the residents,
    particularly with regard to light and ventilation. This harm would conflict with
    Policies D3 and D6 of the London Plan and Policies 4, 9 and 37 of the Local Plan,
    all of which, amongst other matters, seek a high standard of design which protects
    the amenities of existing and future occupiers.
Living Standards: Neighbours

14. The use of the property as an eight bedroom HMO and for a maximum occupancy
    of 8 persons would be likely to lead to increased comings and goings, compared
    with its existing use as a single dwelling. The residents would probably all be living
    independently which again would suggest a greater number of comings and goings
    than associated with a single family. However, this does not, by itself, provide
    demonstrable evidence that the greater number of occupants would result in
    harmful levels of noise and disturbance to surrounding residents.
15. The main entrance door is centrally sited at the front of the property and therefore
    not immediately adjacent the neighbouring dwellings This would be the sole point of
    access to the property. There is also no evidence to suggest that there would be a
    materially greater use of the rear garden, as a result of the proposal, taking into
    account the expectation that the residents would be living independently.
16. The proposal would result in the ability for more people to live at the site, compared
    with the use of the property as a single dwelling. However, I am not persuaded on
    the basis of the information before me, as well as the layout of the dwelling, that
    this would result in demonstrable harm to the living conditions of neighbouring
    residents, particularly in terms of noise and disturbance.
17. I have noted that there may be no other HMOs within the local area. However, this
    indicates that there would not be an over concentration of such properties in the
    local area, and the proposed use would add to the mix of residential
    accommodation locally. It would retain in both its external appearance and its use,
    the character and appearance of a residential dwelling.
18. I am therefore satisfied, on the basis of the information before me, that the
    proposed development would not result in material harm to the living conditions of
    neighbouring residents, with particular regard to noise and general disturbance.
    There would be no conflict with Policies D3, D6 and D14 of the London Plan and
    Policies 4, 9 and 37 of the Local Plan in this regard.
19. A number of local residents have also raised concerns regarding pressures on on-
    street parking. The proposal would provide for 2 off-street parking spaces in front of
    the property. There are no on-street parking restrictions in the vicinity of the site

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
 Appeal Decision 6009605


     and no information to suggest that this is an area of parking stress. The proposal
     also includes for cycle parking in the rear garden. There is no evidence before me
     to indicate that the living conditions of neighbours would be materially harmed in
     respect of concerns over parking and the Council raised no concerns in this
     particular regard.
Other Considerations
20. The Appellant has advised that he is intending that the accommodation would be
    occupied by NHS staff working at the local hospitals. However, there is no
    information before me to indicate that this would be the case and I am unable
    therefore to give this material weight in my consideration.
Planning Balance
21. The introduction of an HMO would contribute to the overall housing provision by
    providing diversity and choice in the housing market although there would be the
    loss of one larger self-contained dwelling.
22. I have found that the proposed development would not materially harm the living
    conditions of the occupants of the neighbouring dwellings, with particular regard to
    noise and disturbance. However, this would not outweigh the unacceptable harm I
    have concluded to the living conditions of future occupants of the HMO, through a
    lack of a satisfactory standard of accommodation and living environment.
23. The harm I have concluded from the proposed development in terms of the lack of
    a satisfactory living environment for future residents would substantially and
    demonstrably outweigh the benefits of permitting the scheme to proceed. The
    proposal is not therefore sustainable development for which there is a presumption
    in favour.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons given above, the proposals conflicts with the development plan as
    a whole and there are no considerations that would outweigh that conflict, including
    the Framework. Having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal should not
    succeed.



L J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
