Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 July 2026
by S Ramsden BSc (Hons) MA MA IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009985
Plot 1 F I M Renewable Energy Farm, Mill Lane, Kirtlington OX5 3HW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr K Johal against the decision of Cherwell District Council.
•    The application reference is 25/02893/PIP.
•    The development proposed is for Permission in Principle - Proposed conversion of existing building
     to form 2 no. dwellinghouses.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development and site address used above are taken from the
       Council’s Decision Notice. They more accurately reflect the location and describe
       the development than that given on the planning application form and is the basis
       on which the Council made their decision. I have determined the appeal on the
       same basis.
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages.
       The first stage (permission in principle) establishes whether a site is suitable in
       principle. The second stage, technical details consent (TDC), is when detailed
       proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first stage.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent TDC application if permission in principle is
       granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
5.     Section 5A of the Town and Country Planning (Permission in Principle) Order 2017
       states that when granting permission in principle the minimum and maximum net
       number of dwellings must be stated. The description of development states the
       proposal is for two dwellings, I have determined the appeal on the basis of a
       minimum and maximum of two dwellings.
6.     On 17 August 2026, a new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’)
       was published replacing the version of the Framework published in December
       2024. The parties were invited to comment and the comments received have been
       taken into account in the determination of the appeal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009985


7.     Indicative drawings were submitted as part of the application. I have treated these
       as being for illustrative purposes only.
Main Issues
8.     The main issues are whether the site is suitable for residential development,
       having regard to location, the proposed land use and the amount of development,
       with particular regard to:
       •     whether the site would be a sustainable location for the proposed
             development, with regard to access to local services and facilities; and,
       •     the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
             the site and surrounding area.
Reasons
Location
9.     The appeal site comprises an agricultural building and part of a field, at least 700m
       outside the village of Kirtlington. It is separated from the village by open fields and
       a golf course, and is located in open countryside. Access to the village is via Mill
       Lane, formed of a narrow country lane and, in part, a gravelled bridlepath track,
       both with limited passing places.
10. Kirtlington contains a limited range of facilities, including a public house, primary
    school, church and village hall. The appellant submits that there is a village store
    and/or post office in Kirtlington but neither was apparent at my site visit.
11. Although relatively straight and flat, Mill Lane is unlit and has no defined or
    separate footway. Whilst the route may not be arduous for pedestrians or cyclists,
    it would not be attractive during hours of darkness or during inclement weather.
    Around half the distance from the appeal site to the edge of the village is a
    gravelled bridlepath, which would not provide easy access to the site by users with
    limited mobility.
12. At my site visit I did not observe any public footpaths near the site which might
    give more direct access to Kirtlington, and in any event they would not be
    accessible to all users and would likely be unattractive to use, especially in the
    dark or poor weather.
13. I have not been provided with details of public transport in the area, but at my site
    visit I observed that the nearest bus stops appear to be approximately 1km from
    the appeal site, and access to public transport therefore appears to be limited.
14. Future occupants of the proposed dwellings on site would be almost entirely
    dependent on private cars to access the limited local services, and particularly for
    the wider range of services and facilities needed for day-to-day living in other
    settlements. Whilst there may be a village store in Kirtlington, it is likely that future
    occupants of the site would require a private car to access a wider range of shops
    elsewhere. The appeal site is, therefore, not in a sustainable location with regards
    to access to a range of local services and facilities, nor is it easily accessible by
    sustainable modes of transport or by all users.
15. For these reasons, the proposed development conflicts with Policies ESD1 of the
    Cherwell Local Plan 2011-2031 Part 1 (the Local Plan) 2015, which seeks to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009985


       mitigate the impact of development on climate change by requiring development
       which seeks to reduce the need to travel and encourages sustainable travel
       options including walking, cycling and public transport to reduce dependence on
       private cars.
16. The proposed development would not be supported by saved Policy H19 of the
    Cherwell Local Plan (the Saved Local Plan) 1996, which states that conversion of
    rural buildings outside the built-up limits of a settlement will be considered
    favourably where they meet the requirements of other policies in the plan, which
    the proposal does not.
Character and appearance
17. The appeal site consists of a building in agricultural use and part of a field,
    separate to, and some distance from, the village of Kirtlington. It is surrounded on
    three sides by open fields and a golf course. To the north is woodland, which
    slopes steeply to the River Cherwell and a canal, beyond which are further fields.
18. The existing building appears in reasonable condition, and the overall appearance
    of the site is not unexpected or atypical of its agricultural use and rural location,
    nor detrimental to the wider area.
19. The character of the appeal site is, therefore, agricultural. That of the wider area is
    of a tranquil rural landscape. Whilst there is a small solar array to the south of the
    appeal site it is not conspicuous, and there is little in the way of development in the
    vicinity of the site. Mill Lane Farm lies further along Mill Lane to the east and there
    are a few dwellings where the Lane meets the canal, but they are separate to and
    at some distance from the appeal site.
20. Conversion of the existing building to form two dwellings would introduce a
    residential use at odds with the rural, agricultural character of both the site and
    surrounding area. It is not physically well-related to the village and it is highly likely
    that the residential use of the site would involve elements, such as car parking,
    gardens, boundaries, and bin stores; as shown on the illustrative drawings.
    Although they would be subject to TDC consent, such elements would have a
    domesticating and urbanising impact, irrespective of their detailing.
21. The proposed development would, therefore, harm the tranquil, rural character and
    appearance of the site and surrounding area. It would not result in an appreciable
    reduction of buildings on the site, and the visually intrusive nature of the
    development would be more pronounced due to the lack of development in the
    immediate vicinity.
22. For these reasons, the proposed development would conflict with Policies ESD13
    and ESD15 of the Local Plan, which taken together seek to deliver development
    that enhances local landscape character and does not cause undue visual
    intrusion into the open countryside.
23. The proposed development would also conflict with Policies H19, C28 and C30 of
    the Saved Local Plan, which taken together seek to ensure development is
    sympathetic to, and does not harm, the character of its rural context.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009985


Other Matters
24. It has been put to me that the site is screened from Mill Lane by vegetation.
    However, such screening cannot be relied on seasonally nor over time, nor does it
    mitigate the harm I found on the main issues.
25. The appellant asserts that the proposed development would result in a reduction in
    hardstanding on the site and that it offers opportunities for biodiversity net gain and
    planting. However, such matters cannot be secured at permission in principle
    stage and fall outside considerations at this stage. Nor would matters of detailed
    design overcome the harm with regard to the unsustainable location of the appeal
    site.
26. My attention has been drawn to an appeal decision at Heathfield. I have not been
    provided with full details of that case, but it appears that whilst it involved the
    conversion of an existing building, with some partial demolition, the development
    was seen as a benefit to the character and appearance of the area. That is not the
    case in the appeal before me and I therefore accord this very limited weight as a
    comparison.
27. The appeal site does not contain any listed structures nor are there any listed
    buildings in the immediate area. The canal to the north of the appeal site is
    designated as a conservation area, however due to the distance and intervening
    topography and woodland the proposed development would not harm its setting.
    However, these factors do not diminish the harm I have found on the main issues
    or weigh in favour of the proposal.
Planning Balance
28. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan, in that it
    would not be in a sustainable location, particularly with regards to access to
    services and facilities by sustainable transport modes. It would also introduce a
    domestic use, in an isolated rural location, which would harm the character and
    appearance of the tranquil, open countryside.
29. Policy S3 of the Framework explains how the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development is to be applied in decision-making. Policy S5 of the Framework
    specifically sets out that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements, including limited infilling within groups of houses, the
    redevelopment of previously developed land, and development which would
    address an evidenced unmet need where the development would be physically
    well-related to an existing settlement. In such cases, development should be
    approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    of the Framework.
30. The appeal site is some distance outside the settlement of Kirtlington and it is not
    within a group of existing houses. I have found above that it is not well-related to
    an existing settlement. Policy S5.3 of the Framework states that development
    proposals comprising isolated homes should not be approved other than in
    accordance with policy HO11.
31. Policy HO11 sets out the criteria in which isolated homes in the countryside should
    be supported. The proposed development does not fall within any of the given


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009985


       criteria. Whilst it would entail the reuse of an existing building, no substantive
       evidence has been presented to demonstrate that the building is redundant or
       disused, and the proposal would not enhance its immediate setting.
32. The proposal would involve the reuse of a site which could be described as
    constituting previously development land, which would attract support under Policy
    S5 of the Framework.
33. The proposed development would provide additional housing in the district. This
    would contribute to the Framework’s objective of supporting the delivery of homes
    and attracts substantial weight, having regard to the local housing supply position.
    The proposed development would also provide economic and social benefits
    associated with employment during construction and an uptick in the use of local
    services once occupied. Given the scale of the development, those benefits would
    attract moderate weight.
34. Taken together, I nevertheless find the benefits of the proposed development
    would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects arising from its
    unsustainable location and the harm to character and appearance when assessed
    against the national decision-making polices of the Framework. As such, Policy S5
    of the Framework does not indicate that the proposed development should be
    allowed.
Conclusion
35. In the final balance, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of
    sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to
    all other matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.

 S Ramsden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
