Appeal Decision
Inquiry held on 18-19 August 2026
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by Stephen Wilkinson BA, BPl, Dip LA, MBA, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009377
Floringham Lodge, Old Bracknell Lane, East, Bracknell, RG12 7AJ
•       The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant [outline] planning permission.
•       The appeal is made by McCarthy and Stone Retirement Lifestyles Ltd against the decision of
        Bracknell Forest Borough Council.
•       The application Ref is 25/00456/FUL.
•       The development proposed is redevelopment of the site to provide 46 one and two Bedroom
        retirement Living Units for Older People with associated parking, landscaping and communal
        facilities (C3 Use Class), following the demolition of the existing building.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the redevelopment of
   the site to provide 46 one and two bedroom retirement living units for Older People
   with associated parking, landscaping and communal facilities (C3 Use Class),
   following the demolition of the existing building at Floringham Lodge, Bracknell,
   RG12 7AJ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/00456/FUL, and
   the plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The appeal was originally programmed to be heard through a Public Inquiry but
   following the Case Management Conference (CMC) it was determined that
   evidence would be heard through a blended Hearing involving the presentation of
   evidence both in person and from two of the Council’s witnesses by video link.
3. Since the Council’s decision the parties have agreed that revisions to the proposed
   radius on the northern side of the vehicle access to the site would address the
   Council’s first reason for refusal. The revised plan LSE-3045-03-AC-0120-P10 and
   LSE-3045-03-LA-MCS792-Drg01 P6 identify the extent of the proposed change.
   Following discussion at the Hearing I am satisfied that this revision does not
   prejudice interested parties.
4. The appellant included a draft Unilateral Undertaking (the Undertaking) in advance
   of the Hearing given that the parties could not agree a target return rate for the
   developer’s profit which had been included in the draft S106 Agreement. A
   completed Undertaking dated 1 September 2026 is discussed later in this decision.
5. For consistency purposes a revised plan floor plan has been submitted with the
   appeal introducing a minor change to the second floor plans with the inclusion of a
   window. This had been included in the elevational drawings. Accordingly, given the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009377


         reason for the suggested change I am satisfied that drawing reference LSE-3045-
         03-AC-0202 – Proposed Second Floor Plan P08 is acceptable.
 6. In advance of the Hearing the Council stated that it did not intend to defend
    ‘overshadowing’ included in its fourth reason for refusal. The Council acknowledged
    during the Hearing that reference to policy LP18 in its fifth reason for refusal was a
    typographical error and should have referred to LP38.
 7. Both parties accept that the Council does not have a policy compliant housing land
    supply. In an additional document submitted after the Hearing the Council
    confirmed that as of 1 April 2026 this is 3.53 years.
 8. The Development Plan comprises the Bracknell Forest Local Plan adopted 19
    March 2024. The Government issued its revised National Planning Policy
    Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. Parties were asked to provide a
    closing statement demonstrating how this affected their respective cases. Their
    comments have been taken account of in this decision.
 Main Issues
 9. During the Case Management Conference, the Council stated that it would not
    defend Reasons 1 and 2 of its refusal relating to parking and highway matters.
    However, given the comments from interested parties they remained as issues for
    consideration during the Hearing. This decision addresses the following matters as
    main issues:
             •    Whether or not the scheme makes a sufficient contribution to affordable
                  housing,
             •    The effect of the appeal scheme on the living conditions of surrounding
                  occupiers,
             •    The effect of the appeal scheme on the living conditions of future occupiers,
             •    Whether or not the scheme includes appropriate mitigation for the Thames
                  Basin Heaths Special Protection Area, and
             •    Whether or not the scheme includes sufficient infrastructure to support the
                  proposal.
 10. These matters are considered as part of the overall planning balance.
 Reasons
 Affordable housing
11. Policy LP16 requires that for housing schemes of more than 10 dwellings 35% will
    be affordable. Specifically, the policy allows that for development for specialist
    accommodation for older persons any suggested departure from this requirement
    must be evidenced by a site specific viability assessment.
12. There is agreement1 by the parties that the appellant’s viability assessment which
    has been independently reviewed does not identify a sufficient surplus to allow for
    the provision of a policy compliant amount of affordable housing. They differ,

 1
     Viability Statement of Common Ground


 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
  Appeal Decision 6009377


          however, on whether there is policy support for a viability review mechanism which
          would allow an opportunity for another viability study in advance of completion of
          the scheme, the appropriate target rate and the timing of when the review should
          be carried out if that is the case.
  Adopted policies
13. The Planning Policy Guidance (PPG) identifies that the purpose of a review
    mechanism is to strengthen local planning authorities’ ability to seek compliance
    with relevant policies2. It advises that the circumstances when review mechanisms
    should be set out is in adopted plans together with clear processes and terms of
    engagement regarding how and when viability will be assessed over the lifetime of
    a plan to ensure policy compliance and public benefits.
14. Policy LP16 does not include a specific reference to a requirement for a review
    mechanism. Although in supporting text there is reference to a requirement for
    S106 Agreements to include ‘claw back’ provisions with a viability assessor
    appointed to monitor this matter. The absence of policy support undermines the
    requirement for this which could deliver contributions to affordable housing
    following further viability work at some point during the delivery programme.
15. Policy LP24 2ii was identified during the Hearing as providing policy support for this
    claw back mechanism. This policy refers to the operation of an appropriate
    mechanism to secure Infrastructure which supporting text identifies can also
    include affordable housing. However, the absence of any links to housing policies
    identified at the end of the policy undermines this reference. Furthermore, it is
    instructive that in its officer report, reason for refusal, written evidence, the Housing
    SPD, closings and the CIL compliance statement the Council did not refer to this
    policy. For these reasons, I accord only limited weight to this policy which could
    warrant a conflict with the appeal scheme.
16.       Whilst the Council’s Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) on Housing refers
          to the use of a review mechanism to be completed at a point when 75% of market
          homes have been sold this does not have sufficient policy support to merit further
          consideration in this appeal.
17.       The Council made references during the Hearing to other appeal decisions where
          the late review mechanism had been accepted by appellants, but these decisions
          were not placed before me in evidence.
18.       I conclude that the adopted policies of the Local Plan do not provide a sound and
          consistent basis to support a late review mechanism to secure contributions to
          affordable housing. Accordingly, the other matters between the parties in respect of
          target rate and time fall away.
Impact on surrounding occupiers
  19. The appellant had originally engaged with the Council though a local design review
      panel3 for a previous scheme for the site which was subsequently withdrawn. This
      resulted in significant changes to the form of the appeal scheme from three blocks
      to the two villas now proposed; this approach is consistent with Policy DP4 of the
      Framework.

  2
      Paragraph 010 Ref ID 10-010-2025 1216
  3
      Design and Access Statement


  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
  Appeal Decision 6009377


  20. Policy LP50 includes a range of design requirements for development to respond
      to. In particular, policy LP50ii, iii, v, vi and viii require development to have regard to
      local character, demonstrate that views into and out of the site have been
      considered and that developments relate well to their context regarding adjoining
      buildings, views and amenity. The policy is consistent with Policy DP3 of the
      Framework. The Council’s adopted SPD on Design provides additional guidance on
      these matters.
  21. The appeal site lies to the west of Bracknell town centre in a residential area
      comprising three storey flatted blocks, short terraces of post war two storey housing
      and in the immediate vicinity of the appeal site and including the site itself detached
      properties. The appeal site comprising 0.56ha extends through from Old Bracknell
      Lane East to the Downshire Way (A322) and has well treed boundaries with
      Floringham Lodge itself being virtually hidden from views from surrounding
      properties. The council’s reason relates to the relationship of the proposed
      development to the buildings to the south.
  22. The Design and Access Statement identifies that some consideration has been
      given to how the appeal scheme could integrate with its surroundings. The scheme
      has been designed as two large buildings, described as villas by the appellant with
      each containing self-contained flats, with villa A comprising part two and three
      storeys lying towards the eastern end of the site and villa B comprising four storeys
      set deeper within. Between the two villas is a single storey linking element within
      which are the communal areas serving the development. Parking lies to the front
      and side of the scheme with landscaped gardens including allotments to its western
      and northern edges.
23.    The SPD requires that appropriate separation distances to reduce overlooking
       between two and three storey development is 22m and 30m respectively and that
       for higher development a proportionate approach should be considered. These
       standards are required to avoid loss of privacy, (addressed further in this decision),
       prevent development being overbearing and resulting in overshadowing.
24.    Villas A and B will have ridge heights of around 12.5m and just over 14.5m
       respectively. Villa A will be set at its closest point around 8.9m and villa B 8.3m
       from the site’s southern boundary.
25.    The existing dwellings most affected include the Carriage House of 1.5 storeys
       within a metre of the site’s southern boundary and Laurel Cottage set around
       24.5m away with Boxford Ridge, a two storey block of maisonettes located around
       22.5m away.
26.    The Carriage House lies in a secluded location despite its location right on the
       shared boundary with the appeal site. This together with the extent of existing
       vegetation along this boundary prevents intervisibility between the two. Accordingly,
       despite the location of Villa A within the Council’s suggested separation distance no
       harm would result to the living conditions of occupiers of the Carriage House.
27.    Villa A at its closest point lies within 24.5m of Laurel Cottage and critically its first
       floor windows are around 32m from the southern elevation of villa A. However,
       there is no direct overlooking between the blocks due to the obscure glazing
       proposed for the secondary windows in flats 14 and 28 in villa A and its orientation
       within the site.


  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
  Appeal Decision 6009377


28.    In respect of the maisonettes in Boxford Ridge there is sufficient separation
       distance and boundary vegetation to prevent direct overlooking between the facing
       windows facing the site’s boundary at this point.
29.    Presently views from the rear garden and first floor windows of Laurel Cottage are
       above the line of trees on the boundary to open sky. These views would be
       replaced by the flank elevation of part of villa A comprising two gables. The degree
       of impact would however be mitigated in part by the proposed orientation of this
       building within the site and existing boundary planting.
30.    The appeal scheme would urbanise the appeal site when compared to the
       character of the existing development leading to visual impacts on the living
       conditions of occupiers of Laurel Cottage but this would not be sufficient to conflict
       with the Council’s design policy or Policy DP3 of the Framework. Whilst it would be
       seen it would not be overbearing.
31.    In respect of existing development along Old Bracknell Lane East through a
       combination of both distance and the extent of well treed boundaries the scheme
       would not appear as overbeating.
32.    In terms of the proposed scheme’s impacts on the sunlight and possible
       overshadowing to surrounding properties the proposed scheme lies to the north of
       the adjacent properties and the appellant’s evidence identifies that the impacts
       would be within acceptable tolerances.
33.    I conclude that despite the location of the appeal scheme in breach of the Council’s
       separation distances, its impacts on surrounding properties would be limited. The
       scheme does not conflict with policy LP50.
Living conditions of future occupiers
34.    There are two aspects to this issue related to adherence to appropriate standards
       for wheelchair access and the quality of accommodation to flats 14 and 28. These
       are addressed below.
Wheelchair access
35.    Policy LP38 iii requires that in schemes for specialist housing for older people and
       adults 100% of all self-contained units will meet the Part M4(3)(2)(a) standard to
       allow full wheelchair mobility. This is consistent with the Revisions to Part M of the
       Building Regulations which introduced ‘optimal standards’. Supporting text to the
       policy identifies that exceptions to this policy could only be justified by specific site
       factors such as vulnerability to flooding and topography or other site circumstances
       which make the site less suitable. None of these exceptions affect the appeal site
       and no other circumstances were identified in evidence by the appellant.
36.    The policy is predicated on allowing residents to maintain full wheelchair
       accessibility as their mobility needs increase over their lifetime.
37.    Although the appellant questions the validity of the policy based on background
       papers submitted to the Local Plan Examination it is not my role in this decision to
       pursue this given that the policy has been adopted. I accept however their
       evidence, in the absence of any counter evidence from the Council, that full
       adherence to the Part M4(3)(2)(a) standard within the same floorspace of the
       scheme could require changes to the dwelling mix and/or number of units overall.

  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
  Appeal Decision 6009377


38.      Whilst the scheme only includes 4 units or 8.7% of units designed to Part
         M4(3)(2)(a), the remaining units would meet M(4)(2) standards although in some
         cases bedrooms would exceed this standard with private outdoor space meeting
         the M4(3) standard. However, the inclusion of the full standard in the remaining 42
         units fails the Council’s adopted standard for the entrance, kitchen manoeuvring,
         size of the main shower room, the provision of a dedicated wheelchair transfer
         space, bedroom circulation and requirement for hoist and outdoor specifications.
39.      Whilst I acknowledge the appellant’s experience in delivering retirement schemes,
         it has apparently never delivered a scheme which includes 100% of units designed
         to meet M4(3)(2)(a) provision. It is unsurprisingly therefore that its resident survey
         identifies that only 2.7% of residents in its schemes use a wheelchair in the home
         and only 3.2% use one in communal areas.
40.      Whilst the Council’s housing register presently includes just 10 applications for
         accessible and adaptable housing for the over 55 years age groups, the
         background paper to this topic prepared for the Local Plan Examination identifies
         the growing need during the plan period arising from people with either limiting long
         term health issues or disability requiring the provision of accessible housing
         although it concludes that dwellings should adhere just to M4(2) standard.
41.      Whilst I acknowledge the findings of my Inspector colleague in the Lymington
         decision4 in which they recognised that the provision of units to M4(2) standard in
         breach of that Council’s adopted policy would still cater for occupants with a range
         of mobility needs not all the evidence on this point is before me. Furthermore,
         having considered the Warrington decision5 the exception to the provision of 10%
         new wheelchair housing related to whether the requirement was not viable or
         technically feasible as required by the Council’s policy. No exception of this nature
         is accounted for in policy LP38 and in this appeal the scheme is already estimated
         to be unviable.
42.      In conclusion, the appeal scheme conflicts with policy LP38 which requires 100%
         provision of all units to Part M4(3)(2)(a) standard for the appeal scheme.
  Internal design
43.      As has been referred to above, policy LP50 includes a range of design
         requirements including how development relates to its context, adjoining buildings
         and views. The Council’s adopted SPD on Design provides additional guidance on
         these matters
44.      Flats 14 and 28 each include one bedroom and are located on the first and second
         floors of villa A. Each bedroom is served by two windows of which one faces due
         west located right on the edge of the buildings return with a secondary window
         facing due south overlooking the gardens of the adjacent residential dwellings.
45.      Given that the villa’s southern façade lies within the suggested separation distance
         to the boundary the proposed glazing to this secondary window would be obscured.
         There is no evidence before me that the position and fenestration within each of
         these two flats would be unnaturally oppressive as the Council allege. The west
         facing window would maintain a clear outlook overlooking the courtyard and the
         southern window would still allow sunlight.
  4
      APP/B1740/W/20/3265937
  5
      APP/M0655/W/23/3327682


  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
  Appeal Decision 6009377


46.    For these reasons I conclude that the proposed obscuring of the secondary window
       to flats 14 and 28 would not adversely impact on the living conditions of future
       occupiers in conflict with policy LP50.
  Internationally Designated Sites
47. Under Regulation 63 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 (as amended) as competent authority I am required to undertake an
    Appropriate Assessment of the development on the basis of the appeal scheme’s
    likely significant effects on Internationally Designated Sites which include the
    Thames Basin Heath Special Protection Area. (the SPA).
48. Policies NRM6 of the South East Plan (2009) and LP32 require that where
    development is likely to have a likely significant effect on the integrity of the SPA it
    must be demonstrated that adequate measures will be put into place to avoid or
    mitigate any such effects. Such mitigation includes Suitable Alternative Natural
    Greenspace (SANG) and Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM).
49. The site lies within 400m-5km of the SPA buffer zone. The SPA comprises a
    network of heathland designated for habitats for internationally important bird
    species including Woodlark, Nightjar and Dartford Warbler. These bird species can
    be particularly affected by disturbance from recreational walkers and their dogs.
50. The conservation objectives of the SPA aim to ensure that its integrity is maintained
    and its structure and function is restored consistent with the Habitat Regulations.
    The proposed development and its location is likely to result in an increase in
    visitors resulting in significant effects on the site unless it is carried out with
    appropriate avoidance and mitigation measures.
51. Potential impacts could include adverse air quality and recreational pressures. I
    accept that the former is screened out as the adopted guidance agreed with Natural
    England is concerned with the air quality for developments of over 100 dwellings.
52. The Council in partnership with surrounding Councils and Natural England (NE)
    has a refined approach to secure appropriate levels of mitigation to address
    recreational pressures. In this case obligations included in the Undertaking require
    contributions to a SANG and SAMM as defined within policies NRM6 and LP32.
    These include financial contributions of £237,750 directed towards Englemere
    Pond which lies within 5km of the site and £30,658 towards the SAMM for Natural
    England’s management measures within the SPA. These obligations will be
    triggered on commencement of the development when the money would be
    received in full.
53. Each of these payments is consistent with the Supplementary Planning Guidance
    and with the policies NRM6 and LP32 and Regulation 122 of the CIL Regulations.
    Natural England has confirmed that it is satisfied with the suggested obligations.
54. These measures would adequately mitigate the recreational effects of the proposed
    scheme, either alone or in combination with other plans and projects, so that there
    would be no adverse effect upon the integrity of this internationally recognised site.
Infrastructure
55. The Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulations 2010 set a number of tests
    for planning obligations: they must be necessary to make the development

  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
 Appeal Decision 6009377


      acceptable in planning terms, be directly related to the development, and be fairly
      and reasonably related in scale and kind. The Council submitted a CIL compliance
      schedule with its Planning Obligations SPD which together identify how each
      suggested obligation is consistent with its adopted policies, particularly LP24 on
      Infrastructure and the requirements of the Regulations.
56. Despite the appellant submitting an Undertaking in place of the draft S106
    Agreement the Council has not objected to the substance of the obligations. I find
    that its concern over the ‘deemed’ approval mechanism included in the Undertaking
    is unwarranted as they are consistent with the imperative on delivery included in
    the Framework.
57. The Undertaking includes obligations in favour of the Council. Given the date of the
    application the obligations are consistent with the SPD which was in place at that
    time the application was submitted and not that most recently adopted (June 2026)
    given the assumptions which have underpinned the financial viability appraisal. For
    reasons of consistency, I accept that the Council’s approach is fair and transparent.
58. Obligations in favour of the Council include a contribution towards open space at
    public value required to be paid prior to occupation. The amount of £69,000 is
    calculated with respect to formula based on the site area and anticipated demand
    for public open space arising from the scheme; this would be paid prior to
    commencement. This is required to increase facilities in the area and raise the
    quality of the environment and is justified with reference to policies LP30, LP45 and
    LP46. The Council has highlighted sites within around one mile of the appeal site
    where this commuted sum can be directed.
59. The Undertaking includes obligations in favour of the Council for £46,000 to be paid
    prior to commencement. This would be a commuted sum directed towards projects
    at the Parks Community Centre or Braybrook Community Hall and or alternative
    facilities capable of serving the site. These facilities are within a mile of the appeal
    site and would be consistent with policy LP24.
60. Other obligations include the provision of highway improvements linked to a further
    agreement under Sections 38 and 278 of the Highways Act 1980. These require
    the provision of a Travel Plan submitted for approval prior to the site’s occupation
    involving a deposit of £19,000 with a monitoring fee of £6,500. Given the site’s
    location within a short distance of the rail and bus stations the operation of the
    travel plan could lead to genuine modal choice. These provisions are consistent
    with policies LP25 and LP61.
61. The scheme includes provision for the monitoring of the Sustainable Drainage
    System (SUDs) within the site which is designed to limit the possibility for flooding
    on adjacent land. This is a capped figure of £8,000 required to cover the monitoring
    over the lifetime of the development and is linked to the salary range of a drainage
    engineer.
62. Finally, a further obligation in respect of the purchase of off-site Biodiversity Net
    Gain (BNG) of £25,000 is included based on a metric for the loss of habitat units
    within the site. The obligation of £3,600 is a monitoring charge and would cover the
    on-going monitoring of BNG features over 30 years. This accords with the
    Environment Act 2021.



 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
  Appeal Decision 6009377


63. I conclude that the obligations would provide for the infrastructure, which is
    necessary, directly required and fairly and reasonably related in scale to this
    development. To conclude, I am satisfied that each of these obligations fall within
    the provisions of Regulation 122(2) of the CIL Regulations, Policy DM6 of the
    Framework and the PPG.
Other Matters
Highway Safety
64. Old Bracknell Lane East is a cul de sac with a carriageway of 5.5m in width which
    extends north from its junction with Bagshot Road (A3095). Parking restrictions are
    in place along its whole length although the access to the site lies within a
    Controlled Parking Zone (CPZ) requiring permit holder parking only Monday-
    Saturdays 0800-1800hrs and Sundays 1000-1600hrs with further parking
    restrictions along the lane.
65. There is a pedestrian footway of around1.5- 2m in width along parts of the western
    edge of the lane with a pedestrian footway along the full length of the eastern side
    of the lane.
66. The scheme would generate around 72 daily vehicle movements with 7 and 4
    vehicles in the morning and evening peaks respectively. I accept that this volume
    can be accommodated within the capacity of the lane. Proposed revisions to the
    site access included with the appeal would facilitate turning by service vehicles
    through alterations to the access radii. These are minimal changes and are
    appropriate.
67. Other highway works include a short extension of the pedestrian footway along the
    western edge of the carriageway to a proposed pedestrian crossing point which
    would connect to the wider footpath network which in turn leads to cycle and
    pedestrian routes into the town centre.
68. The Council’s adoption of revised parking standards would only lead to a shortfall
    of three spaces overall. Whilst in breach of the new standards, given the nature of
    the occupancy and the inclusion of a travel plan predicated on achieving modal
    shift, I am satisfied that on street parking would not result from the scheme.
69. Given the high levels of on street parking it is understood that the Council as
    Highway Authority does not intend to issue further parking permits. Given the range
    of measures included in the appeal scheme I am satisfied that the slight
    infringement of parking policies would not lead to on street parking compromising
    highway safety. Accordingly, there would be no conflict between the appeal
    scheme and policies LP25, LP26 and LP62.
Planning balance and conclusions
Benefits of the appeal scheme
70.    The appeal scheme includes a range of benefits consistent with the Framework’s
       objectives identified for sustainable development which are addressed below.
Social benefits
71.    There would be a net gain of 46 market old persons dwellings. This is an important
       sector of the housing market and one where the scheme could make an important

  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
 Appeal Decision 6009377


      contribution given the Council’s undersupply of housing land. In particular, the
      proposed occupancy of the scheme would result in the release of housing back to
      the market as its future occupants move into accommodation designed to meet
      their needs. It is recognised that these moves link to other households in the
      housing chain6 providing stimulus to the wider local market.
72.   Whilst only four of these dwellings would be designed to the Part M4(3)(2)(a)
      standard the Council’s policy recognises that during the plan period around 5%7 of
      all dwellings need to be for wheelchair users. The scheme would make a
      contribution to this demand.
73.   Other benefits which would support the Framework’s social objectives include the
      likely health benefits for elderly residents living in a community of similar people8. I
      recognise that both physical and mental health benefits could arise from the appeal
      scheme leading to reduction in pressures on the NHS.
74.   These benefits are broadly consistent with policies H05, H07 and H09 and are
      accorded significant weight.
Economic benefits
75.   It is recognised that the scheme could deliver economic benefits through those
      employed directly in construction and through the appellant company’s
      apprenticeship programme with permanent employment for a single house
      manager. These measures could lead to long term and positive benefits for
      employment. However other benefits cited by the appellant including the spending
      power of occupants of the scheme would be of limited additional value given that a
      large proportion of its residents are likely to be already living in the wider area.
76.   These benefits are broadly consistent with policies L2 and S4 of the Framework
      and I accord them moderate weight.
Environmental benefits
77.   Environmental benefits derive from the redevelopment of an existing brownfield site
      leading to an efficient use of land through a net gain of 45 dwellings. The site’s
      location within around 10 minutes walking distance of the rail and bus stations
      could allow modal shift for long journeys. The proposed highway works involving a
      pedestrian crossing would link the whole scheme to the existing pedestrian and
      cycle network which is integral to the town. I accord moderate weight to these
      benefits.
78.   All of the above matters will be considered in the overall planning balance.
Planning balance
79.   Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
      planning decisions are made in accordance with the development plan unless
      material considerations indicate otherwise.
 80. The appeal scheme will deliver market led old person accommodation on a
     brownfield site with good access to public transport. There is agreement between

 6
   Chain Reaction August 2020
 7
   ICENI Housing Needs Assessment
 8
   Institute of Public Care 2012


 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
  Appeal Decision 6009377


       the parties that the appeal scheme addresses policy L3 of the Framework in
       making an efficient use of land through the net increase of 45 dwellings.
       Furthermore, whilst there are shortcomings in the scheme’s design these do not
       amount to conflict with policy LP50. I accept that following the revision to the site
       access and the introductions to the parking standards the scheme would not
       conflict with highway safety. Other matters related to infrastructure can be
       adequately mitigated through the completed Undertaking. Overall the scheme
       adheres to Framework policies DP3, DP4 and HO5 which relate to specialist
       housing and design.
81.    Framework policy S4 includes a presumption in favour of development proposals
       within settlements unless a scheme’s benefits are substantially outweighed by any
       adverse effects when assessed against the Framework’s policies. In this case the
       only adverse effect is the scheme’s failure to include all dwellings built to the Part
       M4(3)(2)(a) standard. However, Framework policy H05 requires that dwellings
       should meet or exceed local levels of need and that 40% of homes on major
       development s are delivered to M4(2) standards.
82.    Given that the scheme includes four units which comply with policy LP38 with the
       others designed to M4(2) the level of harm arising from the scheme is clearly
       outweighed by its benefits.
83.    Although the scheme does not include a claw back mechanism for affordable
       housing this reflects the viability assessment and the exigencies of policies LP16
       and LP24.
84.    I conclude that in this instance the adverse impacts would not substantially
       outweigh the benefits when assessed against the policies of the Framework as a
       whole. As such the proposed development benefits from the Framework’s
       presumption in favour of sustainable development with specific reference to Policy
       S4.
85.    In this case therefore, material considerations, including the Framework outweigh
       the conflict with the development plan as a whole and indicate that planning
       permission should be granted for this development that is not in accordance with it.
86.    I therefore conclude that the appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is
       granted subject to conditions and the completed Undertaking.
Conditions
87.    The suggested conditions were considered during the Hearing in the context of
       advice included in both the Framework and the Government’s PPG. Their wording
       set out in the schedule below reflects that discussion. The numbers referred to
       below relate to the corresponding condition in the schedule. Whilst several of the
       suggested conditions require discharge in advance of the development proceeding
       I am satisfied that there is clear justification for these given their substance.
88.    The standard condition relating to the life of the permission (condition 1) requires
       development to commence within three years of the date of this decision. To
       provide certainty, the plans on which this decision is based (condition 2) are
       identified.




  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
  Appeal Decision 6009377


89.    To ensure that the development does not adversely impact on the character and
       appearance of the surrounding area I have imposed condition 3 regarding materials
       for all parts of the built development.
90.    Given the slight change in levels across the site, condition 4 requires that full
       details of the finished floor levels are identified in advance of all works
       commencing.
91.    To reduce the impact of the scheme on the living conditions of surrounding
       occupiers I have imposed condition 5 requiring obscured glazing in those windows
       identified on the approved drawings for flats 14 and 28.
92.    Consistent with the essential purpose of the appeal scheme I have imposed a
       condition 6 requiring that all dwellings should be constructed as a minimum to Part
       M4(2) of the Building Regulations and that 4 dwellings should adhere to Part
       M(3)(2)(a) standard for wheelchair adaptable.
93.    Several conditions have been imposed for reasons of highway safety. These
       include condition 7 requiring that no gates are located at the site entrance, details
       of visibility splays and their retention (condition 8) and a requirement that plans for
       the means of access have been approved and delivered (condition 9) and that the
       parking layout has been provided in advance of occupation (condition 10) .
94.    To ensure that appropriate refuse disposal facilities are provided and to protect the
       living conditions of surrounding residents, details of refuse storage are required
       before the site’s occupation (condition11).
95.    To protect the habitats and/or connected habitats within the site the scheme should
       adhere to the ecological measures identified in the report submitted with the appeal
       and various other measures designed to enhance biodiversity (conditions12,13 and
       14).
96.    Consistent with the Environment Act 2021 conditions 15, 16 and 17 require the
       preparation of a biodiversity net gain and monitoring plan requiring implementation
       in advance of the scheme’s occupation.
97.    Given the importance of existing tree belts and boundary hedges to the site,
       condition 18 requires full detail of a landscaping scheme which will address the
       site’s means of enclosure and clear identification of which trees /plants will be
       removed and their replacement within 5 years in the event of disease or damage.
       This should in part address concerns of local residents identified from the site visit.
 98. Conditions 19 and 20 are required to address the archaeological interest of the site
     given local records. Conditions 21, 22 and 23 require land contamination surveys to
     be completed and appropriate action if necessary to be taken as a result. Condition
     24 requires that noise mitigation measures are addressed in advance of occupation
     as identified in the report submitted with the appeal.
 99. To protect the living conditions of surrounding occupiers a working method
     statement in respect of the demolition of the existing property and full details of a
     Construction Environmental Management Plan is submitted to control the possible
     adverse effects which could arise during the whole construction process (conditions
     25 and 26).



  https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
 Appeal Decision 6009377


100. Consistent with the appeal scheme, condition 27 requires that apartments shall
     only be occupied by persons aged of 60 years or over.
101. Consistent with the Frameworks intentions to encourage modal choice I have
     imposed a planning condition requiring details of a Travel Plan (condition 28). This
     could greatly assist in the reduction on use of the private car given the site’s
     proximity to public transport services.
102. Conditions 29, 30 ,31 and 32 requires full details of a sustainable drainage strategy
     within the site to ensure that its development does not result in off-site flooding.
     These conditions require verification of its management and design.
103. Finally, condition 33 through consultation with Thames Water requires that there is
     sufficient capacity to accommodate the proposed scheme through existing
     sewerage infrastructure.

 Stephen Wilkinson
 INSPECTOR




 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6009377




                                           Schedule of Conditions

01 The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of three
years from the date of this permission.

02 The development hereby permitted shall be carried out only in accordance with the
following approved plans received by the Local Planning Authority:


•      LSE-3045-03-AC-0100 – Location Plan
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0120 Rev P10 - Updated Site Plan
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0200 – Proposed Ground Floor Plan P06
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0201 – Proposed First Floor Plan P07
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0202 – Proposed Second Floor Plan P08
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0203 – Proposed Third Floor Plan P06
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0204 – Proposed Roof Plan P05
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0300 – Proposed Elevations 1 P05
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0301 – Proposed Elevations 2 P05
•       LSE-3045-03-AC-0302 – Proposed Elevations 3 P06
•       LSE-3045-03-LA-MCS792-Drg 01 Rev P6 – Landscape Proposals
•       2411-KC-XX-YTREE-TCP01 RevA – Tree Constraints Plan
•       2411-KC-XX-YTREE-TPP01 Rev0 – Tree Protection Plan
•       PP/4155/BRACKNELL/F1 – Topo
•       PP/4155/BRACKNELL/F2 – Topo
•       External Lighting Layout
•       Elevation Plan A1 Laurel Cottage Ref: LSE-3045-03-AC-0303 RevP01

•     2411-KC-XX-YTREE-TPP01Rev0
047.00091-0003 P05

•        Energy and Climate Change Statement

03     No structure hereby permitted shall be built above existing ground level until
samples of the materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
development hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved in writing by the
Local Planning Authority. The submitted samples shall include details of elevations,
roofs of the development together with those for ancillary structures such as the refuse
enclosures. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
details.

04     The development hereby permitted shall not be begun until details showing the
finished floor levels of the proposed buildings hereby approved in relation to fixed
datum points showing the land levels across the site have been submitted to and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         14
Appeal Decision 6009377


approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and the development shall be
carried out in accordance with the approved details.

05     Those windows shown on the approved drawings as having obscured glazing in
part or full shall at all times be glazed with a minimum of Pilkington Level 3 or
equivalent and shall at all times be non-opening unless the parts of the window which
can be opened are more than 1.7 metres above the floor of the room in which the
window is installed or the windows are installed in a corridor area..

06      The dwellings shall as a minimum be constructed in accordance with Part M4(2)
of the ‘Accessible and adaptable dwellings’ of the Building Regulations 2010 (Approved
Document ‘M’ – Access to and use of Buildings – dwellings 2015) (as amended) and
that of the dwellings four should be built to Part M(3)(2)(a) standard for full wheelchair
adaption.

Prior to the occupation of the dwellings hereby permitted, written verification that the
completed dwellings are in accordance with these standards shall be submitted to and
approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The completed dwelling shall be
maintained as such thereafter.

07       No gates shall be provided at the vehicular access to the site.

08       No development above slab level shall take place until a plan showing visibility
splays has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details. The
visibility splays shall thereafter be kept free of all obstructions to visibility over a height
of 0.6 metres measured from the surface of the adjacent carriageway.

09     No dwelling shall be occupied until a means of access to the site and building
has been constructed for vehicles, pedestrians and/or cyclists in accordance with
details which have first been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
Authority. The means of access shall thereafter be retained unobstructed for its
intended use.

10     No dwelling shall be occupied until the associated vehicle parking has been
provided in accordance with the approved drawing. The spaces shall thereafter be kept
available for parking at all times.

11     The development hereby approved shall not be occupied until details of on-site
refuse storage (including any open air storage facilities) for waste material awaiting
disposal (including details of any screening) have been submitted to and approved in
writing by the Local Planning Authority. Such facilities shall be provided in accordance
with the approved details prior to the first occupation of the dwelling to which it relates
and thereafter permanently retained.
12     All ecological measures and/or works shall be carried out in accordance with the
details contained in Section 5.1 of the Ecological Impact Assessment (Greenlink,
19/08/2025) as already submitted with the planning application and agreed in principle
with the local planning authority prior to determination.

13   No development shall commence other than site clearance and demolition until a
scheme for the provision of biodiversity enhancements (not mitigation), including a plan


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   15
Appeal Decision 6009377


or drawing showing the location of these enhancements, has been submitted to and
approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved scheme shall be
performed, observed and complied with.

14     An ecological site inspection report shall be submitted to and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority prior to practical completion of the development hereby
approved to demonstrate that all biodiversity enhancements have been undertaken in
accordance with the approved scheme.

15     The Biodiversity Gain Plan shall be prepared broadly in accordance with the
Ecological Impact Assessment (Greenlink, 19/08/2025) and Statutory Biodiversity
Metric (dated 25 June 2025). The Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan shall be
prepared to accompany the Biodiversity Gain Plan and shall be submitted for approval
alongside or after the submission of the Biodiversity Gain Plan.

16      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a Habitat
Management and Monitoring Plan (the HMMP), prepared in accordance with the
approved Biodiversity Gain Plan and including:
(a) a non-technical summary;
(b)     the roles and responsibilities of the people or organisation(s) delivering the
HMMP and any changes to those to be notified to the Local Planning Authority within
21 days of the changes occurring;
(c)     the planned habitat creation and enhancement works to create or improve
habitat to achieve the biodiversity net gain in accordance with the approved Biodiversity
Gain Plan;
(d)     the management measures to maintain habitat in accordance with the approved
Biodiversity Gain Plan for a period of 30 years from the completion of the habitat
creation and enhancement works set out in the HMMP; and
(e)    the monitoring methodology and frequency in respect of the created or
enhanced habitat to be submitted to the Local Planning Authority,
has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local Planning Authority.

17. The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until notice in writing has
been given to the Local Planning Authority that the:
(a) HMMP has been implemented; and
(b) habitat creation and enhancement works as set out in the HMMP have been
completed.

18    The development hereby approved shall not be occupied until the following have
been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority:

1) details of both hard and soft landscaping works, and

2) a comprehensive five year post planting maintenance schedule

No dwelling shall be occupied until the landscaping for that plot has been carried out in
accordance with the approved soft landscape planting scheme

The details in respect of 1), above shall include:




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   16
Appeal Decision 6009377


a) Comprehensive planting plans showing details of ground preparation and all other
operations associated with plant and grass establishment, full schedules of plants,
noting species, and detailed plant sizes/root stock specifications, planting layout,
proposed numbers/densities locations.

c) Means of enclosure (walls and fences etc)

d) Paving including pedestrian, paths, patios, proposed materials and construction
methods, cycle routes, parking courts,

e) Any trees or plants which die, are removed, uprooted, are significantly damaged,
become diseased or deformed within a period of 5 years from the completion of the
development are to be replaced during the nearest planting season (1st October to 31st
March inclusive) with others of the same size, species and quality as approved, unless
the Local Planning Authority gives written consent to any variation

19     No development shall take commence until a programme of archaeological
work, including a Written Scheme of Investigation (WSI) has been submitted to, and
approved by, the local planning authority in writing.
The WSI shall include an assessment of significance and research questions; and:

1.       The programme and methodology of site investigation and recording

2.       The programme for post investigation assessment

3.       Provision to be made for analysis of the site investigation and recording

4.    Provision to be made for publication and dissemination of the analysis and
records of the site investigation

5.      Provision to be made for archive deposition of the analysis and records of the
site investigation

6.    Nomination of a competent person or persons/organisation to undertake the
works set out within the WSI.

20     The Development shall take place in accordance with the WSI approved under
condition 19.

The development shall not be occupied until the site investigation and post
investigation assessment has been completed in accordance with the programme set
out in the WSI approved under condition 21 and the provision made for analysis,
publication and dissemination of results and archive deposition has been secured.

21    A detailed remediation scheme to bring the site to a condition suitable for the
intended use by removing unacceptable risks to human health, buildings and other
property and the natural and historical environment must be prepared, and is subject to
the approval in writing of the Local Planning Authority. The scheme must include all
works to be undertaken, proposed remediation objectives and remediation criteria,
timetable of works and site management procedures. The scheme must ensure that the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   17
Appeal Decision 6009377


site will not qualify as contaminated land under Part 2A of the Environmental Protection
Act 1990 in relation to the intended use of the land after remediation.

22      The approved remediation scheme must be carried out in accordance with its
terms prior to the commencement of development other than demolition or works
required to carry out remediation, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Local
Planning Authority. The Local Planning Authority must be given two weeks written
notification of commencement of the remediation scheme works.
Following completion of measures identified in the approved remediation scheme, a
verification report that demonstrates the effectiveness of the remediation carried out
must be produced, and is subject to the approval in writing of the Local Planning
Authority.

23      In the event that contamination is found at any time when carrying out the
approved development that was not previously identified it must be reported in writing
immediately to the Local Planning Authority. An investigation and risk assessment must
be undertaken, and where remediation is necessary a remediation scheme must be
prepared, which is subject to the approval in writing of the Local Planning Authority.
Following completion of measures identified in the approved remediation scheme a
verification report must be prepared, which is subject to the approval in writing of the
Local Planning Authority.

24     The development hereby approved shall not be occupied until the noise
mitigation measures as set out in the (Noise Assessment, 24 Acoustics, 8 July 2025,
Ref R11087-1 Rev 1) submitted with the application, are implemented. The noise
mitigation measures shall be retained and maintained thereafter.

25     No development shall take place until details of a scheme (Working Method
Statement) to control the environmental effects of the demolition and/or construction
work has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
The scheme shall include:-
•      the control of noise
•      the control of dust, smell and other effluvia
•      the control of rats and other vermin
•      the control of surface water run-off
•      the proposed method of piling for foundations (if any)
•      proposed construction and demolition working hours
•      hours during the construction and demolition phase when delivery vehicles, or
vehicles taking materials, are permitted to enter or leave the site.
The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved scheme.

26     No development (including site clearance) shall take place, until a Construction
Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) has been submitted to and approved in
writing by the local planning authority. The CEMP shall include as a minimum:

(i) Location of the access for demolition and construction vehicles;

(ii) Routing of construction traffic (including directional signage and appropriate traffic
management measures);

(iii) Details of the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   18
Appeal Decision 6009377




(iv) Areas for loading and unloading of plant and materials;

(v) Areas for the storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development;

(vi) Location of any temporary portacabins and welfare buildings for site operatives;

(vii) Details of any external lighting of the site;

(viii) Measures to prevent ground and water pollution from contaminants on-site;

(ix) Details of wheel-washing facilities;

(x) Measures to minimise the pollution potential of unavoidable waste;

(xi) Measures to dispose of unavoidable waste in an environmentally acceptable
manner;

(xii) details of measures to mitigate the impact of demolition and construction activities
on ecology; and

(xiii) Details of a monitoring regime to demonstrate compliance with the CEMP
including timings for reports to be submitted to the Local Planning Authority.

(xiv) Location of public information board(s) to be displayed at the site, to include
details of the site manager;

The approved Construction Environmental Management Plan shall be adhered to
throughout the demolition and construction period.

27     The apartments hereby permitted shall only be occupied by persons of 60 years
or over.

28    A Travel Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
Planning Authority prior to practical completion of the development hereby approved.
The Travel Plan shall be implemented upon first occupation of the development hereby
approved and in line with provisions and timescales set out within the Travel Plan.

29.     No development shall commence until a detailed Sustainable Drainage Strategy
has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
strategy shall include:
i) Results of intrusive ground investigations demonstrating the depth of the seasonally
high groundwater table across the site.
ii) Results of infiltration testing undertaken at a depth representative of the proposed
attenuation and infiltration features, in accordance with the relevant guidance and
standards.
iii) Hydraulic calculations demonstrating that the proposed drainage system can
accommodate the design rainfall events, including the 1 in 100-year rainfall event plus
an appropriate allowance for climate change, using FEH rainfall data.
iv) An assessment of the potential impact of groundwater on the proposed SuDS
features, including details of any mitigation measures required and evidence


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    19
Appeal Decision 6009377


demonstrating that groundwater levels will not adversely affect the operation,
performance, structural integrity, or maintenance of the drainage system.
v) Full details of all components of the proposed drainage system, including
dimensions, locations, gradients, invert and cover levels, construction details, headwall
details, planting proposals (where applicable), and supporting drawings, with due
regard to the identified groundwater conditions.
vi) A Temporary Drainage Design Brief setting out the arrangements for the
management of surface water runoff and drainage during the construction phase of the
development.
vii) Where discharge to a public sewer is proposed, written confirmation from Thames
Water (or the relevant sewerage undertaker) confirming acceptance of the proposed
discharge and discharge rate.
The approved Sustainable Drainage Strategy shall thereafter be implemented in full
and retained for the lifetime of the development.

30.    The development hereby approved shall not be occupied until details of how the
surface water drainage system (inclusive of flood mitigation measures) shall be
maintained and managed after completion have been submitted to and approved in
writing by the Local Planning Authority. The details shall include confirmation of
management body, required maintenance activities with expected frequency, with site
specific assessments included to demonstrate that health and safety have been fully
considered in the design and that access and egress for future residents will be
maintained during any operations to repair or replace drainage features.

31.     Prior to practical completion of the SuDS, a verification report, appended with
substantiating evidence demonstrating the agreed/approved construction details and
specifications have been implemented, will need to be submitted and approved (in
writing) by the Local Planning Authority. This will include photos of excavations and soil
profiles/horizons, any placement of tanking, crating, connecting pipe work, hydrobrakes
or control mechanisms and cover systems.

32.    No building shall be occupied until the sustainable urban drainage scheme
serving the development has been implemented in accordance with the approved
details.
Written confirmation of agreements for the management and maintenance of the
drainage scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
Authority prior to first occupation of the development. The sustainable urban drainage
scheme shall thereafter be managed and maintained in accordance with the approved
management and maintenance plan


33.     No development shall commence until either:
a) Written confirmation has been submitted to and approved by the Local Planning
Authority in consultation with Thames Water that sufficient capacity within the sewerage
infrastructure exists to serve the development; or
b) a scheme for the improvement of the existing sewerage system by the sewerage
undertaker to ensure that sufficient capacity is provided to serve the development. No
dwelling shall be occupied until the scheme for improvement of the existing sewerage
system has been completed in full as approved.
REASON: To ensure that the development is adequately served by sewerage
infrastructure.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   20
Appeal Decision 6009377




The development may not be begun unless—
(a) a biodiversity gain plan has been submitted to the planning authority, and
(b) the planning authority has approved the plan.

                                           End of Schedule



Documents received after the Hearing opened


•    Council’s Note on the draft Unilateral Undertaking14 August
•    Completed Unilateral Undertaking dated 1 September 2026
•    Council’s commentary on the UU, dated 19 August 2026 and summary following
     adoption of the Framework 2026
•    Appellant’s summary of following the adoption of the Framework 2026, dated 20
     August 2026
•    Court of Appeal judgement – R(Cherkley Campaign Ltd) v Mole Valley District
     Council [2014] EWCA Civ567
•    The Council’s final HLS calculation as at 1 April 2026




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     21
Appeal Decision 6009377


APPEARANCES

       FOR THE APPELLANT:
         Mr R Walton KC instructed by Ms C Fulgoni-Rowe of McCarthy and Stone
         Retirement Lifestyles Ltd

         Mr D Brunt BA(Hons) Dip Arch, RIBA - Partner of Reformat
         Mr I Hann MA– Principal Planning Associate of the Planning Bureau Ltd
         Mr S Carson BA (Hons) MRICS RICS Registered Valuer- Partner of Alder King
         LLP
         Mr H Cross, BSc (Hons) MCIHT – Associate, Paul Basham Associates


       FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:
         Ms M McEvit, Team Manager Major Sites, instructed by District Solicitor, Ms I
         Bhati Team
         Ms V Blades – Planning Officer Infrastructure and Implementation
         Ms R Swan – Planning and Highways Solicitor
         Mr Cridland – Infrastructure and Implementation Manager
         Mr D Coates - Consultant on Viability


       INTERESTED PARTIES:
         Mr D Lancaster
         Ms M Reed
         Ms M Spence
         Ms A Mansfield




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   22
