Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by P Brennan BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009022
Manor Farm Barns, Stratford Road, Beachampton MK19 6DT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs James and Lucinda Westcott against Buckinghamshire Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/5625/FA.
•    The development proposed is the demolition of two redundant agricultural buildings, conversion, and
     extension of existing barns to create two dwellings and the erection of two new dwellings with
     associated works including landscaping.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of two
      redundant agricultural buildings, conversion and extension of existing barns to
      create two dwellings and the erection of two new dwellings with associated works
      including landscaping at Manor Farm Barns, Beachampton MK19 6DT in
      accordance with the terms of the application, Ref PL/25/5625/FA, subject to the
      conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
      in August 2026. Main parties have been provided with the opportunity to comment
      on the implications of the revisions to their cases. I have taken account of the
      revised Framework, and any comments made, in my determination of the appeal.
3.    I also have a duty under Section 66(1) of the LBCA Act to have special regard to
      the desirability of preserving listed buildings or their settings or any features of
      special architectural or historic interest which they possess. The listed building,
      identified in evidence, is Manor Farmhouse, which is Grade II listed.
Main Issues
4.    The application was not determined by the Council within the statutorily prescribed
      8-week timeframe. As such, following the submission of an appeal, it falls to me to
      determine whether planning permission should be granted.
5.    The Council has identified, in its Statement of Case, that had it determined the
      proposal it would have refused the scheme due to its effect on the character and
      appearance of the site and surrounding area and its effect on designated and non-
      designated heritage assets.
6.    Accordingly, in consideration of the Council’s Statement of Case, officer report,
      and the evidence before me, I conclude that the main issues in dispute are:

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009022


           •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the area, with particular regard to the proposal’s design; and
           •    whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance the
                significance of the adjacent Grade II listed building and the effect on Barns
                1 and 2 within the appeal site and proposed for conversion which are
                identified as Non-Designated Heritage Assets (NDHA’s).
Reasons
Character and appearance
7.    The appeal site is a complex of various vacant and in decline farm buildings that
      formerly comprised Manor Farm and are located at the northern end of
      Beachampton. The barns are a mix of traditional brick-built structures and more
      modern steel framed buildings. The barns are set around a concrete yard and
      accessed from Stratford Road. To the east of the site lies Manor Farm Business
      Park comprising of industrial buildings, to the south lie further agricultural buildings
      and to the west sits Manor Farmhouse. Aside from these adjacent uses, the site
      sits within open countryside. As an array of farm buildings set around a courtyard,
      the site makes a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the area.
8.    The proposal, as detailed on the proposed layout plan (P200F) would involve the
      conversion of Barns 1 and 2 to form two dwellings, demolition of Barn 3 and the
      animal enclosure (Barn 4) and replacement with two new dwellings in a similar
      location and orientation. A single storey extension, located at the southern end of
      Barn 2 is also proposed.
9.    Barns 1 and 2 are traditional brick, primarily low level, linear agricultural buildings
      which are arranged in a ‘T’ shape. The proposed extension would adjoin the south
      facing gable of Barn 2 and would be in the shape of a cross. The extension would
      have a lower, subservient roofline adjoining the existing barn which would then
      increase in height for the gabled ends of the extension. The main ridge of the
      extension would be taller than the ridge for the existing barns however, the pitch of
      the roof slope would be similar. Whilst the extension would have a wider gabled
      form than the existing barns, this would not be bulky in form and would
      complement the character and appearance of the barn.
10. Window openings within the extension would also be of similar proportions to
    those within the existing barns. The existing stone and brick facades and slate roof
    would be retained, and the new build element would maintain the agrarian
    appearance using similar materials. This would include a new profiled metal roof to
    Barn 2, matching and replacing the deteriorating current metal roof.
11. I acknowledge that the extension to Barn 2 would not continue the linear form of
    the existing Barns 1 and 2. Nonetheless, the extension would respect the simple
    form of the barns, would not appear overly domestic in appearance and the
    extension and conversion would continue to maintain a strong agrarian character.
    Furthermore, the barn conversions and the proposed extension would continue to
    sit within, extend the form of, and maintain the courtyard’s appearance as a
    farmstead.
12. The new build proposal for Barns 3 and 4, would be provided in an ‘L’ shape
    formation on the opposite side of the courtyard. Barn 4 would be sited in a similar


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009022


      location to that of the existing animal enclosures whilst Barn 3 would be sited in
      front of the existing steel barn which would be demolished, with the area providing
      private garden space for Barns 3 and 4. On this basis, the siting of the new
      dwellings would accord with the established layout and configuration of the historic
      farm courtyard that currently exists on site.
13. Barn 3 is proposed as a two-storey dwelling. This barn would also accommodate
    part of the accommodation for Barn 4. The new build barn would have a proposed
    ridge height that would be around 1.5m taller than the barn to be demolished.
    Whilst this would exceed the height of the existing structures proposed to be
    demolished on site, the ridge height would match that of the existing agricultural
    building to the rear of, adjacent to and outside of the appeal site. As a result, a
    new building, with the ridge height as proposed, would prevent unsightly views of
    adjacent development beyond the site boundary from within the courtyard.
14. The new build barn, for Barn 3, would appear tall and bulky in scale when
    compared to the relatively low profile of the older barns for conversion.
    Nonetheless, Barn 3 would replace a barn of similar scale. A mix of materials
    including horizontal and vertical cladding, glazing and a profiled metal roof would
    be used. Whilst this would include several types of cladding material it would be
    similar to that of the existing barn and more modern agricultural farm buildings
    seen locally. Consequently, Barn 3 would comfortably assimilate into its courtyard
    surroundings. Its overly simple form, whilst domestic in appearance would assist in
    illustrating its design as an interpretation of a modern barn conversion.
15. Barn 4 would be primarily single storey and would maintain the same linear form
    and low profile established by Barns 1 and 2. Barn 4 would incorporate a regular
    window and door configuration with a more modern and domestic appearance
    than the converted barns. Nonetheless, its use of similar materials to Barns 1 and
    2 would ensure it would maintain the character and appearance of the historic
    farmyard.
16. Overall, the design of the new build dwellings, extensions and conversions would
    maintain and enhance the agrarian character of the former farm courtyard and
    would consequently accord with the rural character and appearance of the site and
    wider area.
17. Accordingly, the proposed development would have a positive effect on the
    character and appearance of the site and surrounding area. Consequently, the
    proposal would accord with the requirements of Policies BE2 and C1(i) of the Vale
    of Aylesbury Local Plan (VALP). These policies, amongst other matters, seek
    development proposals to respect and complement the site and its surroundings
    and the reuse of existing buildings that are suitable, in terms of its size, design and
    construction for the intended re-use without the need for complete or substantial
    reconstruction and development that is in keeping with the rural surroundings and
    where extensions are proposed, they are modest in scale, ancillary in nature,
    subordinate to the main building, designed with sensitivity and will enhance the
    character and appearance of its immediate surroundings.
Heritage assets
18. Policy BE1 of the VALP Policy requires all development to seek to conserve
    heritage assets in a manner appropriate to their significance, including their
    setting, and seek enhancement wherever possible and shall contribute to heritage

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009022


      values and local distinctiveness. Proposals which affect the significance of a non-
      designated heritage asset should be weigh the direct and indirect impacts upon
      the asset and its setting.
19. HE6(1) of the Framework identifies that substantial weight be given to a heritage
    asset’s conservation and Policy HE6(3) identifies that any harm to a designated
    heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight.
    Furthermore, Policy HE6(4) of the Framework requires development that would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and
    its significance should be weighed against public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. The Framework Policy HE7(2) requires that where a development
    proposal would harm the significance of a NDHA, this should be weighed against
    the benefits of the proposal.
      Manor Farmhouse
20. Manor Farmhouse is Grade II listed and is located adjacent to the appeal site
    fronting Stratford Road. The building is circa 1772 and is constructed from stone
    and rubble stone with timber lintels to openings, moulded brick eaves, an old tile
    roof and has four chimneys. The farmhouse is two storeys in height with an attic.
    The significance of the farmhouse relates primarily to its age, vernacular
    construction and design, alongside its rural setting.
21. Whilst the barns and land which are the subject of this appeal, once formed part of
    the farm holding in conjunction with the farmhouse, these have since been
    severed and are no longer used for farming purposes. The farmhouse now has a
    defined domestic rear garden with boundary treatment and accompanying
    paraphernalia. A large new dwelling has also been constructed to the south of the
    farmhouse. Consequently, the setting of the farmhouse has changed over time.
22. The proposal would retain and convert the adjacent barns to residential use and as
    outlined above, their rural character and composition would be maintained. The
    farmhouse still sits in its rural setting even if that no longer includes its former
    purpose of farming. The appeal barns would continue to contribute to the setting of
    Manor Farmhouse. Their sensitive conversion to residential alongside the new
    build elements, one of which is larger than the existing modern barn, would not
    harm the setting of the listed building. Whilst there is significant intervisibility
    between the appeal proposal and the farmhouse, the proposed changes to the site
    would not materially affect the rural and now domestic setting of the listed building.
23. The proposed development would therefore preserve the setting of Manor
    Farmhouse, and its significance would not be harmed, causing no effect.
      Non-designated heritage assets
24. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) defines a non-designated heritage asset
    (NDHA) as “buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes identified by
    plan-making bodies as having a degree of heritage significance meriting
    consideration in planning decisions, but which do not meet the criteria for
    designated heritage assets.”
25. Barns 1 and 2 form part of a historic farmstead and due to their historic use and
    group value with Manor Farm are NDHA’s. As part of a farmstead group, they
    have some historic interest due to their location, footprint, and built form. Whilst


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009022


      Barns 3 and 4 have no historic value they provide a transition between the NDHA’s
      and the industrial buildings within Manor Fam Business Park. However, the
      proposed new build dwellings would equally provide the same transition.
      Consequently, the demolition of Barns 3 and 4, would not affect the NDHA’s.
26. The proposed extension to Barn 2 would provide a small cross form of
    development that would breach the existing linear form of development and would
    be taller and wider than the existing NDHA barns. However, the extension would
    be located at the end of Barn 2. This would continue the linear shape adding to the
    length of Barn 2. A smaller link element would be lower in height than the existing
    barn and would clearly define the new build element from the existing barn. As a
    result, the location of the extension would not diminish the legibility of Barn 2 as a
    former agricultural building, nor would it harm the ability to understand the
    building’s original function and evolution. Nevertheless, the extension to Barn 2
    would remain agrarian in design and would maintain the courtyard pattern of
    development of the former farmyard.
27. The Council and Appellant have drawn my attention to a previously agreed
    extension to Barn 2. The proposed plan indicates via a dotted line, the location and
    floor area of the extension, which would be perpendicular to the existing linear
    barn and would protrude into the courtyard area. The Council consider that this is
    more acceptable due to the simple design and linear form of the extension.
    However, it does not naturally follow that the proposed scheme would be harmful
    simply by being different to that previously approved. The proposed extension to
    Barn 2 would continue to maintain the character and appearance of the courtyard
    as a former working farmyard. On this basis, I find that the proposed extension to
    Barn 2 would not harm the significance of the NDHA’s.
28. The new barn proposed as Barn 3 would be taller than the existing barn to be
    demolished and would have large areas of glazing and PV panels to the roof. The
    barn therefore appears more domestic in appearance than a conversion of the
    existing barn may appear. The Council and Appellant have drawn my attention to a
    prior approval consent for the conversion of the existing barn to three dwellings.
    The Council’s evidence details that the conversion limited the extent of glazing and
    maintained the existing agricultural character of the barn. Nonetheless, the prior
    approval illustrated large areas of glazing in the form of doors to two of the barn’s
    elevations.
29. As outlined above, the increase in height proposed would ensure that the
    agricultural building to the rear of Barn 3, which sits outside of the appeal site,
    would not be visible from within the courtyard. The large amount of glazing in the
    form of several domestic sized windows would clearly indicate a modern purpose-
    built dwelling. However, the proposed barn would be clad in a variety of materials,
    which would be the same approach taken to the existing barn. Furthermore, the
    proposed barn would be honest in design and would not try to disguise its form or
    function and would use features associated with rural buildings. Therefore, whilst
    different to the heritage assets in materiality, it would not be incongruous in design
    to the other barns or the historic courtyard.
30. The barn would be sited forward of the existing barn’s position. Nonetheless, it
    would have space around it and sit comfortably within its setting and would not
    therefore be cramped. The proposed pattern of buildings would be similar to that
    visible on site currently and the historic courtyard would remain clearly legible. As

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009022


      a result, the proposed development of Barns 3 and 4 would not detract from the
      traditional farmstead.
31. Accordingly, the proposed development would not harm the setting or significance
    of Barns 1 and 2 as NDHA’s.
      Summary of effect on heritage assets
32. Overall, the proposed development would preserve the setting of Manor
    Farmhouse, and its significance would not be harmed, causing no effect. The
    proposal would also preserve and enhance the buildings and setting of Barns 1
    and 2 as NDHA’s, and their significance would not be harmed, also causing no
    effect.
33. Accordingly, the proposed development would preserve or enhance the
    significance of the adjacent Grade II listed building and Barns 1 and 2 within as
    NDHA’s. Consequently, the proposal would accord with Policy BE1 of the VALP.
    This policy requires, amongst other matters, conservation of heritage assets
    appropriate to their significance.
Other Matters
34. Planning permission has previously been granted for the conversion of Barn 1 and
    the conversion and extension of Barn 2 to form two dwellings and the demolition of
    existing agricultural buildings (18/04586/APP). Prior approval was also granted for
    the conversion of Barn 3 into three dwellings (24/03020/COUAR). Both
    permissions remain extant.
35. The Council suggest that the previous approved schemes were “better” in that they
    were considered to respect the existing traditional farmstead arrangement and
    would provide five dwellings on site rather than the current four as proposed.
    However, whilst the previous schemes were considered to comply with the
    development plan, this has no material bearing on the merits of this proposal.
36. I note that several objections were received to the planning application in relation
    to flooding and surface water drainage. These factors are not in dispute between
    the main parties and were addressed in the Officer’s Report, with the Council
    concluding that there would be no material harm in these regards and it would not
    have formed part of its reasons for refusing the proposal. I have also considered
    these matters, and am satisfied that, no substantiated evidence has been
    submitted that would lead me to a different view.
37. Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is required under a statutory framework introduced by
    Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as inserted by Schedule
    14 of the Environment Act 2021). Under the statutory framework for BNG, subject
    to some exceptions, every grant of planning permission is deemed to have been
    granted subject to the condition that the biodiversity gain objective is met.
38. The BNG matrix demonstrates a net gain of 0.12 habitat units on site, equivalent to
    a 12% net gain, thereby achieving the required 10% net gain on site. The
    Appellant would need to discharge the Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP) condition,
    through which the 10% net gain would be secured. The final landscaping design,
    along with the on-site habitat units, could be set out in the BGP together with a
    habitat management and monitoring plan.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009022


39. Based on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the development could
    achieve the required 10% BNG and that the BGP condition, required by paragraph
    13 of Schedule 7A of the TCPA 1990, is capable of being successfully discharged.
Conditions
40. The Framework states that conditions should be kept to a minimum and only
    imposed where they are necessary, relevant to planning and to the development to
    be permitted, enforceable, precise, and reasonable in all other respects. I have
    considered the conditions put forward by the Council against the Framework and
    where necessary, I have amended the wording in the interests of clarity and
    enforceability.
41. To ensure certainty and clarity, I have imposed the standard conditions relating to
    the commencement of development [1] and approved plans [2].
42. Due to its rural location and the need to secure BNG, it is necessary to impose a
    condition requiring the submission of a Habitat Management Monitoring Plan to
    protect and enhance biodiversity [3]. I have also imposed a condition requiring
    details of the materials to be used to ensure that the materials used are
    appropriate for the site and surrounding area [4].
43. To ensure that the proposed development will achieve efficiency in the use of
    natural resources, I have imposed a condition requiring details of measures to be
    included within the proposed development in accordance with Policy C3 of the
    VALP [5]. I have also imposed conditions requiring that the new dwellings in Barns
    3 and 4 meet the requirements of Part M4(2) of Building Regulations to comply
    with Policy H6C of the VALP [6] and that limits water consumption in accordance
    with Policy I5 of the VALP [7].
44. To ensure that protected species and ecology on and adjacent to the site are
    protected in accordance with Policy NE1 of the VALP, it is necessary to ensure
    that the development is undertaken in accordance with the submitted Preliminary
    Ecological Appraisal and Bat Survey [8]. It is also necessary to ensure that the
    development is undertaken in accordance with the submitted Energy Statement to
    achieve greater efficiency in the use of natural resources in accordance with Policy
    C3 of the VALP [9].
45. A condition for the provision of the proposed parking and turning areas prior to
    occupation is necessary to ensure that the development does not prejudice
    highway safety [10]. In the interests of ensuring a high-quality development that
    safeguards the character and appearance of the area, I have imposed suggested
    conditions requiring details of proposed soft landscaping [11], boundary
    treatments, and hard landscaping [12]. A condition requiring the provision of the
    bin store in the position shown on the proposed site plan is also considered
    necessary to ensure that its position does not harm the adjacent heritage assets
    [13]. I have also imposed a replacement planting condition to ensure that any of
    the landscaping scheme that fails is replaced to ensure that the biodiversity and
    appearance of the site is maintained [14].
46. Given the proposal’s design and that any changes, including further means of
    enclosure and further extensions under permitted development, could harm the
    designated and non-designated heritage assets identified and could reduce the
    quality of the development, it is necessary to remove permitted development rights

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009022


      with respect to Classes A to E (inclusive) of Part 1, Schedule 2 [15] and Class A of
      Part 2, Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
      Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) [16].
47. The Council also requested conditions relating to electric vehicle charging points
    and cycle storage. I have not attached these conditions. The provision of electric
    vehicle charging points for new dwellings is required under Building Regulations
    and sufficient space for cycle storage is provided within the private garden space
    to each dwelling to accommodate such a requirement.
Conclusion
48. The Framework, at Policy H07, requires substantial weight to be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. This is especially pertinent in a district
    where the Council is not meeting its required 5-year supply of housing land at 3.73
    years.
49. The proposal would result in the provision of four dwellings to which I afford
    substantial weight and would include the re-use of two barns identified as NDHA’s.
    I have found that the proposed development would have a positive effect on the
    character and appearance of the site and surrounding area and would not cause
    harm to the significance of Manor Farmhouse or the adjacent NDHA’s.
50. Consequently, the proposal would comply with the requirements of the VALP and
    the Framework as a material consideration. For the reasons given above, the
    appeal is allowed and planning permission has been granted subject to the
    conditions listed in the attached schedule.



P Brennan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6009022


Schedule of conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 2502_P_001 - Location Plan and Panoramic
              Photo; 2502_P_1050 Revision D - Existing Site / Roof Plan and Proposed
              Site / Roof Plan; 2502_P_2000 Revision F - Plans as Proposed;
              2502_P_2010 Revision E - Elevations as Proposed: Sheet 1 and
              2502_P_2020 Revision F – Elevations as Proposed: Sheet 2.
     3)       No development shall take place including demolition, ground works,
              vegetation clearance until a Habitat Management Monitoring Plan (HMMP)
              has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
              The content of the HMMP shall include the following:
              a) Description and evaluation of features to be managed.
              b) Ecological trends and constraints on site that might influence
                 management.
              c) Aims and objectives of management which will (without limitation) include
                 the provision of biodiversity net gain within the Site as shown within the
                 Biodiversity Net Gain Technical Note (AAe Environmental Consultants,
                 September 2025).
              d) Appropriate management options for achieving aims and objectives.
              e) Prescriptions for management actions.
              f) Preparation of a work schedule (including an annual work plan capable of
                 being rolled forward over a thirty-year period).
              g) Details of the body or organization responsible for implementation of the
                 plan.
              h) Ongoing monitoring and remedial measures.
              i) Details of species-specific enhancements proposed within the
                 development including locations and models.
              The HMMP shall also include details of the legal and funding mechanism(s)
              by which the long-term implementation of the plan will be secured by the
              developer with the management body(ies) responsible for its delivery. The
              plan shall be for no less than 30 years. The plan shall also set out (where the
              results from monitoring show that conservation aims and objectives of the
              HMMP are not being met) how contingencies and/or remedial action will be
              identified, agreed, and implemented so that the development still delivers the
              fully functioning biodiversity objectives of the originally approved scheme.
              The approved plan will be implemented in accordance with the approved
              details.
     4)       No development shall take place until a detailed schedule of materials to be
              used on the external elevations of each of the dwellings hereby permitted,
              including details of source and supplier, shall be submitted to and approved
              in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall thereafter be
              completed and retained for the life of the development in accordance with the
              approved details.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6009022


     5)       No development above slab level of the dwelling hereby approved, details of
              how the scheme will achieve efficiency in the use of natural resources,
              including measures to minimise energy use, improve water efficiency and
              promote waste minimisation and recycling shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall
              thereafter be carried out and thereafter maintained in accordance with the
              approved details.
     6)       The residential dwellings forming Units 3 and 4 hereby approved, as shown
              on drawing number 2502_P_1050, shall be constructed and fitted out to
              comply with the Building Regulations 2010 (as amended) optional
              requirement M4(2) 'accessible and adaptable' as a minimum prior to first
              occupation. Such provision shall be maintained for the lifetime of the
              development.
     7)       The dwellings hereby permitted shall be built and fitted out so as not to
              exceed the optional water consumption standard of 110 litres per person per
              day, as set out in Approved Document G of the Building Regulations 2010
              (as amended). Such measures shall be maintained for the lifetime of the
              development.
     8)       The development hereby permitted, including site clearance, demolition and
              during the construction phase, shall be implemented in accordance with the
              recommendations outlined in Section 4.0 of the Preliminary Ecological
              Appraisal & Phase 2 Bat Survey (AAE Environmental Consultants,
              September 2025). All mitigation measures shall have been provided prior to
              first occupation of the development hereby permitted and shall thereafter be
              retained for the lifetime of the development.
     9)       The development should be carried out in accordance with the measures set
              out in the Energy Statement contained within the submitted
              2502_P_010_Architect’s Design, Access, and Energy Statement Rev
              A_29.09.2025. All measures shall be implemented prior to first occupation of
              the dwellings hereby permitted and maintained thereafter for the life of the
              development.
     10)      The scheme for parking and manoeuvring indicated on the approved plans
              shall be laid out prior to the first occupation of the dwelling to which it relates
              and that area shall thereafter be retained as such in perpetuity and shall not
              be used for any other purpose.
     11)      Prior to the first occupation of the dwellings hereby approved, full details of
              soft landscaping shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. These details shall include any new trees or hedgerows,
              as well as those to be retained, showing their species, spread and maturity,
              planting plans; written specification (including cultivation and other operations
              associated with plan and grass establishment); schedules of plants; noting
              species, plant sizes and proposed numbers/densities. The approved soft
              landscaping shall thereafter be carried out within the first planting season
              following the first occupation of the development or the completion of the
              development whichever is the sooner.
     12)      Prior to the first occupation of the dwellings hereby permitted, full details of all
              hard landscaping and boundary treatments shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved details shall


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    10
Appeal Decision 6009022


              thereafter be installed prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby
              permitted and shall be retained as such thereafter.
     13)      Prior to the first occupation of the dwellings hereby permitted, the proposed
              bin store area indicated on approved drawing number 2502_P_2000
              Revision F shall be laid out and made available for the storage of bins in
              association with the new dwellings. The bin storage area shall thereafter be
              retained as such in perpetuity and shall not be used for another purpose.
     14)      Any tree or shrub which forms part of the approved landscaping which within
              a period of five years from planting fails to become established, becomes
              seriously damaged or diseased, dies or for any reason is removed shall be
              replaced in the next planting season by a tree or shrub of a species, size and
              maturity similar to the one it replaces.
     15)      Notwithstanding the provisions of Classes A – E inclusive of Part 1 of
              Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
              Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking or re-enacting or
              amending that order) no enlargement, alteration or improvement of the
              dwellinghouses hereby approved shall be undertaken, nor shall any
              outbuildings be erected anywhere within the curtilage of the dwellinghouses
              hereby approved, at any time without the prior planning permission of the
              local planning authority.
     16)      Notwithstanding the provisions of Class A of Part 2, Schedule 2 of the Town
              and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order
              2015 (or any order revoking or re-enacting or amending that order) no gate,
              fence, wall or other means of enclosure (other than any approved as part of a
              planning condition) shall be erected, constructed or placed anywhere within
              the application site or curtilage of the dwellinghouses hereby approved,
              without the prior planning permission of the local planning authority.


     End of conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
