Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 July 2026 by T Morris BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009737
12 Hyde Park Terrace, Hyde Park, Leeds LS6 1BJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Scott Harris against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/05170/FU.
•   The development proposed is change of use from 9-bedroom House in Multiple Occupation (sui
    generis) to six self-contained flats (C3 use), including roof lights to front and rear, existing arch to be
    in filled, new exit door and new door to form storage area to lower ground floor to rear and existing
    garden level to be amended to create light well for new basement window to front.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The description of the development within the banner heading above is taken from
   the Council’s decision notice as it more accurately describes the proposal than that
   provided on the original application form.
4. On the 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning
   Policy Framework (the Framework). Having reviewed this, I find that the changes
   do not affect the substance of the main issues of this appeal. Therefore, I have
   proceeded with the appeal without seeking comments on the revised Framework
   from the main parties as I am satisfied that no one would be prejudiced by this.
5. The appellant has submitted overnight parking observation photographs with the
   appeal. This is in response to the Council’s concerns in relation to highway safety.
   In considering whether to accept this, I have had regard of the principles set out in
   the judgement of Holborn Studios Limited v The Council of the London Borough of
   Hackney (2017) EWHC 2823 (Admin). The additional evidence does not change
   the development which was before the Council when it made its decision. The
   Council has had the opportunity to comment on the evidence and so accepting it
   would not cause procedural unfairness to anyone involved in the appeal process
   from a re-consultation point of view. Accordingly, I have accepted the additional
   evidence as part of the appeal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009737


Main Issues
6. The main issues are 1) whether or not the proposed development would provide
   acceptable living conditions for the future occupiers, and 2) the effect of the
   proposed development on highway safety, with particular regard to the provision of
   car parking and cycle storage.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Living Conditions
7. The Council’s concerns with regards to the living conditions of the future occupiers
   of the proposed development relates to the gross internal floor area including the
   floor to ceiling heights, as well as the outlook from flat 6; noise and disturbance
   issues arising from the juxtaposition of the bedrooms and the living rooms across
   the development as a whole; and the privacy of the occupiers of flat 1 given its
   relationship with the shared garden.
8. With regards to the floor area of flat 6, Policy H9 of the Leeds Core Strategy (2019)
   (CS) requires a minimum floor to ceiling height for all new dwellings of 2.3 metres
   for at least 75% of the gross internal area. The gross internal area of flat 6 is
   annotated on the plans as 42.1 square metres. However, the plans show that some
   sections of the flat would have a low headroom. This includes parts of the
   living/dining room, the kitchen and the bedroom. These are all habitable living
   spaces which the occupiers of the dwelling would be reliant on to serve their day-
   to-day needs.
9. The appellant has completed a form which suggests that 77.3% of the floor area of
   flat 6 achieves the required floor to ceiling height of 2.3 metres. However, this is not
   reflected on the floorplans for the flat, which does not clearly identify whether or not
   the 42.1 square metre figure includes the low headroom areas, or the floor to
   ceiling height of the low headroom areas themselves. Consequently, and in the
   absence of any detailed evidence to the contrary, I find that the gross internal floor
   area including the floor to ceiling heights of flat 6 would fail to meet the
   requirements of Policy H9 of the CS.
10. The failure to meet the floor area requirements as set out in policy H9 would lead to
    a restricted and unsatisfactory living environment for the future occupiers of flat 6,
    including in the important habitable living spaces where occupiers of the dwelling
    would be most likely to spend time for activities such as relaxing and socialising. It
    would not be appropriate to provide additional information on this matter via
    condition, since it has not been demonstrated that the requirements of policy H9
    are achievable based on the current plans.
11. For flat conversions, policy H6 of the CS requires that dwellings provide a
    satisfactory outlook, amongst other things. However, given its location at the attic
    floor, the living/dining room, the kitchen and the bedroom of flat 6 would only be
    served by skylights in the roofslope of the building. Consequently, the outlook that
    occupiers would have from these rooms would be limited to an outlook of the sky
    only. Similarly to the aforementioned floor area issue, these are important living
    spaces where occupiers of the dwelling would most likely spend time.
12. Although the appellant states that rooflight-served accommodation is common in
    converted flats and is a typical approach in conservation areas in order to avoid the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009737


     need for extensions, no examples of developments of this nature have been
     provided. Nor does the absence of a request for a daylight or sunlight assessment
     indicate that the outlook would be acceptable given that neither such survey would
     relate to outlook. Whilst I am aware that rooflights can be used in some habitable
     rooms within a dwelling, in this instance the approach would be to all rooms within
     the property. I have also drawn my own conclusions on the proposed arrangement
     and find that the limited outlook for all of the habitable rooms in the flat would
     contribute to a poor-quality living environment. Together with the shortcomings in
     terms of the floor area and floor to ceiling heights, it would combine to provide
     unsatisfactory internal living conditions for the future occupiers of flat 6.
13. Policy H6 of the CS also requires that dwellings provide satisfactory internal living
    accommodation in terms of the juxtaposition of living rooms and bedrooms in flat
    conversions. The floorplans show that living rooms would be located above
    bedrooms and vice versa in the proposed development.
14. The way in which living rooms and bedrooms are normally used is different. Living
    rooms are more often used as communal spaces for social activities, whereas
    bedrooms are more commonly used for privacy and sleeping. Therefore, living
    rooms are more likely to be used for activities which would generate noise such as
    socialising, watching a television and listening to music. Consequently, such
    activities taking place in the living rooms located above the typically quieter
    bedrooms in the building would result in noise and disturbance to the occupiers of
    the bedrooms below.
15. There are limited details before me of the various methods of acoustic separation
    or acoustic testing which could be provided via the building regulations process to
    confirm that the noise and disturbance issues resulting from the juxtaposition of the
    living rooms and bedrooms could be overcome through technical measures.
    Furthermore, and in relation to the fallback position, the existing HMO is different to
    the appeal scheme, insofar as the existing floorplans indicate that the bedrooms
    are predominantly above the shared living spaces, resulting in a reduced potential
    for noise and disturbance impacts to the bedrooms in particular in the existing
    HMO, regardless of its different pattern of movement and level of occupation.
    Consequently, the proposal would also provide an unsatisfactory living environment
    in terms of the noise and disturbance issues arising from the juxtaposition between
    the living rooms and bedrooms across the building as a whole.
16. The Council are also concerned that the garden area which would be shared by all
    of the flats in the proposed development would be adjacent to flat 1 on the lower
    ground floor, resulting in potential privacy issues. I note that policies P10, H6 and
    H9 of the CS do not specifically dictate how shared gardens at flat conversions
    should be set out. Neither does policy GP5 of the Leeds Unitary Development Plan
    (Review 2006) (UDP).
17. Although the Council are concerned that this arrangement would result in people
    congregating near to the bedroom and kitchen window at flat 1 at the lower ground
    floor, the location plan demonstrates that the rear garden area would be large. I
    therefore find it unlikely that occupiers of the flats would choose to congregate
    immediately adjacent to the windows at flat 1, when there is a large garden with
    plenty of space available further away from the building. Occupiers of the flats are
    more likely to pass by the windows for fleeting moments on a limited basis, rather
    than standing by the windows for an extended period of time. Accordingly, the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009737


     proposal would not result in an unacceptable living environment for the occupiers of
     flat 1 in terms of privacy.
18. Nevertheless, with all of the above factors in mind, the proposal would fail to
    provide acceptable living conditions for the future occupiers of the development as
    a whole. This would be contrary to policies P10, H6 and H9 of the CS and policy
    GP5 of the UDP, which amongst other matters, require that developments provide
    satisfactory internal living accommodation for future occupiers. The proposal would
    also be contrary to the Framework, which seeks developments that provide
    acceptable living standards for residents.
Highway Safety
19. The appeal site is located on Hyde Park Terrace which is a narrow road
    predominantly formed of terraced dwellings with front gardens rather than
    driveways. Accordingly, there is very little off-street parking availability at properties
    on this street and residents are mostly reliant on on-street parking. I observed on
    my site visit that this is similar to most of the other streets in the locality. In that
    regard, although I appreciate it was just a snapshot in time, I found that there were
    many cars parked on the road with limited on-street parking availability on Hyde
    Park Terrace and the surrounding streets when I visited the site, including cars
    which were blocking the few driveways in the area.
20. Policy H6 of the CS requires that sufficient easily accessible and appropriately
    located off and on-street car and cycle parking is incorporated for flat conversions.
    The Council suggest that the proposed development of six flats requires six off-
    street car parking spaces at the site, in accordance with its Transport
    Supplementary Planning Document (2023) (SPD). However, no off-street parking
    spaces would be provided.
21. In response to the lack of off-street parking spaces together with the lack of
    evidence to confirm that there is sufficient on-street parking capacity to meet the
    demands of the proposal, the appellant has submitted some overnight parking
    observation photographs. These were taken on the 11/12/2025 and the
    27/01/2026, on Hyde Park Terrace and Hyde Park Road.
22. I accept that the appellant’s photographs indicate that there was some, albeit
    limited on-street parking availability on Hyde Park Terrace and Hyde Park Road at
    the time that the photographs were taken. Even so, for the most part, the number of
    available spaces is not quantified. This is aside from the ‘view looking East on Hyde
    Park Terrace’ from the 27/01/2026, but this photograph only refers to three
    available spaces. The photographs indicate that most of the available spaces were
    towards the top of Hyde Park Terrace near to the junction with Hyde Park Road,
    but there are parking restrictions in place here. They also indicate that further
    spaces were available on Hyde Park Road, but this is a separate road further away
    from the appeal site which occupiers are less likely to use.
23. Overall, the appellant’s photographs generally reinforce that there is a high demand
    for on-street parking spaces on Hyde Park Terrace, consistent with my own
    observations from my site visit. The proposed six flats would increase the demand
    for on-street parking spaces in the area, where it has not been sufficiently
    demonstrated that the increased demand could be accommodated. Consequently,
    the proposal would lead to an increased competition for on-street parking spaces
    amongst residents and visitors, as well as indiscriminate parking on the footways

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009737


     and at road junctions in the area. This would disrupt traffic flows and block visibility
     at junctions, resulting in pinch points and potential vehicle conflict along the narrow
     road, all of which would be to the detriment of highway safety in the area.
24. Although the appellant refers to the provision of cycle storage, aside from these
    words being annotated on the plan, there are no details of this before me, including
    what kind of structure would be used to store the cycles and how many could be
    stored. Whilst I accept that in other circumstances it might be acceptable to secure
    such details via condition, given the site’s location in the Headingley Hill, Hyde Park
    and Woodhouse Conservation Area (CA), I find that this information would be
    required now given that such works would need to be considered in the context of
    the character and appearance of the CA. The absence of cycle storage
    exacerbates the highway safety harm, since in the absence of appropriate cycle
    storage, it has not been demonstrated that the use of a cycle would be a viable
    alternative to the use of a car for occupiers of the flats.
25. In reaching these conclusions, I recognise that the site is well located in terms of its
    access to public transport connections and local services, including the universities.
    Paragraph 447 of the SPD also refers to the strategic aim of reducing the
    concentrations of HMOs in Hyde Park and that the expected amount of car parking
    may be relaxed subject to optimising opportunity for off-street parking in
    redevelopment schemes. However, the SPD also states that this is subject to
    avoiding the creation of highway safety problems in all cases. For the above
    reasons, the proposal would not avoid the creation of highway safety problems.
    Therefore, the sustainable location of the site together with the desire to reduce the
    number of HMOs in the area does not justify the absence of parking, at least from
    the evidence before me.
26. On this main issue, the appellant also refers to the fallback position of the existing
    HMO. However, Table 3-17: Car Parking Guidelines of the SPD sets out that the
    parking requirement for student HMOs is a ratio of 1:8, which equates to a parking
    demand of only one space for the existing HMO at the site. Given that the parking
    demand of the fallback position is significantly less than the proposed development,
    this does not justify the proposal, and I give this limited weight on this main issue.
27. There is also little evidence of the ways in which the proposal is designed for
    people without cars, especially given the very limited information provided
    regarding cycle storage. Furthermore, there are no details before me of any method
    to secure that the flats would be occupied by people without cars or that the
    characteristics of the local housing market confirm that the occupiers of the
    dwellings would not have cars. I therefore give these matters limited weight and
    they do not alter my findings on this main issue.
28. I therefore conclude that the proposal would be harmful to highway safety, with
    particular regard to the provision of car parking and cycle storage. This would be
    contrary to policies T2 and H6 of the CS and policy GP5 of the UDP, which
    amongst other matters, require that developments should avoid highway
    congestion and provide sufficiently easily accessible and appropriately located car
    parking provision in accordance with current guidelines. It would also be contrary to
    the guidance in the SPD in terms of its parking guidelines, as well as the
    Framework, which advises that developments should be refused if they would have
    an unacceptable impact on highway safety.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009737


Other Matters
29. I acknowledge that the proposal would contribute to the housing supply in Leeds,
    that it would reduce the concentration of HMOs in the area and that it would
    potentially reduce the level of occupancy of the building. However, the proposal
    only replaces an existing housing use in the form of a HMO, rather than being an
    entirely new form of housing. It would also constitute only a minor reduction in the
    number of HMOs in the area, and it would likely only slightly reduce the occupancy
    of the building. Consequently, I can only give these matters limited weight in
    support of the appeal, and they do not overcome the totality of the harm I have
    identified in the main issues.
30. I can also only give limited weight to the proposal reusing and improving an existing
    residential building, given that there is nothing before me to suggest that the
    residential use of the building would cease if the appeal were dismissed.
31. The absence of harm to the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring
    properties, as well as the lack of objections from neighbours and some of the
    technical consultees are neutral factors which do not weigh in favour of the appeal.
32. The appellants concern regarding the lack of an opportunity to amend the scheme
    in order to address the Council’s concerns, whilst frustrating, is not a reason to
    allow the appeal.
33. The appeal site is located in the CA, albeit the effect of the proposed development
    on the CA is not in dispute. Despite this, I have a statutory duty under Section 72(1)
    of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (The Act) to
    pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of conservation areas. Given that the proposal primarily relates to a
    change of use with limited visual changes to the site and the building, I agree with
    the main parties that it would preserve the character and appearance of the CA.
    Accordingly, there would be no harm to the significance of the heritage asset and
    no conflict with the statutory presumptions of the Act.
34. The appeal site is also located near to 27 and 29 Victoria Road which are Grade II
    listed buildings. Although the effect of the proposal on the setting of the listed
    buildings is also not in dispute, I have a statutory duty under Section 66(1) of the
    Act to have special regard to the desirability of preserving a listed building or its
    setting. Having considered the significance of the listed buildings, their distance to
    the appeal site and the nature of the harm of the proposal, the setting of the listed
    buildings would be preserved. Accordingly, there would be no harm to the
    significance of the heritage assets and no conflict with the statutory presumptions
    of the Act.
Conclusion and Recommendation
35. The proposed development would be contrary to the development plan overall and
    there are no other considerations which would outweigh this conflict. Therefore, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

T Morris
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009737


Inspector’s Decision
36. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
