Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by C Harding BA (Hons) PGCert PGDip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6009866
Land outside Exchange Station, Midland Street, Barnsley S70 1SE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Thomas Johnston against the decision of Barnsley Metropolitan
    Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/0219.
•   The development proposed is installation of a communication kiosk with integrated defibrillator and
    advertisement display.

Appeal B Ref: 6009867
Land outside Exchange Station, Midland Street, Barnsley, S70 1SE
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant
    express consent.
•   The appeal is made by Thomas Johnston against the decision of Barnsley Metropolitan
    Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/0294.
•   The development proposed is installation of a communication kiosk with integrated defibrillator and
    advertisement display.

Decisions
1. Appeal A is dismissed.
2. Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3. The two appeals are for related proposals at the same site. I have considered each
   appeal on its individual merits, however, as they raise similar issues, I have
   combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
4. In relation to Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
   (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) (‘the Regulations’) stipulate that control
   may be exercised only in the interests of amenity and public safety. Therefore,
   whilst the development plan policies referred to on the decision notice are not
   determinative, I have taken them into account where relevant.
5. The government published a new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the
   Framework’) in August 2026. As this could affect the issue and matters in this case,
   the Council and appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision
   reflects the most recent version of the Framework and any responses received in
   relation to it.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6009866 and 6009867


Main Issues
6. The main issue in relation to Appeal A is the effect of the proposal upon the
   character and appearance of the area.
7. The main issue in relation to Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisement
   upon the amenity of the area.
Reasons
8. The appeal site relates to an area of public realm located close to the junction of
   Midland Street and Eldon Street, and to the front of Barnsley Interchange (‘the
   Interchange’) which is a busy public transport hub.
9. Several items of street furniture are currently located within the public realm
   including seating and a large bin, not all of which is shown on the provided plans.
   Although the footway at this location is wide, it is a busy area as it serves two sets
   of sliding double-doors which form a main entrance to the Interchange. The existing
   street furniture, located towards the kerb edge allows pedestrian flow across the
   front of the building and serves to funnel pedestrians towards a drop kerb road
   crossing point.
10. The existing street furniture results in a degree of visual clutter, however most
    elements are relatively lightweight and are purposefully located. They do not
    currently dominate the area in visual terms.
11. Both parties have made reference to an existing telephone kiosk and standalone
    cash machine located on a pavement close to the appeal site, however at the time
    of my visit these structures had since been removed. Therefore, neither their
    potential removal or cumulative impacts are factors to which I have afforded weight
    in reaching my decision.
12. The proposed kiosk would be located between an existing bench and the front
    entrance of the Interchange, with plans indicating that it would be located around
    45cm from the building itself. Rather than follow the alignment of the pavement, it
    would be situated such that its widest dimensions would be across the path.
    Although the provided plan indicates that around 3.7 metres of space would remain
    to the kerb edge, given that the plans do not show some of the existing street
    furniture, it is likely that this distance would be considerably reduced.
13. The proposed hub would be a structure of around 2.5 metres in height and over 1
    metre in width. Other than a glazed return on one side, it would be solid in
    construction and would feature a roof canopy. Given its scale and nature, it would
    appear as a significant structure within the streetscene.
14. Moreover, given the proposed location of the kiosk directly in front of the
    Interchange entrance and in close proximity to other street furniture, it would lead to
    a noticeable narrowing of the pavement and would lead to an excessively cluttered
    cluster of street furniture being evident at this location. The digital illuminated
    advertisement would only serve to draw the eye further to the structure and would
    contribute to its overall intrusive appearance, in the midst of what would potentially
    be a busy area, with pedestrians both entering and exiting the Interchange. These
    factors would further increase the harmful prominence of the proposed kiosk.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6009866 and 6009867


15. Though I have no reason to doubt that the proposed hub and advertisement would
    be appropriately maintained, this would not mitigate the harm that would result.
16. For these reasons, the development the subject of Appeal A would harm the
    character and appearance of the area, and the advertisements the subject of
    Appeal B would harm visual amenity.
17. The proposals would therefore conflict with Barnsley Local Plan Policies BTC3 and
    D1 which together, and among factors, seek to ensure that developments make a
    positive contribution to public spaces through their design, siting and use
    of materials.
Other Matters
18. The appellant has drawn my attention to a number of extracts from a variety of
    appeal decisions in relation to similar structures elsewhere in the country. However,
    I note that the cited examples were for proposals in London and are therefore
    unlikely to be wholly comparable to the circumstances of the appeals which are
    now before me, which in terms of character and appearance are
    locationally specific.
19. I have also been made aware of an appeal decision for a similar proposal
    elsewhere in Barnsley. Although limited details of the proposal itself are before me,
    it is evident that it related to a proposal on Queen Street and I saw that such a unit
    had been installed on Queen Street at the time of my visit. Whether or not that unit
    was associated with the cited appeal, it was clear to me that the context of that site,
    within a wide, largely pedestrianised shopping areas was materially different to that
    of this appeal, which relates to a specific area at the entrance to a busy transport
    interchange. Although I have had regard to this decision, it is not determinative in
    my decision.
20. The Council has identified that the proposals would be located within the setting of
    the Regent Street, Church St and Market Hill Conservation Area, as well as the
    Queen’s Hotel which is a Grade II listed building. No harm to these heritage assets
    is alleged, and I have no reason to disagree. As I am dismissing the appeal, no
    harm to these assets could arise from my decision in any event.
Planning Balance
21. I have found that the proposed development and advertisements would harm the
    character and appearance of the area, and the amenity of the area respectively. I
    have found that both elements would conflict with policies contained within the
    development plan. In the case of Appeal A, the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan as a whole.
22. Framework Policy S3 sets out a presumption in favour of sustainable development
    and, since the appeal sites are located within a settlement, indicates that
    Framework Policy S4 applies to both proposals.
23. Framework Policy S4 explains that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the Framework’s
    national decision-making policies. Framework Policy S4 also contains a non-
    exhaustive list of situations where the benefits of approving development are likely
    to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects. This includes a failure to comply

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6009866 and 6009867


       with one of the national decision-making policies which state that development
       proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
24. The proposed communication kiosk would provide additional telecommunications
    infrastructure. The Framework supports the expansion and upgrading of such
    infrastructure, and recognises that advanced, high quality and reliable
    communications are essential to meet changing technological, social, business
    and security requirements. Being mindful of Framework Policy CO1, I afford
    substantial weight to the benefits that the communication kiosk would bring in
    this regard.
25. It is stated that the appellant has partnered with a charity to deliver a tree for every
    phone kiosk installed. However, it has not been shown that the tree planting
    scheme is wholly reliant on new kiosks being installed. Although it is suggested that
    such tree planting could be secured by means of a planning condition, no wording
    has been put before me, and such a condition would be unlikely to be sufficiently
    precise or enforceable given it would require a third party to deliver a tree in an
    unspecified location. I therefore afford this commitment only very limited weight in
    favour of the kiosk proposal.
26. The provision of a defibrillator would be a public benefit of the proposal. The
    Council’s undisputed evidence indicates that there are 10 existing locations hosting
    defibrillators within the town centre, including close to the Interchange, which
    suggests a reasonable degree of existing provision. However, I am mindful that in
    medical emergencies that the speed with which a defibrillator could be sourced
    would be an important factor. Nevertheless, it has not been shown that this could
    not be provided in another, less harmful, location. As a result, I can afford this
    element of the proposal limited weight as a public benefit.
27. Also, while I accept that the information and communication advantages of the
    proposal would be potentially particularly beneficial at a public transport hub, it has
    not been shown that such benefits could not be provided at another, less
    harmful, location.
28. It is stated that the kiosk advertisement could be made available for public service
    messaging, however there is no guarantee that this would be the case, so this
    matter carries little weight in favour of the kiosk. As the content of a proposed
    advertisement does not fall within the narrow scope of consideration for such
    proposals, as set out in the Regulations, this is not a factor which weighs in favour
    of the Appeal B proposal.
29. I have found that the proposals would be harmful to the character and appearance
    of the area. Framework Policy CO1 (b) states that telecommunications
    infrastructure should be sited and designed to minimise the visual impact of the
    proposals, especially in situations where a new site or structure is proposed, so as
    far practical taking into account its operational requirements. It has not been
    shown that there are any operational requirements which would prevent the
    proposal being located in a less harmful location.
30. Furthermore, Framework Policy DP3 sets out that development proposals should
    respond to their context, so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings. This policy states that development proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with aspects of the policy. The harm that I


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6009866 and 6009867


       have found, in both cases, means that the proposal would not comply with this
       policy, and the harm I have found is not clearly justified.
31. Therefore, both the proposed communication kiosk in Appeal A and the proposed
    advertisement in Appeal B would fail to comply with one of the national decision-
    making policies which states that proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.
32. Taking account of the above, I find that the adverse effects of the proposals within
    both appeals would substantially outweigh their respective benefits. In such
    circumstances Framework Policy S3 and the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development set out within it, indicates that both proposals should be refused.
Conclusions
33. The proposal in Appeal A conflicts with the development plan as a whole. There
    are no material considerations in this case, including the Framework, which
    indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. I
    therefore conclude that Appeal A should be dismissed.
34. The advertisements the subject of Appeal B would harm visual amenity. Having
    regard to material considerations, including the Framework, I conclude that Appeal
    B should also be dismissed.

C Harding
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
