Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by A Knight BA PG Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009081
Ground Floor Flat, 2 Douglas Road, Herne Bay, Kent CT6 6AE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Arthur Knowles against the decision of Canterbury City Council.
•    The application Ref is CA/26/00307.
•    The development proposed is remove and change all wooden, single pane windows and install
     uPVC double glazed windows. windows include front window, bedroom window, dining room
     window, two windows in kitchen and one window in bathroom, also remove wooden backdoor and
     install a uPVC half double glazed door.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for replacement of
       ground-floor front and rear windows and rear door from timber to uPVC at Ground
       Floor Flat, 2 Douglas Road, Herne Bay, Kent CT6 6AE in accordance with the
       terms of the application Ref CA/26/00307, subject to the following condition:
              1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance
                 with the following approved plans: Location Plan (received 26 February
                 2026); Window and Door Details (received 26 February 2026); Window
                 Detail Brochure (Pages 1-3) (received 3 March 2026).
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development in the banner heading above is taken from the
       application form. In my decision I have used the description found on the Council
       decision notice as it is more concise, but omitted the term “Retrospective
       application for” as that is not a form of development.
3.     The application form confirms that the development has been completed, and I
       saw as much during my site visit.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. The main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
       any implications for the appeal.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance
       the character and appearance of the Herne Bay Conservation Area (the CA).
Reasons
6.     The appeal site is within the CA. The statutory duty set out in Section 72 of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009081


       special attention be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the
       character or appearance of a conservation area. The Framework states that when
       considering the impact of development on the significance of designated heritage
       assets, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
7.     The appeal concerns the ground floor of a residential building. It is part of a terrace
       of similar buildings at the northern end of Douglas Road, within the CA.
8.     The Herne Bay Conservation Area Appraisal (2008) (the CAA) gives an overview
       of the development of the town over time. Douglas Road is cited as an example of
       a shift in the early 20th Century from terraced housing, which had been
       predominant up to that point, to detached and semi-detached mansions and
       houses. This is said to have eroded the visual coherence of local housing.
9.     The CAA divides the CA into different Character Areas, the appeal site being in
       Area 13. This is largely laid out in a grid pattern that gives the area a formal,
       planned feel.
10. Based on the above I find that for the purposes of the appeal, the significance of
    the CA is in the example of uniformity provided by the terrace of which the appeal
    site forms a part.
11. The appeal scheme involves the replacement of six timber ground floor windows
    and one door with uPVC versions. In its delegated report the Council states that as
    the door is to the rear of the building it would not “be prominent within the street
    scene and as such would not be visible from the conservation area. This element
    of the proposal is not considered to detract from the character appearance of the
    locality”.
12. To my mind, if the above is true of the door, then it must also be true of the rear
    windows. Indeed, in its appeal statement the Council limits it’s objection to “the
    installed uPVC window to the front”. However, it cites the “proposed replacement
    windows” in the plural in its reason for refusal. As such, the Council’s position is
    somewhat unclear.
13. I saw that the rear of the property is in fact visible, including from within the CA, as
    the houses on Oakdale Road have a clear line of sight towards it. That said, I
    recognise that the front elevation of the building is its most prominent, and that the
    window it contains is the largest proposed in the appeal scheme.
14. The Council objection to the replacement front window is focussed on its not being
    a close copy of its timber predecessor “in terms of design, dimensions, and
    profile”. Specifically, the replacements are described as “chunkier”. The evidence I
    have regarding the timber window is largely limited to a photograph taken at some
    point before it was replaced.
15. The photograph does not show, nor even suggest, that the uPVC window has
    wider frame components than the timber window. Indeed, the fixed mullions and
    transoms of the uPVC window appear noticeably slimmer. Beyond that, the
    general arrangement appears broadly unchanged.
16. A generally consistent approach to window design can be discerned across the
    terrace. It is common for first floors to have sash windows, with the upper section
    made in smaller panels and the lower section in one panel. Ground floors tend to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009081


         be arranged in six larger panels, including casements. The appeal scheme
         maintains this pattern.
17. The terrace includes a mix of timber and uPVC windows, and the appellant has
    drawn my attention to four specific instances where the Council approved the use
    of uPVC1. Whilst I note the background to each of these decisions as provided by
    the Council, the pertinent fact is that uPVC windows are visible in the terrace. As
    such, they form part of a context in which the appeal scheme does not appear at
    odds with its surroundings.
18. I have little evidence regarding the previous timber windows and doors to the rear
    and side of the site. That said, I saw that uPVC windows and doors appeared
    common across the rear of the terrace, and noted that they were not directly
    visible from the public realm. The Council does not object to that aspect of the
    appeal scheme and, given the above, I find no reason to take a different view.
19. The uniformity of the terrace, which provides the significance of the CA for the
    purposes of the appeal, has been maintained by the appeal scheme which
    therefore preserves the character and appearance of the Herne Bay Conservation
    Area. With reference to Policy HE5 of the Framework, the scheme has had no
    effect on the significance of the heritage asset.
20. Given the above, the scheme satisfies the requirements of the Act, the objectives
    of the Framework, and does not conflict with the pertinent requirements of Policies
    DBE3, DBE6, HE1, or HE6 of the Canterbury District Local Plan (2017) which
    seek, among other things, to ensure that heritage assets will be preserved or
    enhanced.
Conditions
21. The condition set out above is based on that suggested by the Council, which I
    have considered against the tests of the Framework and advice provided by the
    Planning Practice Guidance. I have imposed the condition for the avoidance of
    doubt and in the interests of certainty.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above the appeal is allowed.

A Knight
INSPECTOR




1
    Applications Refs CA//11/00260; CA//12/01742; CA//15/00589; CA/20/02751



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
