 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009382
 Land between No.129 and 131, Colchester Road, Colchester, CO6 3JX
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr S Laver (WB Nightingale) against the decision of Colchester City Council.
 •    The application Ref is 260375.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of 1 x 4-bedroom dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of 1 x 4-
   bedroom dwelling on land between No.129 and 131, Colchester Road, Colchester,
   CO6 3JX in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 260375, subject to
   the conditions set out in the schedule at the end of this decision.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr S Laver against Colchester City Council,
   and this is the subject of a separate decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in this case is the effect of the proposed development in respect of
   overlooking of the private amenity spaces from the front first-floor windows, and
   general proximity, on the residential amenity of the occupiers of the adjacent
   dwelling at No.131.
Reasons
4. The site is located at land on the south side of Colchester Road in West Bergholt,
   outside but adjacent to the settlement boundary. The site is triangular in shape with
   the apex at the road frontage, mainly grassed with some vegetation. An existing
   access to the agricultural land at the rear would be used and improved, with this
   strip forming the north-west boundary. To the north-west there are 11/2 storey
   cottages, whilst to the south-east there is a detached house at No.131 Colchester
   Road. It is the privacy aspects of this dwelling that are the subject of the refusal of
   permission.
5. Policy DM15 requires all development to be designed to a high standard that
   protects and promotes both public and residential amenity, particularly with regard
   to privacy, overlooking, security, noise and disturbance, and daylight and sunlight.
   The adopted Supplementary Planning Document the Essex Design Guide (EDG)
   also provides guidance on the safeguarding of residential private amenity.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009382



6. The appeal dwelling is designed as a 11/2–2 storey building with a front gable
   elevation facing Colchester Road. The front elevation of the proposal is set behind
   the rear elevation of No.131, with the boundary between the proposal and No.131
   marked by a 2m fence. Number 131 is built very close to the boundary with the
   appeal site. The proposed front elevation has a gable to the main roof, with 2
   windows set within it, and another window, a dormer, set in the roof running at
   right-angles towards the neighbour. It is the proximity of these first-floor windows to
   the neighbour that is of concern.
7. Two of these windows serve bathrooms and could be obscure glazed and fixed
   shut, required by condition. The third first-floor window serves Bedroom 2: it is this
   furthest window from No.131 that is the main point of concern of the refusal reason.
   The relationship would be oblique, at an angle of approximately 45 degrees, and at
   a distance of some 16m. The privacy approach in the EDG, allows for reduced
   spacing when rear relationships are angled by more than 30 degrees. In this case,
   the relevant relationship exceeds the angle and distance threshold identified1.
8. I have also considered whether there would be a harmful effect on the outlook of
   the first-floor windows of the neighbouring house, but the relevant direct views
   would be across the open frontage of the proposed house. The front of the new
   dwelling would be viewed obliquely, but I do not regard this as causing harm to a
   degree that warrants refusal of permission.
9. Whilst the spatial relationship of the proposed house and the neighbour is unusual,
   the matters that determine acceptability relate to the actual interaction of the
   elements of the design of the proposal with the existing neighbouring property and
   the degree to which there might be harm to the residential amenity of the adjoining
   occupiers. In this case, the EDG guidance and my own assessment leads me to
   conclude that there would be no undue harmful effect of the proposal, in respect of
   the front first-floor windows on the residential amenity in relation to windows in the
   adjoining house and its outside amenity area.
10. For these reasons the appeal will be allowed.
Conditions
11. The statutory condition that provides a time limit on the start of development must
    be imposed. In addition, the council has suggested conditions in the event that the
    appeal is upheld, and the appellant has commented on these. I have considered
    the suggestions and the comments in the light of Planning Practice Guidance. I am
    imposing a condition requiring the development to be carried out in accordance
    with the approved plans as this provides certainty as to the development approved.
12. In addition, I am also including conditions relating to materials, obscure and fixed
    glazing, timing of the development, visibility splays, car parking, construction of
    access, surfacing of access, cycle parking, travel information, tree protection and
    tree planting, contamination, Biodiversity Net Gain, and wildlife mitigation and
    enhancement.
13. These (in the same order) are necessary to achieve a satisfactory appearance, to
    protect residential amenity, in the interests of highway safety, to encourage non-
1 See Essex Design Guide diagram noted ‘Back of houses at more than 30 degrees to one another. Separation to be

reduced to 15 metres from nearest corner’.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
 Appeal Decision 6009382



     motorised transport and reduce travel by car, to protect trees and provide additional
     tree planting, to protect against contamination, and to achieve net gain in
     biodiversity and wildlife enhancement.
14. Conditions 13 is a ‘pre-commencement’ condition which can only be imposed with
    the agreement of the appellant. This condition is required because it
    deals with protective fencing and ground protection for trees. This protection is
    necessary before the development commences because any work carrying out the
    scheme could potentially harm the tees and ground conditions. The appellant has
    agreed to the imposition of this condition.

Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision 6009382



                                           Schedule of Conditions

     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance
             with the details shown on the submitted Drawing Numbers: ‘Arboricultural
             Impact Assessment’ dated 4 June 2026 and referenced ‘TPSQU0309’;
             ‘Materials Plan’ referenced ‘005’, dated February 2026; ‘Location Plan’
             referenced ‘001’, dated June 2025; ‘Boundary Treatment Plan’ referenced
             ‘006’, dated February 2026; ‘Proposed Site Layout’ referenced ‘002’, dated
             February 2026; ‘Proposed Plot 1 Elevations’ referenced ‘021’, dated
             February 2026; ‘Refuse & Cycle Plan’ referenced ‘004’, dated February 2026;
             ‘Garden Area Plan’ referenced ‘007’, dated February 2026; ‘Massing Plan’
             referenced ‘003’, dated February 2026; and ‘Proposed Plot 1 – Floor Plans’
             referenced ‘020’, dated February 2026.
     3)      The external facing and roofing materials to be used shall be those specified
             on the submitted application form and drawings.
     4)      The 2 first-floor bathroom windows on the front elevation shall be obscure
             glazed and fixed shut below 1.7m above finished floor level and shall be
             retained in that form.
     5)      No demolition or construction work shall take place outside of the following
             times: Weekdays: 08:00-18:00; Saturdays: 08:00-13:00; Sundays and Bank
             Holidays: No working.

     6)      Prior to occupation of the development, the access at its centre line shall be
             provided with a clear to ground visibility splay with dimensions of 2.4 metres
             by 43 metres as measured from and along the nearside edge of the
             carriageway and retained free of any obstruction at all times.

     7)      Prior to occupation, parking in accordance with details previously agreed in
             writing with the local planning authority shall be provided. The vehicle parking
             area and associated turning area shall be retained in this form at all times.
             The vehicle parking shall not be used for any purpose other than the parking
             of vehicles that are related to the use of the development.

     8)      Prior to occupation of the development the vehicular access shall be
             constructed, as shown on approved planning drawing ‘Site Access Visibility
             Splays’.

     9)      No unbound material shall be used in the surface treatment of the vehicular
             access within 6 metres of the highway boundary.

     10)     Cycle parking shall be provided in accordance with the EPOA Parking
             Standards. The approved facility shall be secure, convenient, covered and
             provided prior to occupation and retained at all times.

     11)     Prior to occupation of the proposed development, the Developer shall be
             responsible for the provision and implementation of a Residential Travel
             Information Pack for the dwelling, for sustainable transport, approved by

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
 Appeal Decision 6009382



             Essex County Council, to include six one day travel vouchers for use with the
             relevant local public transport operator.

     12)     All works shall be carried out in accordance with the approved Arboricultural
             Impact Assessment (AIA) and Method Statements (Tree Planning Solutions
             Ltd, ref. TPSQU0309, dated 4 June 2025) unless otherwise agreed in writing
             by the Local Planning Authority.

     13)     Prior to the commencement of development, including any demolition,
             ground works or site clearance, tree protective fencing and ground protection
             shall be installed in the positions shown on the approved Tree Protection
             Plan (Appendix 5 of the AIA). The protective fencing and ground protection
             shall be retained in position and maintained in good condition for the duration
             of the construction works, and shall not be removed or repositioned without
             the prior written agreement of the local planning authority.

     14)     Prior to the commencement of the development other than demolition and
             site clearance, an updated Arboricultural Method Statement (AMS) shall be
             submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
             updated AMS shall include: (a) confirmation of the excavation depth and
             extent of Root Protection Area (RPA) incursion into H2, expressed as a
             percentage of total RPA area; (b) a services layout demonstrating that all
             below-ground services are routed outside the RPAs of retained trees, or
             where this is not achievable, a detailed method statement for trenchless
             installation within the RPA; (c) an arboricultural monitoring schedule linked to
             key construction activities including pre-commencement barrier installation,
             all excavation works within RPAs, service installation in proximity to retained
             trees and post-construction barrier removal; and (d) confirmation of the
             measured stem diameter of T4 and any consequential revision to the
             calculated RPA. Development shall be carried out in accordance with the
             approved details.

     15)     Prior to any development above slab level, a detailed replacement planting
             scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
             authority. The scheme shall include: (a) species, size at planting (minimum
             heavy standard), planting locations, pit specifications and staking/guying
             details; (b) an establishment, maintenance and aftercare programme for a
             minimum period of 5 years following planting, to include watering, weed
             control, mulching, replacement of failures and formative pruning. All planting
             shall be carried out in the first planting season following substantial
             completion of the development or in accordance with a programme agreed in
             writing by the Local Planning Authority. Any tree that within a period of 5
             years from the completion of planting dies, is removed, or becomes seriously
             damaged or diseased, shall be replaced in the next planting season with a
             specimen of the same species and size as that originally planted.

     16)     No works within the RPA of any retained tree, including excavation for the
             footway and parking bays within the RPA of H2, shall be undertaken other
             than under the direct supervision of the appointed arboriculturist. A record of



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       5
 Appeal Decision 6009382



             all supervisory visits, including photographic evidence, shall be submitted to
             the Local Planning Authority within 5 working days of each visit.

     17)     In the event that historic land contamination is found at any time when
             carrying out works in relation to the development, it must be reported in
             writing immediately to the Local Planning Authority and all development shall
             cease immediately. Development shall not re-commence until such times as
             an investigation and risk assessment has been submitted to and approved in
             writing by the Local Planning Authority, and where remediation is necessary,
             a remediation scheme has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
             Local Planning Authority. Development shall only re-commence thereafter
             following completion of measures identified in the approved remediation
             scheme, and the submission to and approval in writing of a verification report.
             This must be conducted in accordance with all relevant, current, best practice
             guidance, including the Essex Contaminated Land Consortium’s ‘Land
             Affected by Contamination: Technical Guidance for Applicants and
             Developers’.

     18)     The Biodiversity Gain Plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
             ‘Biodiversity Net Gain Assessment’ dated 5 June 2025, Issue 2.1 and
             prepared by Matthew Game.
             No works shall take place until a Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan
             (the HMMP) has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Local
             Planning Authority. The HMMP shall be prepared in accordance with the
             approved Biodiversity Gain Plan and shall include:
             (a) a non-technical summary;
             (b) the roles and responsibilities of the people or organisation(s) delivering
             the (HMMP);
             (c) the planned habitat creation and enhancement works to create or improve
             habitat to achieve the biodiversity net gain in accordance
             with the approved Biodiversity Gain Plan;
             (d) the management measures to maintain habitat in accordance with the
             approved Biodiversity Gain Plan for a period of 30 years from the completion
             of development; and
             (e) the monitoring methodology and frequency in respect of the created or
             enhanced habitat to be submitted to the local planning authority. Notice in
             writing shall be given to the Council when the:
             (f) (HMMP) has been implemented; and
             (g) habitat creation and enhancement works as set out in the (HMMP) have
             been completed.
             The HMMP (or equivalent plan) can be set out in phases, even if the
             development is not phased, so there may be different completion dates for
             different habitat types or phases. This condition is drafted to
             require notification when all the habitat creation and enhancement has been
             completed. Local authorities should consider whether notification on
             completion of each HMMP phase or habitat type is needed.
             Unless other phasing is agreed in the HMMP, prior to the end of the first
             planting season following commencement of the development; Unless other
             phasing is agreed in the HMMP, prior to the end of the first planting season
             following commencement of the development; a. the habitat creation and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       6
 Appeal Decision 6009382



             enhancement works set out in the approved (HMMP) have been completed;
             and b. a completion report, evidencing the completed habitat enhancements,
             has been submitted to, and approved in writing by the Local Planning
             Authority. The created and/or enhanced habitat specified in the approved
             (HMMP) shall be managed and maintained in accordance with the approved
             (HMMP).
             Monitoring reports shall be submitted to local planning authority in writing in
             accordance with the methodology and frequency specified in the approved
             (HMMP).

     19)     Within three months of the date of this permission, precise details of wildlife
             mitigation and enhancement shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
             the Local Planning Authority.

                                           End of Conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        7
