Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by R Gravett BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009486
Homestead, Liverpool Road, Tarleton, Lancashire PR4 6HP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (the
     Act) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Matt Eastham of Elm Residential Care against the decision of West
     Lancashire Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 2026/0109/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of existing 4no bedroom dwellinghouse (C3(a) Use) to
     a Children's Care Home for up to 2 Children (C2 Use).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of
       existing 4no bedroom dwellinghouse (C3(a) Use) to a Children's Care Home for up
       to 2 Children (C2 Use) at Homestead, Liverpool Road, Tarleton, Lancashire PR4
       6HP in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 2026/0109/FUL, and the
       plans submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
              A301 Location Plan
              A303 Existing & Proposed Site Plans
              A304 Existing & Proposed Floor Plans
              A305 Existing & Proposed Elevations
     3)       The property shall be used as a children’s care home (Use Class C2) for up
              to two children and for no other purpose, including any other purpose in
              Class C2 of the Schedule to the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes)
              Order 1987 (as amended) or in any provision equivalent to that Class in any
              statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with or without
              modification.
Application for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Matt Eastham of Elm Residential Care
       against West Lancashire Borough Council. This is the subject of a separate
       decision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009486


Preliminary Matters
3.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (“the Framework”) was published in
         August 2026. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance
         which should be taken into account from the day of publication. The main parties
         have had the opportunity to comment on any implications for the appeal, and I
         have taken comments received into account.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is whether the location of the proposed development is suitable,
         with particular regards to the need for children’s care homes within Lancashire, the
         effect on local services, and on the mix and balance of communities.
Reasons
5.       The Council alleges that the proposal conflicts with Policy GN3 of the West
         Lancashire Local Plan 2012-2027 (2013) (LP) which relates to a range of matters,
         such as design, accessibility and transport, flood risk and landscaping. It does not
         refer to the creation of mixed and balanced communities, nor does it require
         proposed developments to address an identified local need. However, LP Policy
         GN3(1)(vii) is relevant to the main issue as it requires proposals for development
         to create safe and secure environments that reduce opportunities for crime.
6.       The appellant’s evidence is that Ofsted has highlighted a significant and continuing
         national shortage of residential care homes for children with ‘complex lives’ with
         over 90% of local authorities reporting issues finding suitable homes. I do not have
         the Lancashire Children’s Social Care Sufficiency Strategy before me. However,
         Lancashire County Council’s (LCC) Market Position Statement (MPS) of March of
         this year1 outlines that Lancashire continues to experience a significant market
         imbalance whereby the county has a very high number and saturation of Ofsted
         registered children's care homes. The local picture in respect of the need for
         children’s care homes evidently differs significantly from the national one.
7.       The MPS identifies that only 14% of children's home beds in Lancashire are being
         used by Lancashire's children. However, the identity of those who would live at the
         proposed care home is not a matter that can be controlled through the planning
         system. For example, a condition requiring that the home is only occupied by a
         child in LCC’s care would not be reasonable. The appeal proposal would
         accommodate up to two children aged between 7 and 17years old who have been
         assessed as being victims of child criminal exploitation. These are circumstances
         where it could be appropriate to place a child from a different geographical area
         and accordingly, it is reasonable to assume the proposal would accommodate
         children from outside Lancashire.
8.       Policy HO9(1) of the Framework states that development proposals addressing
         specialist housing needs should provide living conditions and access to services
         which are appropriate to the needs of their residents and users. In this regard,
         LCC raise concerns that a consequence of the placement of high numbers of
         children from other areas is a significant strain on local services, such as schools,
         health services and the police.


1
    Lancashire County Council’s Market Position Statement March 2026: Children’s Homes


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6009486


9.       LCC’s evidence2 is that many children in care have a history of special education
         needs or disrupted education and that Secondary Pupil Referral Units and special
         schools in Lancashire are over capacity. The appellant’s evidence is that most
         young people who would be placed in the proposed care home have had a
         disrupted education and that the aim, where possible, would be for a local school
         to be attended on a full-time basis. However, I have little evidence before me in
         respect of the capacity of local school rolls in Tarleton, or whether these schools
         could support the transition of the children into mainstream education.
10. The appellant recognises that the children who would be placed in the proposed
    home would present social, emotional and behavioural needs. Although the
    appellant’s ‘Statement of Purpose’ outlines that individual tailored therapeutic care
    plans would be produced alongside an independent psychologist, the children
    would still likely require various health services, such as Child and Adolescent
    Mental Health Services; a service which LCC assert is already stretched.
11. Policy HO9(1)(b) of the Framework states that proposals for specialist community-
    based accommodation should be supported by a management plan or other
    supporting evidence which shows how the development will provide a safe and
    secure environment for residents. The ‘Statement of Purpose’ sets out that
    training, placement and behaviour management plans and risk assessments would
    be used to manage the safety of children inside and outside the home, including
    risks associated with being missing from the home.
12. However, this does not provide sufficient information for me to be certain that the
    proposal would not place undue additional pressure on Missing Person Prevention
    Officers, and the police. Nor is it clear how the wide-ranging measures in the
    Statement would be enforceable. This is significant because the appellant’s own
    evidence recognises the difficulties faced by other care providers in coping with
    the intended cohort of children to be placed in the home.
13. I appreciate that staff recruitment and retention is challenging, but children’s
    homes are subject to a separate system of regulation to ensure that appropriate
    standards of care are met and maintained. There are legislative requirements for
    registering and operating a home as well as guidance to follow, and the appellant
    will need to satisfy themselves that staffing requirements can be met.
14. The appeal property is outside a settlement, in a location with no immediate
    neighbours, and I am not aware of similar Class C2 uses nearby. It is therefore
    difficult to see how two supervised children in this location would undermine the
    mix or balance of the communities.
15. Nevertheless, based on the evidence before me and the individual circumstances
    of this case, I find that the proposal would contribute to the detrimental effects on
    local education, health and police services which arise from the very high numbers
    of children’s care homes in Lancashire. However, these detrimental effects would
    be tempered by the placing of only two supervised children in the proposed home,
    which could be controlled by condition.
16. There is no development plan policy requiring a demonstration of need, and there
    would be no harm to the mix and balance of communities. However, for the
    reasons given above, I conclude that the location of the proposed development

2
    Lancashire County Council’s Market Position Statement April 2025: Children’s Homes


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6009486


       would not be suitable having regard to its effect on local services. The proposal
       would conflict with LP GN3(1)(vii) in so far as it requires development to create
       safe and secure environments that reduce opportunities for crime.
Other Matters
17. I have had careful regard to the appeal decisions in respect of proposals for Class
    C2 uses at Warren Drive in Blackpool3 and Briars Green in Skelmersdale4 referred
    to by the Council. Although also in Lancashire, the circumstances in the Warren
    Drive case differs to the appeal proposal as there was a policy in the Blackpool
    Local Plan Part 2: Site Allocations and Development Management Policies (2023)
    which supported class C2 accommodation where, amongst other criteria, there
    was a demonstrable need, and it targeted meeting the needs of local residents.
18. In respect of the recent Briars Green appeal, I note the Inspector drew a similar
    conclusion to my own with regards to the contribution the proposal would make to
    certain detrimental effects relating to children’s care home provision within
    Lancashire. Consequently, the Inspector found conflict with the content of the
    Framework5 where it sought to ensure that residential development comes forward
    where it is needed, that the needs of groups with specific housing requirements
    are addressed and that an appropriate mix of housing types is provided for the
    local community. Although policy HO1(2) of the Framework has a similar objective,
    this is a plan-making policy, and paragraph 8 of the Framework is clear that such
    policies should not be used when making decisions on development proposals.
19. Accordingly, I have come to my own views on this appeal having regard to the
    specific circumstances of the case, which includes the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development now embodied in Policy S3 and S5 of the Framework. I
    deal with this ‘Planning Balance’ below.
20. Although I appreciate the Council’s concerns, there is no requirement for the
    appellant to engage with key local stakeholders, including LCC Children's
    Services, and this has had no bearing on my consideration of the appeal.
Conditions
21. Conditions specifying the approved plans and a timescale for the commencement
    of the development are necessary in the interests of certainty.
22. The Council has suggested a condition which would restrict both the number of
    children resident at the property at any one time and the number of staff. Given
    that the proposal has been considered on the basis that it would be a children’s
    home for up to two children, it is reasonable and necessary to limit the operation of
    a Class C2 use in this way. For clarity, I have amended the wording to refer
    explicitly to the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as
    amended). However, given sufficient parking spaces is shown for five cars and
    the level of vehicle movements or effects on living conditions of neighbours is not a
    concern, it is not necessary to restrict staff numbers.




3
  APP/J2373/C/23/3325930
4
  APP/P2365/W/25/3361672
5
  December 2024 Version


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009486


Planning Balance
23. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
    applications for planning permission must be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
24. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance. There is no
    dispute between the parties that the appeal property is outside a settlement and in
    such circumstances, Policy S5(1) of the Framework lists certain forms of
    development which should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, assessed against the national
    decision-making policies. The proposal falls within the list at policy S5(1)(c) which
    is the reuse of an existing building provided that the existing building is of
    permanent and substantial construction and is lawful in planning terms. Policy
    S5(1)(c) does not only relate to rural agricultural buildings.
25. The only adverse effect identified relates to the suitability of the location of the
    proposed development having regard to its detrimental effect on local services. In
    this regard, there would also be conflict with policy HO9 of the Framework
    because the proposal would not have access to services which are appropriate to
    the needs of their residents, and insufficient evidence has been provided to show it
    would provide a safe and secure environment. Whilst that harm attracts weight
    against the proposal and results in conflict with LP Policy GN3, I have found that
    the harm would be tempered by the small number of children who would be placed
    at the home.
26. Although I have found there to be an absence of need for the proposal, this does
    not represent conflict with national decision-making policy HO7. Whilst this policy
    gives substantial weight to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute
    towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community, it does
    not impose a ceiling on housing provision or require individual planning
    applications to demonstrate a need for the sort of housing proposed.
27. In this case, I do not find that the adverse effects arising from the proposal would
    be so significant that they would substantially outweigh the benefits. In the context
    of policy S5 of the Framework, the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development therefore applies.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above, the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan but material considerations, including the Framework, indicate
    that a decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
29. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

R Gravett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
