Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009207
46 The Beck, Elford, Tamworth, Staffordshire B79 9BP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. Tim Gilbert against the decision of Lichfield District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00078/FUL.
•   The development proposed is for a new 2 storey, 3 bedroom dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Amended plans have been submitted with the appeal, proposing alternative parking
   arrangements. However, the appeal process should not be used to evolve a
   scheme and what is considered at appeal should be the same as was by the
   Council and interested parties at application stage. I have therefore taken the
   originally submitted plans into account in my findings.
4. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues
   in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded
   without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on a) the character
   and appearance of the area and b) highway safety, with specific regard to access
   and parking.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
6. The appeal site comprises part of the front driveway and the side and rear garden
   of Number 46 The Beck (No. 46), a two storey semi-detached dwelling. The
   surrounding area is residential and contains a varied mix of housing types. It is not
   within a protected area, a conservation area, or close to listed buildings or their

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009207


     settings. However, the short section of The Beck where the appeal site is located is
     largely characterised by similarly designed pairs of semi-detached dwellings.
     Collectively, they create a consistent and wide built frontage that defines the street
     scene. They are set well back from the highway within generously sized, narrow
     and linear plots, with an irregular rhythm of gaps between them. Some of which
     have been narrowed by side extensions.
7. Due to the curvature of the road, No. 46 occupies a wider plot and benefits from a
   larger side gap. This space acts as an important visual buffer between the two
   distinct groups of semi-detached houses, with the hipped roof, mostly rendered
   pairs on the straight part of the road, and the brick, pitch gabled roof pairs on the
   bend. As such, No. 46’s side gap helps to provide a distinctive transition space
   between these differing dwelling types and therefore contributes positively to the
   character and appearance of the area.
8. The proposed dwelling would be modestly sized and have a finish that would
   complement the local material palette. It would also be sited well behind the front
   elevations of the adjacent semi-detached houses and be partially obscured as a
   result. However, with no space on either side, it would occupy almost the full width
   of its plot and appear as a tightly constrained, cramped form of development, even
   with its set back position and large rear garden. It would also substantially infill the
   generous side gap at No. 46, eroding the quality of the spaciousness it provides.
   Furthermore, its detached form and small scale, positioned between semi-detached
   dwellings with a broader combined frontage and greater overall massing, would
   result in it appearing as an incongruous and noticeably smaller building. This would
   highlight its discordant relationship with the surrounding built character.
9. For the above reasons, the proposal would result in unacceptable harm to the
   character and appearance of the area. It would be contrary to Core Policy 3 and
   Policy BE1 of the Lichfield District Local Plan Strategy 2015 (LPS), Policy DH1 of
   the Elford Parish Neighbourhood Plan 2019 (EPNP). Whilst these policies do not
   specifically prohibit the infill or subdivision of plots, or specify for proposals to be of
   identical developments, they still require, amongst other things, for all development
   to respect, enhance and respond positively to the locally distinctive character of the
   built environment.
Highway Safety
10. No. 46 currently benefits from a large, paved driveway to the front and side. The
    driveway entrance contains a tree to both its sides and is accessed via a dropped
    kerb from The Beck, which is a residential road with a speed limit of 30 miles per
    hour. The section of road outside the appeal site has a grass verge and footway to
    one side.
11. The proposal would utilise the existing access which, at less than 4.2 metres wide,
    would fall below the Highway Authority's minimum standard for a private drive to
    safely accommodate two way vehicle movements. This shortfall is modest but
    would nonetheless be inadequate to allow safe comings and goings for two
    vehicles to pass, where such movements are more expected when two
    independent dwellings are to share an access.
12. As a result, there would be an increased risk of conflict between entering and
    exiting vehicles on the access itself, due to the limited width available. This could
    lead to vehicles waiting on the highway to gain access to the site while others exit,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009207


     impeding the free flow of traffic. Whilst a single dwelling may not generate a
     significant volume of traffic, it would still intensify vehicle movements associated
     with the existing access and, in turn, the likelihood of conflicts occurring.
13. The submitted plans show that the proposed dwelling and No. 46 would each be
    provided with two parking spaces, resulting in a total of four vehicles being
    accommodated within the shared front driveway. The plans indicate that the
    parking spaces would be arranged at varying angles. As such there would be
    insufficient room within the site to enable vehicles associated with either dwelling to
    safely turn around. Consequently, the site would not provide adequate space for
    vehicles to enter and leave in a forward gear.
14. As a result, vehicles would be required to either reverse into or out of the access.
    Reversing into the site would necessitate vehicles stopping within the live
    carriageway, thereby impeding the free flow of traffic. Reversing out onto the
    highway would be similarly difficult, requiring drivers to manoeuvre with restricted
    visibility. In both cases, it would increase the potential for conflict with pedestrians,
    cyclists and other road users.
15. The details to secure revised plans would not be appropriate to condition, as it is
    important that the potential effects of any highway safety issues are first
    understood, and the relevant consultees approached for comment, in order to
    confirm that a safe and suitable access arrangement can be achieved.
16. The Highway Authority has advised that the visibility splay shown on the submitted
    plan is inaccurate, as it extends across third party land and has not been measured
    from a point 2.4 metres back from the carriageway edge to the nearside kerb.
    However, the access would remain unchanged, and the need for vehicles to edge
    forward onto the footway to obtain adequate visibility is an existing situation and
    similar to a number of accesses for other properties along The Beck. The Highway
    Authority has also expressed that the required visibility splays can be achieved,
    albeit not correctly demonstrated on a plan. As such, the proposal is unlikely to
    result in unacceptable highway safety impacts from inadequate visibility splays.
    While an existing tree would restrict manoeuvring for the parking spaces serving
    No. 46, it is not protected and its removal could be secured by condition.
17. That said, the proposed development would still result in harm to highway safety
    due to inadequate vehicle access and turning arrangements. It would therefore be
    contrary to Core Policy 5, Policy ST1 and Policy ST2 of the LPS. Together and
    amongst other things, these policies require development proposals to make
    provisions for appropriate off street parking, to improve road safety, ensuring
    access and egress to the public highway is taken into account.
Other Matters
18. I have had regard to the economic benefits of the scheme in creating employment
    during the construction phase, and through the additional support for local service
    and facilities following its occupation. There would also be some social benefits
    through the provision of a family sized home that would contribute to the diversity
    and supply of local housing, and the dwelling would be sustainably located and
    represent an efficient use of land.
19. However, any effects would be temporary or very limited in their scope due to the
    scheme being for one dwelling and lived in by the appellant. One would expect the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009207


     location of the dwelling to have good access to necessary services to be
     acceptable in principle. With this and the above in mind, the weight ascribed to the
     benefits offered by the appellant are insufficient to outweigh the harms I have
     found. Any concerns regarding the Council’s assessment of the proposal are
     matters that should be taken up with them directly and are not for me to resolve
     here.
20. Appeal decision 3353740 related to an outline application for a proposed bungalow
    to be located towards the rear of No. 46’s garden. It is not directly comparable to
    the appeal scheme, which I have determined on its own merits, based on the
    evidence before me. Of the appellant’s cited examples of nearby developments,
    which I saw on my site visit, these are not sufficiently comparable as they related to
    ones of different design, scale, and appearance, and were situated within a
    different location not read within the same immediate context as the appeal site.
21. The principle of one additional dwelling within the settlement boundary is accepted.
    The proposal would also retain sufficient outdoor amenity space for both the
    proposed dwelling and No. 46. However, these do not make up for the
    shortcomings of the scheme in regard to the main issues.
Conclusion and Recommendation
22. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    and material considerations do not indicate a decision should be made other than
    in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend the appeal is dismissed.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
23. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
