Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Paul Martinson BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009132
2 Jesmond Avenue, Middlesbrough TS5 5JY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Dale Hemmings of Positive Futures against the decision of Middlesbrough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/0672/COU.
•    The development proposed is Change of Use from Dwelling-house (Class C3) to 3 Child Children's
     Home (Class C2).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Change of Use from
       Dwelling-house (Class C3) to 3 Child Children's Home (Class C2) at 2 Jesmond
       Avenue, Middlesbrough TS5 5JY subject to the conditions in the attached
       schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have taken into account the national decision-making policies contained within
       the new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’), as published on
       17 August 2026. Any reference to the Framework below is therefore a reference to
       this new version. Framework Policy HO9 refers to specialist community-based
       accommodation which includes but is not limited to, accommodation for looked
       after children.
3.     The Policy states that proposals for this type of specialist accommodation should
       provide living conditions and access to services which are appropriate to the
       needs of their residents and users. This includes at: b), being supported by a
       management plan or other supporting evidence which shows how the
       development will provide a safe and secure environment for residents.
       Developments are also required to be located where residents will be able to
       access frequently used services easily and safely.
4.     The application was submitted with a ‘Statement of Purpose’ which details how the
       proposed children’s home would be managed, with children being looked after for
       24 hours a day, with a focus on education, working with local schools. Children will
       be involved in decision making, whilst the document details a high level of external
       and internal monitoring, the use of safeguarding systems, and importance placed
       on children's welfare. I am therefore satisfied that the proposal would represent a
       safe and secure environment for future residents of the facility.
5.     The appeal site is located in a suburban area and is approximately 400 metres
       walking distance to shops and services at the Acklam Road/Cambridge Road

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009132


         Local Centre. Main bus routes along Green Lane lie within 250 metres walking
         distance. Based on measurements provided by the Council, there are several
         primary schools and a secondary school within walking distance along suburban
         roads with pavements. I am therefore satisfied that the future residents will be able
         to access frequently used services easily and safely. On this basis, the proposal
         would comply with Framework Policy HO9.
6.       I have taken the description of the development from the appeal form as this is
         more reflective of the appellant’s evidence and is consistent with the description in
         the Council’s decision notice.
7.       The Middlesbrough Publication Local Plan 2025 (the PLP) has been the subject of
         examination and is understood to be at a reasonably advanced stage of
         preparation. I have therefore given moderate weight to its policies which I have
         considered below.
Main Issue
8.       The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the residential
         character of the area.
Reasons
9.       Jesmond Avenue is a residential cul-de-sac in a suburban area. The area is made
         up of predominantly 2 storey semi-detached houses with occasional detached
         houses and bungalows. Most properties have driveways with off street parking to
         the front or side with enclosed and private gardens to the rear. I saw on the site
         visit that background noise and traffic levels were consistent with the area’s
         residential character. My impressions were that the area had a reasonably high
         number of family homes.
10. The appeal property is a detached 2 storey four-bedroom dwelling located
    alongside semi-detached properties. It lies on a corner plot at the junction of
    Jesmond Avenue and Reeth Road. There are existing vehicle accesses from both
    roads although the main access appears to be the paved driveway from Reeth
    Road.
11. It is proposed to change the use of the existing dwelling (C3) to a children’s home
    which falls within residential Use Class C21. The proposal would provide three
    bedrooms for children with staff rooms provided on the ground and first floor. The
    children cared for would be aged between 7 and 17 years and would be
    supervised by members of staff at all times, with 2 of those staying overnight. In
    that sense, the proposed use would function very much like a typical family home
    with older adults caring for children of mixed ages. There would be 2 support staff
    and a manager during the daytime and 2 support staff overnight. Shift handover
    times would be at 8.00am and 8.00pm. At handover times, there would be 4
    members of staff present. 2 of those staff members would leave shortly after the
    arrival of 2 members of staff to relieve them.
12. Although the resulting vehicle movements associated with staff would occur every
    day, twice each day, this level of activity would not be significantly different from
    that generated by a C3 dwelling occupied by two adults. It is reasonable to expect
    such occupants to undertake multiple daily trips, including commuting to and from
1
    As set out in Schedules 1 and 2 to the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, as amended.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decision 6009132


       work, shopping, school runs, and journeys associated with social and recreational
       activities. Moreover, these trips could be reasonably expected to occur at a similar
       time to the proposed timing of the shift handover period. As such, the vehicle
       movements likely generated by the proposed C2 use would be comparable to that
       of a C3 dwelling and would not adversely affect the residential character of the
       area.
13. The proposal would involve the provision of 4 parking spaces. These would
    comprise 2 spaces to the existing driveway adjacent to Reeth Road and 2 to a
    driveway created from the existing access from Jesmond Avenue, following
    demolition of an existing outbuilding. Whilst the arrangement of spaces may lead
    to tandem parking, given that staff members will be arriving and leaving at the
    same time, I am satisfied that this would be unlikely to lead to staff members
    parking on the street. Whilst other visits from social workers, for example, may
    occur more occasionally, I am satisfied that there would be sufficient on-street
    parking available, given the prevalence of driveways along Jesmond Avenue. This
    would be little different to health or social care professionals visiting other
    residential properties and as such I am satisfied that the level of parking demand
    would not adversely alter the residential quality or character of the area.
14. The Children’s Commissioning section of the Council argues that the number of
    residential beds in proximity to one another is concerning, with regard to the
    potential impact on the market, especially if any of these beds become occupied
    by children from out of area. However, the comments do not elaborate on these
    concerns in relation to the matters in dispute, namely the effect on the residential
    quality or character of the area. Whilst the Council may prefer an even spread of
    children’s homes across the Council area, this is not an indication that the appeal
    scheme would result in a concentration of children’s homes to the extent that it
    would adversely affect the residential character.
15. Nonetheless, Middlesbrough has 19 Ofsted registered beds within a 1 mile radius
    of the appeal site. Approximately half of those are located within the same Council
    ward as the appeal site, with the others being split across 2 neighbouring wards.
    However, this equates to just over 6 three-bedroom properties within a mile, with
    half these in the same ward as the appeal site. This is a reasonably densely
    populated residential area with undoubtedly a high number of properties within a 1
    mile radius. As such, the evidence before me indicates that an additional 3
    bedrooms would make little difference, spread across such a wide area. Therefore,
    it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would result in an
    overconcentration of children’s homes in the area to the extent that it would
    adversely affect the residential quality or character of the area.
16. Concerns have also been raised with regard to potential for an increase in the risk
    of crime as a result of the proposal. The Framework seeks to ensure that
    development is inclusive, and the fear of crime does not undermine quality of life,
    community cohesion and resilience. The courts have held that the fear of crime
    can be a material consideration. However, there must be some reasonable
    evidential basis for that fear.
17. In that regard, Cleveland Police comments set out that the facility would be
    required to operate within national standards for children’s homes, and staff would
    be subject to Ofsted regulation and inspections, as set out in the Statement of
    Purpose. As such, mindful of the small scale of the proposal, it seems to me that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009132


       sufficient safeguards would therefore be in place to minimise the risk of crime and
       to protect the neighbouring community and future occupants and avoid a change
       to the residential quality or character of the area.
18. Similarly, given the level of supervision that would occur, and the limitation to just 3
    children, I am satisfied that there are suitable provisions in place to avoid any
    persistent noise or disturbance arising that would be over and above the levels
    that could be expected from a C3 residential property, preserving the residential
    character.
19. The Council’s reasons for refusal refer to Policy H11 of the Middlesbrough
    Housing Local Plan (2014) (the HLP) which sets out the Council’s strategy to
    ensure the delivery of the Council’s housing requirement in a manner that delivers
    a balanced and sustainable housing stock to meet the current and future needs of
    the population, including providing a wider range of housing types such as more
    family housing and higher value dwellings.
20. The loss of a single house would be unlikely to have any discernible effect on the
    Council’s strategy. Nonetheless, the appeal scheme would still provide residential
    accommodation, housing local children. It has not been demonstrated that the
    proposal would create an overconcentration of such homes within the area and as
    such I am satisfied that it would not disrupt the balance of the existing housing
    stock. The proposal would therefore not conflict with Policy H11.
21. The reason for refusal also refers to emerging policy HO1(b) of the PLP, which
    seeks to ensure that there are sufficient houses to meet the economic aspirations
    of the Borough. However, I am mindful that the appeal proposal would ensure that
    the property remained in residential use. Moreover, I am provided with little
    evidence as to the extent that a proposal of this scale, relating to a single unit,
    would adversely affect the economic aspirations of the area. Whilst I am assured
    that there is a high demand for family properties locally, there does not appear to
    be a shortage of such homes in the area, which based on my own impressions,
    appear to be the dominant housing type. Moreover, I am mindful of the Framework
    support for providing healthy, mixed, vibrant and integrated communities.
22. For the above reasons the proposal would preserve the residential character of the
    area. There would also be no conflict with Policy H11 of the HLP or emerging
    Policy HO1(b) of the PLP, set out above.
Other Matters
23. Whilst the effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring
    properties did not form part of the Council’s reasons for refusal, I acknowledge the
    concerns of local residents with regard to the effect on the living conditions of the
    occupiers of neighbouring properties. However, for the same reasons as above,
    namely, the low numbers of children, the extent of supervision, and that the level
    of activity and noise would not exceed the levels that could be expected from the
    existing 4 bedroom dwelling, I am satisfied that the proposal would ensure that
    neighbouring living conditions would be preserved.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009132


Conditions
24. The conditions imposed are based on those proposed by the Council. Where
    necessary I have amended the wording of these in the interests of precision and
    clarity, and to comply with advice in the Planning Practice Guidance.
25. In addition to the standard timeframe condition, I have imposed a condition
    specifying the approved plans for certainty. For the same reason, a condition is
    necessary to ensure that the use is limited to that as a children’s home. Similarly, a
    condition is necessary to limit occupation to 3 children in order to avoid increases
    in the number of children which could alter the effect on the residential character of
    the area.
26. I have not imposed the Highway Authority’s condition relating to a drop kerb as it is
    not relevant to planning, being subject to other primary legislation in the form of the
    Highways Acts. I have however imposed a condition requiring both driveways to
    be installed in accordance with the approved plans prior to the first use in order to
    avoid parking stress in the locality.
Conclusion
27. For the above reasons, having had regard to the development plan as a whole and
    all other relevant material considerations, I conclude that the appeal should be
    allowed subject to the conditions below.

Paul Martinson
INSPECTOR
                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing nos: a. Site Location plan; Existing and proposed floor plan drawing
              REV B dated 13 February 2026; Proposed site plan drawing dated 17
              February 2026.
     3)       The premises shall be used as a children’s home and for no other purpose
              including any other proposed use in Class C2 of the Schedule of the Town
              and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (or any other order revoking
              or re-enacting that order with or without modification).
     4)       The use hereby approved shall be limited to accommodation for no more
              than 3 children at any one time.
     5)       Prior to the first occupation of the children's home, both driveways shall be
              installed in accordance with the details shown on the proposed site plan,
              including the removal of the outbuilding in the garden. The parking areas
              shall remain available for the parking of vehicles thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          5
