Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by E Everitt BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009487
Serif House, 10 Dudley Street, Luton LU2 0NT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by J Hardy against the decision of Luton Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01306/FUL.
•    The development proposed is raising the roof and erection of a first floor side extension to include six
     dormers (three front, two rear and a rear/side) to facilitate a conversion and change of use of office
     building to four flats (2 x two bed and 2 x three bed) and alterations to fenestration.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Council raises concerns regarding inaccurate annotated dimensions and
       floorspace calculations on the submitted plans. Nevertheless, I consider those
       plans to be sufficiently accurate to assess the proposal without being prejudicial to
       interested parties.
3.     As part of their appeal submission, the appellant refers to the potential to address
       concerns raised by the Council through amendments to the scheme, albeit revised
       plans have not been submitted. For the avoidance of doubt, I have, therefore,
       considered the appeal based on the plans submitted to the Council with the
       planning application.
4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       during the consideration of the appeal. The main parties were provided with the
       opportunity to comment on the relevance of the Framework to the appeal, and I
       have taken account of these comments, and the Framework, in making my
       decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area,
                and on the significance of the High Town Conservation Area, through
                development within its setting;
           •    whether the development would provide adequate living conditions for
                future occupiers, with particular regard to internal floor space and layout,
                noise and disturbance, privacy, the provision of outdoor space, refuse and
                recycling storage facilities and cycle parking and accessibility;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009487


           •    the effect of the development on the living conditions of the occupiers of
                nearby dwellings, with particular regard to outlook, privacy and noise and
                disturbance; and
           •    whether the development would satisfy the requirements of the statutory
                framework for biodiversity net gain.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     The appeal property is a predominantly 2-storey building fronting onto Dudley
       Street. The surrounding area comprises buildings of a range of architectural styles,
       forms and scales, including some examples of buildings with altered roof profiles
       and varied ridge heights. A variety of uses are also present. Accordingly, the
       streetscene does not appear as architecturally uniform and, instead, has a varied
       character and appearance.
7.     Notwithstanding this, it was evident from my observations during my site visit that
       there is a consistent rhythm to the built form along Dudley Street, with building
       heights rising towards the south of the road. The appeal property forms part of an
       area with lower height buildings, along with 12 Dudley Street (No 12). Moreover,
       No 12 has a broadly similar appearance to the appeal property, featuring a similar
       roof design and materials and being of a broadly consistent height.
8.     The appeal proposal would reduce the similarities in the appearance of the
       buildings on the appeal site and at No 12, and it would increase the extent of built
       form along the Dudley Street site frontage. It would also alter the roof profile of the
       appeal property, including by introducing dormer windows to the front and rear.
       Cumulatively, the alterations would result in the appeal property appearing
       substantially larger in size than No 12. This contrast, particularly at roof level,
       would emphasise the extent of built development on the site. Consequently, the
       proposed development would fail to integrate with its surroundings and would
       appear incongruous in the streetscene, particularly when viewed in conjunction
       with No 12.
9.     Moreover, the proposal would depart from the existing rhythm of the building
       heights along this part of Dudley Street. As a result, the appeal property would
       appear unduly prominent, even if its scale would be subservient to some elements
       of the wider context and its altered roof profile would, to some extent, echo the
       roofs of some buildings in the surrounding area.
10. The appellant has put to me that the proposed development has been designed to
    utilise the existing building envelope efficiently whilst introducing a contemporary
    but sympathetic form of development. However, for the reasons set out above, the
    proposal would not respond appropriately to its context. This is irrespective of
    whether the use of dormers and altered roof forms is an established and common
    approach in urban residential conversions and reflective of the evolving character
    of the area.
11. The appeal site is situated outside the High Town Conservation Area (CA), but due
    to its location close to the CA, it is within its setting. The significance of the CA
    derives predominantly from the buildings constructed as part of the development of
    the core of Luton’s earliest suburb. However, the CA also derives some


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009487


       significance from those parts of its setting that respond to and reflect positive
       elements of the built environment within the CA, and those which help to illustrate
       how the area has developed over time. Due to its modest scale in relation to the
       wider townscape within the CA and its setting, the development would have a
       negligible effect on the contribution that the CA’s setting makes to its significance.
       That being the case, the character and appearance of the CA would be preserved.
12. Therefore, while the implementation of the appeal scheme would not cause harm
    to the significance of the CA through development within its setting, it would cause
    harm to the character and appearance of the area. As such, it would be contrary to
    the relevant provisions of Policies LLP10 and LLP25 of the Luton Local Plan
    2011-2031 (adopted 2017) (the LP). Among other things, these policies seek
    development which achieves appropriate densities, height and permeability,
    enhances the distinctiveness and character of the area by responding positively to
    the townscape, streetscene, site and building context, form, scale, height, pattern
    and materials.
13. On the basis of my findings in respect of its effect on the setting of the CA, I find no
    conflict with Policy LLP30 of the LP, which seeks development which takes
    account of the character, setting and local distinctiveness of local heritage assets.
14. Refusal reason 1 on the Council’s decision notice also refers to Policy LLP19 of
    the LP. However, this policy relates to extensions to dwellings, and annexes. As
    the appeal property is not currently in residential use and the proposal does not
    include any annexes, I find no conflict with Policy LLP19 of the LP.
Living conditions of future occupiers
15. The proposed development would provide 4 self-contained dwellings. There is
    dispute between the parties as to whether the dwellings would comply with the
    Nationally Described Space Standards (NDSS). Notwithstanding this, it is evident
    from the plans before me that a substantial portion of the floorspace within each
    dwelling would form circulation space. In this context, irrespective of their precise
    overall floorspace, I am not satisfied that the dwellings would provide sufficient
    usable internal accommodation for future occupiers. This would particularly be the
    case for Flat 4 as low ceiling heights in parts of the flat would further limit the
    usable internal floor space.
16. Even were any discrepancies against the NDSS limited, the development would,
    nevertheless, result in sub-standard internal accommodation and, as a result,
    future occupiers would not be provided with adequate living conditions.
17. The internal arrangement of the proposed development is such that for Flats 3 and
    4 quieter rooms such as bedrooms would be stacked above noisier rooms such as
    kitchens and living rooms, and vice versa. This layout would result in the potential
    for noise and disturbance which could impinge upon the living conditions of future
    occupiers, with no substantive evidence before me to suggest that such noise and
    disturbance could be adequately mitigated.
18. Flat 1 would be located at ground floor level with its bedrooms facing Dudley
    Street. There would be no defensible space between the windows serving these
    bedrooms and the street. In the absence of any details of measures to ensure
    privacy in these rooms, passing pedestrians and users of the highway would have


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009487


       unrestricted views into the bedrooms. I am, therefore, not satisfied that Flat 1
       would provide adequate living conditions for future occupiers in respect of privacy.
19. Appendix 6 of the LP identifies that, for flatted developments, a minimum of 5sqm
    of private outdoor space should be provided for 1-2 persons flats and maisonettes
    and an extra 1sqm should be provided for each additional occupant. While Flats 1
    and 2 would benefit from outdoor space which accords with these standards,
    future occupiers of Flats 3 and 4 would not have access to any private outdoor
    space.
20. Appendix 6 of the LP allows for the provision of communal outdoor space where
    private outdoor space is not achievable. Although communal outdoor space would
    be provided as part of the development, it would, in part, serve as the access to
    Flat 2 and also be used for refuse and recycling storage as well as cycle storage.
21. In respect of refuse and recycling storage, the plans before me identify an area
    proposed for bin storage. However, there is no substantive evidence before me
    demonstrating that the storage area shown would be of a sufficient size to serve
    the waste storage needs that would arise from the future use of the development.
    In the event that the storage area was insufficient in size, refuse and recycling
    storage would be likely to extend further into the communal outdoor space.
22. The Council raises concerns regarding the quantum and accessibility of the
    proposed cycle parking, suggesting that one cycle parking space should be
    provided per bedspace, in addition to visitor parking spaces. There is no
    substantive evidence before me justifying this requirement, with Appendix 2 of the
    LP instead identifying that blocks of flats should provide a minimum of one cycle
    space per unit for the first 10 units. Applying this standard, 4 cycle parking spaces
    would be required. The submitted plans show 4 spaces, thereby according with
    this standard. Nonetheless, by reason of the layout of the cycle store, it is unlikely
    that all spaces would be accessible, particularly when some spaces are in use.
    The difficulty in accessing all the cycle parking spaces is, therefore, likely to
    increase the pressure for cycle storage in the constrained outdoor space.
23. Consequently, these storage uses are likely to harmfully minimise the extent of
    outdoor space that would be available for recreation and leisure purposes by
    future occupiers of the development. Furthermore, in the absence of any details
    having been provided regarding screening of the storage areas, the refuse storage
    is likely to severely limit the attractiveness of the communal outdoor space for use
    by future occupiers. Ultimately, therefore, in this particular case, the quantum and
    quality of outdoor space that would be available for use by future occupiers of the
    development would be inadequate.
24. The appellant highlights that the appeal site benefits from access to nearby public
    open spaces. Nonetheless, the availability of public outdoor space does not
    entirely compensate for the limited outdoor space on the site as public and private
    spaces are, in my experience, suitable for different uses. In this context, the limited
    quantum of usable outdoor space has not been adequately justified, particularly for
    family-sized dwellings.
25. The Council also raises concerns that on collection days bins would either have to
    block the access route to Flats 2-4, as well as the cycle store, or congest the
    public footway outside the site. In the absence of any substantive evidence to the
    contrary, this could pose accessibility and safety risks, particularly given the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009487


       access route would serve as a fire access for the properties. Therefore, it has not
       been demonstrated that future occupiers of the proposed development would be
       able to easily and safely access the flats at all times.
26. For these reasons, even if future occupiers of the proposed dwellings would
    benefit from adequate daylight and ventilation, the development would not provide
    adequate living conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to internal
    floor space and layout, noise and disturbance, privacy, the provision of outdoor
    space, refuse and recycling storage facilities and cycle parking and accessibility.
    The proposal is, therefore, contrary to the relevant provisions of Policies LLP15,
    LLP25, LLP31 and LLP37 of the LP. These policies seek, among other things, to
    ensure that development accords with external amenity standards, provides cycle
    parking/storage, ensures the quality of the local environment is not compromised
    and does not result in the over-intensification of the site.
Living conditions of nearby occupiers
27. The additional built form resulting from the appeal proposal would be visible from
    some windows on the rear and side elevations of 16-18 Albion Court (Nos 16-18).
    Notwithstanding this, from the plans before me and my observations during my site
    visit, the appeal property is separated from Nos 16-18 by some distance and
    established vegetation would limit visibility of the proposed additional built form.
    Moreover, the increased extent of built form would be seen in the context of the
    surrounding built environment, including taller structures on Dudley Street and
    beyond. Overall, therefore, the proposal is unlikely to affect the outlook from
    Nos 16-18 to such an extent that it would be harmful to the living conditions of the
    occupiers of these properties.
28. The proposal would introduce additional windows on the rear elevation of the
    appeal property. While this could increase the potential for overlooking of
    Nos 16-18, the level of overlooking would not be significantly different to the
    existing circumstances, given there are some existing upper level windows on the
    rear of the property. That being the case, the development would not result in a
    harmful loss of privacy for the occupiers of Nos 16-18. Moreover, there is no
    substantive evidence before me indicating that the proposal would result in any
    harmful increase in overshadowing or noise impacts for these or other nearby
    properties.
29. The appeal proposal would increase the level of activity on the site, and the need
    for waste storage and servicing. This increased activity has the potential to disturb
    the occupiers of No 12. However, given the scale of the development and its
    location within an existing urban environment, any increase in noise and
    disturbance is unlikely to be of such a scale that it would be harmful to their living
    conditions.
30. Taking account of the above, the development would not have a harmful effect on
    the living conditions of the occupiers of nearby properties, with particular regard to
    outlook, privacy and noise and disturbance. In this regard, the proposal would not
    conflict with the relevant provisions of Policy LLP25 of the LP. Among other things,
    this policy seeks development which minimises noise, overlooking and
    overshadowing/loss of light. However, the absence of harm in respect of this main
    issue is a neutral consideration in the determination of this appeal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009487


Biodiversity net gain
31. The application form indicates that the proposed development would be exempt
    from biodiversity net gain requirements due to the de minimis exemption. From the
    information before me and my observations on site, it is evident that the site is
    comprised entirely of hardstanding. The proposal would not, therefore, impact any
    onsite priority habitat, more than 25sqm of onsite habitat or more than 5 metres of
    onsite linear habitat. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the de minimis
    exemption would apply in this case.
32. Regardless of the limited biodiversity information submitted with the application,
    the development would, therefore, satisfy the requirements of the statutory
    framework for biodiversity net gain. However, this is a neutral consideration in the
    determination of this appeal.
Other Matters
33. My attention is drawn to comparative improvements made as part of the appeal
    proposal relative to a previous request for pre-application advice relating to the
    property. However, I must make my decision on the basis of what is before me not
    the respective merits of any alternative scheme. Even if changes have been made
    in response to the feedback provided by the Council, such feedback has the status
    of pre-application advice only and is not a formal decision or binding on the
    Council.
34. The appellant has put to me that concerns raised by the Council could be
    addressed through planning conditions or amended plans. However, there is no
    substantive evidence before me to indicate that the harm I have identified above
    could be satisfactorily addressed without fundamentally altering the appeal
    proposal. Consequently, notwithstanding the support in Policies DM3 and DM6 of
    the Framework for a proportionate approach to decision-making and considering
    the use of planning conditions to make otherwise unacceptable proposals
    acceptable, this matter does not lead me to an alternative conclusion on the main
    issues.
35. I appreciate the frustrations of the appellant regarding the Council’s approach to
    the application, including the limited opportunities for engagement and perceived
    failure to substantiate concerns with evidence and consider opportunities for
    concerns to be resolved through amended details and appropriately worded
    planning conditions. Nevertheless, this does not alter my consideration of the
    appeal, which I have determined on its own merits.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
36. Notwithstanding my findings in respect of the effect of the proposal on the living
    conditions of nearby occupiers and biodiversity net gain, the proposed
    development would have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the
    area and it would fail to provide adequate living conditions for future occupiers. As
    such, the proposal would conflict with the development plan, taken as a whole.
37. Policy S3 of the Framework establishes that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4 of the
    Framework states that development proposals within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009487


       adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
       the Framework.
38. The proposal would contribute towards housing supply in the Borough, consistent
    with the emphasis within the Framework on substantially increasing the supply of
    housing. It would deliver family-sized housing, helping to contribute towards
    meeting the accommodation needs of the community. Policy HO7 of the
    Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of
    providing homes in such circumstances. However, by reason of the scale of the
    proposed development, the contribution towards housing supply would, inevitably,
    be small. Consequently, although the provision of housing attracts substantial
    weight, overall, this matter attracts moderate weight in favour of the proposed
    development. The standard of accommodation which would be provided, and the
    extent to which this would adequately serve the needs of future occupiers, further
    tempers the weight I can attach to the benefits associated with the provision of
    new housing.
39. The proposed housing would be delivered in a location which benefits from good
    access to services and facilities and public transport options, consistent with the
    support within Policies L3 and TR3 of the Framework for making efficient use of
    land in well-connected locations. Economic benefits would also result from the
    scheme, both during its construction and following its occupation, which would
    accord with the economic objective set out in paragraph 17 of the Framework. I
    afford moderate weight to scheme’s conformity with the Framework in respect of
    these matters.
40. The proposal would reuse an existing building and previously developed land,
    aligning with the Government’s support for brownfield redevelopment and
    contributing towards urban regeneration objectives. Policy L2 of the Framework
    requires that substantial weight is given to the benefits where a development
    proposal would make better use of underutilised land and buildings or create
    additional homes within settlements by using the airspace above existing
    premises, or through sensitive redevelopment or additional development within
    existing plots.
41. However, Policy DP3 of the Framework emphasises that proposals should
    respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings. Moreover, Policy L2 makes clear that proposals for additional
    homes within settlements should be consistent with the overall streetscene and
    maintain safe access and egress for occupiers and acceptable living conditions for
    residents, including in terms of privacy and external amenity space. For the
    reasons set out in relation to the first and second main issues, I find that the
    proposal would fall wholly short of these requirements of the Framework. I attach
    substantial weight to this conflict, and to the harmful effects of the proposal on the
    character and appearance of the host building and surrounding area as well as the
    failure to deliver acceptable living conditions for future occupiers.
42. Policy S4 of the Framework identifies the circumstances in which the benefits of
    approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse
    effects. This includes situations where the development proposal would fail to
    comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. As I have
    explained above, the proposal conflicts with Policy DP3 of the Framework. On the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009487


       basis that this conflict has not been clearly justified, it, in accordance with the
       provisions of part 3 of Policy DP3, represents a reason to refuse planning
       permission.
43. Taken together, I find that the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework
    does not point to permission being granted in this instance.
44. For the reasons given above, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are
    not of sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in
    accordance with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and
    having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.

E Everitt
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
