Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Rosie Morgan BSc (Hons) MCD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009097
Land to the rear of Melrose, Wigston LE18 3UF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Joel Rose against the decision of Oadby and Wigston Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00315/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a detached bungalow.


Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The parties have both advised that the site address should be ‘land to the rear of
       Melrose’, rather than that used on the original planning application form (‘land to
       the rear of 19 Arndale’).
3.     Since the Council issued its decision in January 2026, the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) has been revised. The 2026 Framework is structured
       differently from previous versions, with the introduction of a set of national decision
       making policies. Whilst the presentation has changed, the content of the
       Framework policies that are relevant to this appeal are similar to the objectives in
       the previous version. The change to national policy does not, therefore, have a
       material bearing on this appeal.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues in this appeal are:
       •     the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
             the area,
       •     the effect on the living conditions of i) future occupiers of the bungalow with
             regard to outdoor space, and ii) existing and future occupiers with regard to
             privacy, and
       •     whether the proposal satisfies mandatory requirements for biodiversity net
             gain.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009097


Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal site is located in an area of modern, suburban housing. Properties
       along Arndale vary considerably in style and design, but in the immediate vicinity
       of the appeal site, the area is characterised by large, detached houses and
       bungalows, many of which have side or front garages. The properties are sited on
       generous plots with wide frontages.
6.     The appeal site comprises a narrow, rectangular plot which occupies a gap
       between 15 and 21 Arndale (Nos. 15 and 21). The site previously formed the
       vehicular access to a two storey garage building associated with Melrose, to the
       rear.
7.     On either side of the appeal site are single storey garages associated with
       Nos. 15 and 21. Garages therefore form the immediate context, being present on
       three sides of the site. However, from the street it is not obvious that the building to
       the rear is (or was) a garage, as the high timber fence which forms the rear
       boundary of the appeal site screens the ground floor from view, leaving only the
       gabled upper floor visible. In any case, side and front garages are common along
       Arndale, and the character of this part of the street is that of a primary residential
       frontage, rather than a service area.
8.     A new residential building would not be unexpected in this location, and the new
       bungalow would not be a large building. Its modest scale would limit its
       prominence, but owing to its position at the head of the cul-de-sac, the proposed
       bungalow would be clearly visible within the streetscene.
9.     The Residential Development Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) provides
       guidance on infill development. Paragraph 3.84 says that individual plots should
       have an area, frontage and depth which are comparable with adjoining properties,
       and should not be out of character with the distinctive locality. At around 6 metres
       wide and with an area of some 150 square metres, the appeal plot size would be
       considerably smaller and narrower than the surrounding properties in Arndale and
       the nearby streets of Peakdale and Wensleydale Road. The narrow frontage of the
       proposed bungalow would appear incongruous, and with no space on either side
       of the building, it would appear cramped and out of character with the surrounding,
       much larger houses set in wide plots.
10. The proposed bungalow would be set back from the street, consistent with the
    front building lines of the adjacent garages. It would be considerably higher than
    the garages, although the effect of the height difference would be reduced as the
    main ridge would be set further back in the plot. Even so, the extensive front roof
    plane would present as a prominent feature. Adjacent buildings would screen the
    side elevations of the new building, which would not be particularly obvious from
    the street. Nonetheless, any difference in roof pitch between the appeal property
    and adjacent garages would contribute to a discordant appearance in this
    prominent location.
11. Due to its modest scale, the proposed development would maintain the wider
    suburban estate character of the Wigston Meadows Urban Character Area,
    defined in the Landscape Character Assessment 2018. Even so, its cramped


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009097


       appearance on an uncharacteristically small plot would cause harm to the
       prevailing character and appearance of this part of Arndale.
12. Policy 11 of the Oadby and Wigston Local Plan 2019 (Local Plan) supports the
    development of bungalows, and the proposal would help to diversify the type of
    house types in the area. However, Policy 11 also requires that all residential
    proposals respect the character of the area, and for the reasons set out above, the
    proposal would fail to do so. It would not comply with Local Plan Policies 6, 15 and
    44 either. Together, these policies require high quality design which respects the
    existing local character, with development patterns that are sympathetic to their
    surroundings and infill developments which do not ‘over develop’ a site from its
    original intended use.
Living conditions
13. The provision of two parking spaces at the front of the property would be more
    than sufficient for a one-bed bungalow, but there would be little private outdoor
    space at the rear. To support the practical needs and health and wellbeing of
    future occupiers, the SPD says that one-bedroom properties should have a
    minimum private rear garden space of 50 square metres. The SPD is guidance
    rather than policy, but at around 38 square metres, the proposed rear garden
    would be much smaller than the SPD figure. The proposed bungalow would be
    small, and future residents may not need a large outdoor space, but the space
    standards set out in the SPD do take account of dwelling size. The extent of the
    shortfall in private garden space is indicative of a poor standard of
    accommodation.
14. Furthermore, the rear garden space of the proposed bungalow would be
    surrounded by walls and fences, so would feel very enclosed. This might not
    necessarily be a negative feature, but the presence of the upper floor gable of the
    rear garage building, very close to the appeal site, could feel oppressive.
15. Its single storey form and the presence of boundary walls and fences means that
    the appeal building itself would not cause unacceptable overlooking or loss of
    privacy to the occupiers of neighbouring properties. However, future residents of
    the bungalow would be subject to overlooking (or the perception of overlooking),
    from the upper floor window in the building to the rear. I acknowledge that
    overlooking is a common feature in suburban areas, but in this case, the bedroom
    window would look directly into the appeal property from close by. This would
    result in a loss of privacy to both the garden space and the main kitchen/living area
    of the bungalow.
16. The Council has advised that the garage building to the rear of the appeal site has
    permission to be converted to additional accommodation associated with Melrose
    (ref 23/00335/FUL). There is a suggestion that the upper floor window which faces
    the appeal site may need to be removed as part of that permission. However,
    there are no specified timescales for removing the window, which was in place at
    the time of my visit. I have assessed the appeal based on the current situation.
17. To conclude, the proposal would not cause harm to the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers, but it would fail to provide acceptable living conditions for
    future occupiers in respect of both private outdoor space and privacy.
    Consequently, the proposal would not comply with Local Plan Policy 6, which
    requires that new development protects local amenity.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009097


18. The Council has also referred to Local Plan Policy 15, which is relevant to matters
    of amenity. However, that policy is concerned with adverse impacts on adjacent or
    nearby properties, which is not the case here.
19. There is further conflict with Framework Policy L2, which encourages efficient use
    of land subject to the need to provide acceptable living standards for residents in
    terms of privacy and external amenity space.
Biodiversity net gain
20. Legislation sets out that every grant of planning permission is deemed to have
    been granted subject to the condition that the biodiversity gain objective is met,
    subject to some exceptions. On the application form, the appellant indicated that
    the development would meet the exemption for custom/self build. However, the
    appellant has provided no specific mechanism to ensure that the property would
    be constructed as custom/self build. The Council has indicated that a planning
    obligation would be the most appropriate way to achieve this, and I agree.
21. In the absence of a signed legal agreement, the custom/self build exemption does
    not apply. Under more recent changes to the biodiversity net gain regime which
    apply to applications submitted from August 2026, the site would be exempt owing
    to its small size. However, the appeal application was submitted before then, and
    no argument has been put forward that the site would fall under the de minimus
    exemption.
22. If I were to allow the appeal, the grant of planning permission would therefore be
    subject to the biodiversity gain condition. There could be opportunities for planting
    in the rear garden, and given the size and condition of the site, the biodiversity
    gain condition may well be capable of being discharged. However, the appellant
    did not provide the minimum biodiversity gain information required as part of the
    application (contained in Article 7 of The Town and Country Planning
    (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015). In the absence of
    this information, uncertainty exists over this matter.
23. The site does not contain features of biodiversity value referred to in Local Plan
    Policy 37, and I have identified no conflict with that policy. However, this does not
    negate the need to comply with mandatory requirements for biodiversity net gain
    which were in place at the time the application was submitted.
Other Matters
24. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Part 1c of Policy S3 goes on to say that development proposals that
    accord with both an up-to-date development plan and the decision making policies
    in the Framework should be approved without delay. However, as explained
    above, the proposal does not comply with the development plan, the relevant
    policies of which are consistent with the Framework. Policy S3 of the Framework
    does not give a reason to allow the appeal.
Conclusion
25. The proposal would provide an additional unit of accommodation within an existing
    urban area, which would make a small contribution to meeting local housing
    needs. However, for the reasons described above, the proposal would cause harm
    to the character and appearance of the area and would fail to provide satisfactory

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009097


       living conditions for future occupiers. In addition, minimum information
       requirements for the biodiversity gain objective have not been met.
26. The proposal would not comply with the development plan or the Framework, and
    there are no material considerations which would outweigh the harms identified.
    The appeal is therefore dismissed.



R Morgan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
