Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 July 2026 by R Pankhurst LLB, MSc
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009943
52 Greek Street, London, W1D 3AW
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 against a refusal to grant express consent.
•   The appeal is made by King Media Ltd against the decision of City of Westminster Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/02000/ADV.
•   The advertisement proposed is described as display of one advertisement sign (4.9m x 5.91m) at 52
    Greek Street, within temporary scaffolding shroud, incorporating a 1:1 facsimile of the building and its
    architectural features printed on it.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of one
   advertisement sign (4.9m x 5.91m) at 52 Greek Street, within temporary scaffolding
   shroud, incorporating a 1:1 facsimile of the building and its architectural features
   printed on it at 52 Greek Street, London, W1D 3AW in accordance with the terms of
   the application, Ref 26/02000/ADV. The consent is subject to the five standard
   conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the Regulations and the following additional
   conditions:
     1) The express consent hereby granted consent shall be for a maximum period of
        6 months which shall begin on the date of commencement of the display or 3
        months from the date of this decision, whichever is the sooner.
     2) The advertisement and surrounding shroud hereby granted consent shall be
        removed at the end of the period specified in Condition 1 or within one calendar
        month of the completion of the maintenance, repair and wind and watertight
        works described in the Schedule of Specific Works Items by CUBED Property
        Advisors Limited dated February 2026, whichever is the sooner.
     3) The inset advertising area hereby granted consent shall not exceed 4.9m
        (width) x 5.91m (height) and shall not be displayed other than at the same time
        as the 1:1 shroud image.
     4) The advertisement hereby granted shall not display any moving, sequential or
        apparently moving images. It shall not display images that resemble traffic
        signs, as defined in Section 64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009943


Preliminary Matters
3. The control of advertisements is exercisable only in the interests of amenity and
   public safety. Regulation 3 states that powers in this regard shall be
   exercised taking into account the provisions of the development plan, so far as they
   are material, and any other relevant factors.
4. The Council has concluded that the advertisement would be acceptable in terms of
   public safety and, from the evidence before me, I have no reason to disagree,
   subject to the conditions listed above.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisement on the amenity of the
   area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal site comprises a four-storey Georgian building with a commercial unit at
   ground-floor level. The surrounding area is characterised by a dense and highly
   urban townscape, comprising predominantly Georgian and later historic buildings
   arranged in narrow plots along a well-preserved historic street pattern. Many
   properties incorporate commercial, restaurant or leisure uses at ground-floor level,
   contributing to the vibrant and active character. The area contains numerous listed
   buildings, including several Grade II listed buildings opposite the site, and the
   Grade I listed House of St Barnabas further away.
7. Greek Street is one of Soho’s principal historic north-south routes and makes an
   important contribution to the significance of the Soho Conservation Area (SCA).
   The Soho and Chinatown Conservation Area Audit (adopted 2005) identifies views
   along Greek Street towards Soho Square as being of particular importance, with
   the street helping to reinforce Soho’s distinctive character of narrow plots, modestly
   detailed historic buildings, active frontages and a rich mix of uses.
8. While existing advertisement and signage on buildings in the area is concentrated
   at ground-floor level, there are a variety of fascia signs, projecting signs and some
   externally illuminated advertisements. Therefore, advertisements are common in
   the local area, although not above ground floor level and not as large as the inset
   proposed by this appeal.
9. The proposed scheme would install a shroud decorated with a 1:1 image of the
   building façade along with an area for advertisement, for a temporary period whilst
   alterations and repairs are made to the building. The Planning Practice Guidance
   (PPG) advises that buildings which are being renovated or are undergoing major
   structural work and which have scaffolding or netting around them may be
   considered suitable as temporary sites for shroud advertisements or large ‘wrap’
   advertisements covering the face, or part of the face, of the building.
10. The proposed shroud would obscure views of the existing building during the period
    of works, which would diminish its positive contribution to the area, to the detriment
    of the character and appearance of the SCA. However, as the 1:1 image would
    cover all the building’s elevations it would represent the architectural qualities of the
    appeal site during the period of construction.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009943


11. The proposed advertisement inset would be atypical of the local area, where
    commercial signage is generally concentrated at ground-floor level. However, the
    enclosed built form of Greek Street would limit direct views of the advertisement
    from longer distances in either direction. Furthermore, the proposed shroud would
    be experienced within a townscape characterised by active commercial frontages
    and a variety of signage associated with restaurants, bars and other commercial
    premises. Given its limited visibility and the commercial character of the
    surrounding streetscene, I am not persuaded that the proposal would appear
    unduly prominent. Whilst the proposal would introduce advertising at an upper-floor
    level, when balanced against the benefits of the 1:1 image, I find that it would result
    in only limited harm to the character and appearance of the Soho Conservation
    Area and to visual amenity.
12. The nearby listed buildings are experienced in this commercial context, where
    advertisements are commonplace. The listed buildings are seen in mainly close
    views due to the nature of the street, and while the appeal site is close to them, it is
    only seen with the listed buildings in longer or oblique views. In these views only
    parts of the proposed inset area would be seen due to the angled shape of the
    appeal building. The 1-1 image would be also be evident in these views. The
    appeal proposal would therefore change the appearance of a small part of the
    street scene temporarily, but the commercial setting and relationship of the listed
    buildings to their neighbours and the tight urban grain would not alter.
    Consequently, the proposal would not harmfully change the setting of the listed
    buildings.
13. The appellant advises that, should the appeal be dismissed, the building would
    instead be covered by traditional scaffolding and a blank shroud during the
    refurbishment works. Whilst blank shrouds are a common feature within central
    London and conservation areas undergoing repair and maintenance, they would
    nevertheless have a similar visual presence to the proposed display. Indeed, a
    plain shroud may appear more conspicuous, as the entirety of its surface would be
    visible rather than incorporating a representation of the building behind. By
    contrast, the proposed 1:1 image would maintain the appearance of the host
    building during the works but would be interrupted by the commercial advertising
    inset. Consequently, I consider that the fallback position would have a broadly
    similar effect on the character and appearance of the SCA and visual amenity as
    the appeal scheme.
14. Moreover, the shroud is only to be displayed for a temporary period, and this would
    further reduce the visual impact of the proposal to the point I am satisfied that
    on balance, these factors would be sufficient to alleviate the residual
    harm identified.
15. Consequently, subject to conditions the proposed advertisement would preserve
    the character and appearance of the SCA and would not harm amenity. In
    producing my recommendation, I have had regard to Policies 42, 44 and 48(G) of
    the City of Westminster City Plan 2019-2040 (April 2021). Among other things,
    these policies require development to contribute to a well designed public realm.
    Given that I have concluded that the proposal would have an acceptable effect on
    amenity and would preserve the character of the SCA, the proposal accords with
    these policies.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009943


Conditions
16. In addition to the five standard conditions set out in the Regulations and the
    conditions mentioned above, it is necessary to define the temporary period of
    consent in order to provide clarity. Alongside this, I consider it necessary to specify
    when the shroud and advertisement must be removed.
17. It is also necessary to limit the size of the inset advertisement display to 4.9m x
    5.91m as applied for, in the interests of visual amenity and the character and
    appearance of the SCA.
Conclusion and Recommendation
18. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed subject to conditions.

R Pankhurst
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
19. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed subject to the standard conditions set out in the
    Regulations and the additional conditions listed above.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
