Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 July 2026
by E Everitt BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009448
Compounds A, A1, and A4, Youngs Industrial Estate, Paices Hill, Aldermaston,
Reading RG7 4PW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
    amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to which a previous
    planning permission was granted.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Tim Young against the decision of West Berkshire District Council.
•   The application Ref 26/00212/FUL, dated 30 January 2026, was refused by notice dated 17 April
    2026.
•   The application sought planning permission for retrospective use of land for storage and distribution
    (Use Class B8) without complying with conditions attached to planning permission Ref
    25/00395/FUL, dated 16 January 2026.
•   The conditions in dispute are Nos 6, 8 and 9 which state that:
    6) Within 3 months of the date of this decision the applicant shall submit to the LPA details of
    sustainable drainage methods (SuDS) to be implemented within the site. Once approved, the
    planning, design and implementation of sustainable drainage methods (SuDS) should be carried out
    in accordance with the Non-Statutory Technical Standards for SuDS (2015), the SuDS Manual C753
    (2015) and the WBC SuDS Supplementary Planning Document December (2018) with particular
    emphasis on green SuDS that provide environmental/biodiversity benefits and water re-use.
    8) Within three months of the date of this permission a scheme for any external lighting to be
    installed on or within Compound A, A1, and A4 shall be submitted in writing by the Local Planning
    Authority. The strategy shall include a plan to show the location of any lighting, isolux contour
    diagram(s), an operation strategy (e.g. details of timed operation), and specifications all lighting to
    ensure that levels are designed within the limitations of Environmental Lighting Zone 1, as described
    by the Institute of Lighting Engineers. No external lighting shall be installed on or within Compound
    A, A1, and A4 except in accordance with the above strategy.
    9) Within three months of the date of this permission a detailed soft landscaping scheme shall be
    submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The soft landscaping scheme
    shall include detailed plans, planting and retention schedule, programme of works, including the
    retention of trees along the northern boundary of the The Youngs Industrial Estate adjacent to 48-49
    Paices Hill, and any other supporting information. All new soft landscaping works shall be completed
    in accordance with the approved soft landscaping scheme within the first planting season following
    approval of the landscaping scheme. Any trees, shrubs, plants or hedges planted in accordance with
    the approved scheme which are removed, die, or become diseased or become seriously damaged
    within five years of completion of this completion of the approved soft landscaping scheme shall be
    replaced within the next planting season by trees, shrubs or hedges of a similar size and species to
    that originally approved.
•   The reasons given for the conditions are:
    6) To ensure that the site does not cause flooding in accord with policy SP6 in the of the West
    Berkshire Local Plan Review 2023-2041.
    8) To protect the amenity of the local area. This condition is applied in accordance with the National
    Planning Policy Framework, and Policies SP7, SP8, DM5 and DM30 of the West Berkshire Local
    Plan Review 2023-2041.
    9) Landscaping is an integral element of achieving high quality design, and to protect the amenity of
    adjoining occupiers. This condition is applied in accordance with the National Planning Policy
    Framework, Policies SP7, SP8, SP10, DM5 and DM30 of the West Berkshire Local Plan Review
    2023-2041, and the Quality Design SPD.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009448


Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the planning permission is granted for the retrospective
       use of land for storage and distribution (Use Class B8) at Compounds A, A1, and
       A4, Youngs Industrial Estate, Paices Hill, Aldermaston, Reading RG7 4PW, in
       accordance with application Ref 26/00212/FUL, without compliance with condition
       9 previously imposed on planning permission Ref 25/00395/FUL dated 16 January
       2026 and subject to the conditions set out in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Tim Young against West Berkshire
       District Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matter
3.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published during
       the consideration of the appeal. I have taken account of this in making my
       decision. As the changes are not material to the issues before me and would not
       alter my conclusions, it has not been necessary to seek further comments from the
       main parties.
Background and Main Issues
4.     Full planning permission was granted in January 2026 for the retrospective use of
       land for storage and distribution (Use Class B8) (reference 25/00395/FUL).
5.     The appellant now seeks the removal of conditions attached to that permission
       relating to sustainable drainage, external lighting and landscaping.
6.     Accordingly, the main issues are:
           •    the effect of the removal of condition 6 on flood risk and water quality;
           •    the effect of the removal of conditions 8 and 9 on the character and
                appearance of the surrounding area; and
           •    the effect of the removal of conditions 8 and 9 on the living conditions of the
                occupiers of 48-49 Paices Hill.
Reasons
Flood risk and water quality
7.     Policy SP6 of the West Berkshire Local Plan Review 2023-2041 (adopted 2025)
       (the LPR) requires that on all development sites surface water is managed in a
       sustainable manner through the implementation of Sustainable Drainage Methods.
       While the appeal site is located within Flood Zone 1, the development relates to
       the change of use of the site only and the hardstanding on the site has been
       present for some time, Policy SP6 does not identify any exceptions for
       development meeting such criteria. Given this, I am of the view that the
       requirements of Policy SP6 are applicable in this case.
8.     The Council has also raised concerns regarding the effect of the change of use on
       pollution control. Such matters were not included in the Council’s reasons for
       imposing condition 6 on the original permission. Nevertheless, I am required to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6009448


       consider the appeal based on the present circumstances and this includes the
       concerns raised by the Council on these matters.
9.     There is no evidence before me regarding any existing drainage system at the
       appeal site or how the implications of the current use of the site, including in
       respect of the materials being stored and level of activity on the site, on drainage
       have been taken into account. The Council notes that the original planning
       application did not include any details of the drainage of the site, with the Planning
       Statement submitted in support of that application outlining that further information
       may be required in relation to such matters and that this could be controlled
       through a condition.
10. The Council has explained that, in the absence of appropriate drainage
    infrastructure, the site could contribute towards flood risk in the surrounding area
    and that silt and other pollutants generated by storage areas used for storing plant
    machinery, vehicles and materials with polluting potential could affect drainage
    systems if not properly managed. In the context of the use of the compounds
    which I observed during my site visit, the importance of appropriate management
    of surface water drainage is, therefore, clear.
11. Against this background, in the absence of any substantive evidence on this
    matter, I cannot be certain that the use of the site does not, or would not in the
    future, adversely affect flood risk in the surrounding area or that the use would not
    adversely affect water quality as a result of silt and other pollutants not being
    appropriately managed. Therefore, I consider that, in this case, control over
    surface water drainage is necessary in the interests of managing flood risk and
    water quality.
12. The appellant has drawn my attention to change of use applications recently
    approved by the Council where conditions relating to drainage details have not
    been imposed. Although I have insufficient information regarding 26/00424/FUL to
    enable a meaningful comparison with the appeal scheme, it is evident that the
    Council’s Flood Risk and Drainage Officer did not object to the proposal. The
    appellant has put to me that 25/00357/FUL and 24/02575/FUL are located
    adjacent to the appeal site and similar planning applications to the appeal scheme,
    for use of the same existing hardstanding as Use Class B8. However, I have
    limited information before me regarding these cases, including details of any
    drainage information submitted with the applications. As such, I am unable to draw
    any meaningful comparisons with the appeal scheme. Moreover, I note that the
    latter of these cases was determined prior to the adoption of the LPR and,
    therefore, considered against different a development plan context.
13. In any event, each case must be considered on its own individual circumstances,
    and I have explained above why I consider control over surface water drainage to
    be necessary in this case. Consequently, requiring a surface water drainage
    strategy in this case does not amount to inconsistency in accordance with the
    principles established in the North Wiltshire District Council v Secretary of State for
    the Environment [1993] 65 P. & C.R. 137 judgement.
14. Even if condition 4 requires information regarding any new occupiers at the appeal
    site to be submitted to the Council, this condition relates to emergency planning
    matters only and would not provide the Council with the opportunity to control the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009448


       occupiers of the compounds or type of goods being stored therein. As such, this
       matter does not lead me to an alternative conclusion on this main issue.
15. Taking account of the above, I conclude that the removal of condition 6 would
    have a harmful effect on flood risk and water quality. In this regard, the condition is
    reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with the relevant provisions of
    Policy SP6 of the LPR, which are outlined above.
Character and appearance
       Lighting
16. Although the appeal site is located close to a number of commercial and industrial
    uses, it is located within the open countryside. In this context, I accept that the
    installation of external lighting could have a harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area, including by detracting from the landscape
    quality of the area and impinging upon the darkness of the night sky.
17. Nevertheless, harm would only potentially occur were lighting to be installed in the
    first place. The appellant has highlighted that the existing occupiers of the appeal
    site have been in place for many years and operational without lighting. In this
    context, I do not consider it reasonable to require the submission of an external
    lighting scheme at this time.
18. Notwithstanding this, were circumstances to change and external lighting be
    sought, it would be necessary to ensure that the lighting would not have a harmful
    effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding area. A proposal for
    external lighting may constitute development and require planning permission.
    However, this is likely to depend on the nature of the proposed lighting. As such, I
    consider that a suitably worded condition is necessary and reasonable. I return to
    this matter subsequently.
19. Accordingly, I conclude that, although the precise wording of condition 8 is not
    reasonable, future control over external lighting is reasonable and necessary in the
    interests of safeguarding the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
    Such control would ensure that the development would, in respect of lighting,
    accord with the relevant provisions of Policies SP7 and SP8 of the LPR. In
    summary, these policies seek development which conserves and enhances the
    diversity and local distinctiveness of the landscape character of the District.
       Landscaping
20. To the north of the appeal site, established vegetation provides a buffer between
    the appeal site, and adjacent industrial and commercial uses, and the residential
    dwelling at 48-49 Paices Hill as well as the countryside beyond. This vegetation
    provides effective separation between, and screening of, the appeal site and
    nearby similar uses from the surrounding area. Indeed, I observed during my site
    visit that the industrial and commercial uses are experienced as a reasonably
    self-contained area separate from the wider landscape due to this vegetation.
21. The Council seeks the retention of this vegetation as well as additional planting to
    screen the site and soften its appearance from the north and north-east. I do not
    dispute that the existing vegetation serves an important role in maintaining the
    character and appearance of the wider landscape and limiting any adverse effects
    which result from the industrial and commercial uses. However, there is no

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009448


       evidence before me demonstrating that the long-term retention of this vegetation is
       under threat as a result of the change of use of the appeal site, or for any other
       reason.
22. Additional landscaping may, to some degree, enhance the character and
    appearance of the area and green infrastructure more generally, in line with the
    aspirations of the Council’s Quality Design Supplementary Planning Document
    (2006) and Policies DP3 and N3 of the Framework, which seek visually attractive
    developments and taking opportunities to incorporate trees and other green
    infrastructure within development. Nonetheless, I am not satisfied that, in the
    context of the above, it is necessary to provide additional landscaping for the
    development to be acceptable in planning terms.
23. In particular, I do not consider such a requirement proportionate or reasonable for
    a proposal which relates only to a small part of the wider area in use for industrial
    and commercial purposes and to a change of use to an alternative storage use.
    Notably, similar conditions have not been imposed on 25/00357/FUL and
    24/02575/FUL. I acknowledge that the former of these cases is separated from the
    wider landscape by the appeal site and the latter was decided prior to the LPR.
    However, in the context of my findings above, I do not consider that the imposition
    of a landscaping condition is reasonable or necessary at the appeal site either.
24. For these reasons, I conclude that the removal of condition 9 would not have a
    harmful effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding area. The
    condition is, therefore, not necessary for compliance with the relevant provisions of
    Policies SP7, SP8 and SP10 in respect of landscaping. These policies, in
    summary, seek to conserve and enhance the diversity and local distinctiveness of
    the landscape character of the District and protect and enhance existing green
    infrastructure assets and linkages.

Living conditions
       Lighting
25. The living conditions of the occupiers of Nos 48-49 could be adversely affected by
    poorly sited or directed or overly bright lights at the appeal site given the
    reasonably short intervening distance. However, such harm would only arise were
    external lighting to be installed.
26. Therefore, I conclude that the disputed condition 8, as it stands, is not reasonable.
    Nevertheless, control over external lighting, were it to be proposed, is reasonable
    and necessary in the interests of safeguarding the living conditions of the
    occupiers of Nos 48-49. Such control would ensure that the development would
    accord with the relevant provisions of Policies DM5 and DM30 of the LPR. In
    summary, these policies seek a high standard of amenity for existing and future
    users of land and buildings.
       Landscaping
27. The Council seeks the retention of the existing trees to the north of the appeal site
    to protect the amenity of adjoining landowners. As outlined above, there is no
    evidence before me indicating any potential risks to the long-term retention of the
    existing trees. As such, on the basis of the information before me, the outlook from
    Nos 48-49 is unlikely to change irrespective of whether condition 9 is removed.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009448


28. I note that the Council also seeks the provision of additional landscaping.
    However, given the extent of existing vegetation and the screening this provides, I
    am not satisfied that additional planting is justified on the basis of the living
    conditions of the occupiers of Nos 48-49.
29. For these reasons, I conclude that the removal of condition 9 would not have a
    harmful effect on the living conditions of occupiers of nearby properties. The
    condition is, therefore, not necessary for the development to comply with the
    relevant provisions of Policies DM5 and DM30 of the LPR in respect of
    landscaping.
Other Matters
30. The dwelling to the north of the appeal site, Nos 48-49, is a Grade II listed building.
    Mindful of the statutory duty set out in section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have had special regard to the
    desirability of preserving its setting. The immediate setting of this asset comprises
    its verdant grounds, including established vegetation at the plot boundaries.
    Beyond this, the wider setting largely comprises open, verdant land, including
    extensive areas of woodland, except for the commercial and industrial uses
    located to the south of the asset, including at the appeal site. The appeal site is
    separated and screened from the asset by established vegetation. This existing
    relationship would be retained. Consequently, I consider that the proposed
    development would preserve the setting of the listed building and, therefore, the
    contribution this makes to its significance.
31. The appeal site is also located close to the Grade II Registered Park and Garden
    known as Aldermaston Court, a designated heritage asset. The appeal site is
    separated from the asset by intervening built form, vegetation and A340. In this
    context, I am satisfied that the proposal would not cause harm to the significance
    of the designated heritage asset.
Conditions
32. I have concluded above that the submission of a sustainable drainage strategy is
    necessary in the interests of managing flood risk. I have, however, amended the
    wording of condition 6 to allow 3 months from the date of this decision for the
    submission of the strategy to Council for approval. I have also amended the
    condition wording for clarity and to ensure compliance with the tests of both
    precision and enforceability. These changes do not alter the fundamental aims of
    the condition previously imposed by the Council.
33. As I have concluded that control over external lighting is only reasonable and
    necessary in the event that lighting is to be installed, I will replace condition 8 with
    a condition which requires the submission of details of the proposed lighting
    strategy prior to the installation of any external lighting, should that occur. This
    amended trigger is consistent with the Council’s comments within its Planning
    Statement of Case. For the reasons set out above, this condition is necessary in
    the interests of safeguarding the character and appearance of the area and the
    living conditions of the occupiers of Nos 48-49.
34. The guidance in the Planning Practice Guidance makes clear that decision notices
    for the grant of planning permission under section 73 should also restate the
    conditions imposed on earlier permissions that continue to have effect. As I have

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009448


       no information before me about the status of the other conditions imposed on the
       original planning permission, I shall impose all those that I consider remain
       relevant, with only minor drafting modifications where this has been necessary. In
       the event that some have been discharged, that is a matter which can be
       addressed by the parties. I have not imposed the standard time limit condition as
       this was not previously imposed and the change of use has already taken place.
Conclusion
35. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed. I will
    grant a new planning permission which does not include condition 9 and which
    includes revised conditions dealing with drainage and external lighting.

E Everitt
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009448


Schedule of Conditions

    1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       approved plans and documents listed below: Location Plan received 17th
       February 2025; Site Plan drawing No 13.418.P.AY001A received 17th February
       2025; and Emergency Plan Compound A, A1 & A4 Version 1.0 dated November
       2025 received 13th November 2025.
    2) The use hereby permitted shall not take place except in accordance with the site
       specific emergency plan hereby approved (Emergency Plan Compound A, A1 &
       A4, Youngs Industrial Estate, RG7 4PW Version 1.0 dated November 2025
       received 13th November 2025), or any subsequent revision/replacement
       approved by the Local Planning Authority. Such emergency plans shall provide
       policies and procedures for the preparedness and response to an incident at
       AWE Aldermaston.
    3) Any site-specific Emergency Plan in effect for the site shall be kept up-to-date,
       and relevant to the current occupant at all times. An amended version of the plan
       may be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for approval pursuant to this
       condition. The Local Planning Authority may at any time require the amendment
       of the Plan by giving notice pursuant to this condition; in which case the
       amended plan shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for approval
       within 1 month of notice being given.
    4) The site shall not be occupied by any new occupant until a new/revised site-
       specific Emergency Plan tailored to that specific occupant has been submitted to
       and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
    5) The premises shall be used for Class B8 storage and for no other purpose
       (including any purpose in Class of the Schedule to the Town and Country
       Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended), or in any provision equivalent
       to that Class in any statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with
       or without modification.
    6) Within 3 months of the date of this decision a scheme for sustainable drainage
       methods (SuDS) to be implemented within the site shall be submitted for the
       written approval of the Local Planning Authority and the scheme shall include a
       timetable for its implementation. The planning, design and implementation of
       sustainable drainage methods (SuDS) shall be in accordance with the Non-
       Statutory Technical Standards for SuDS (2015), the SuDS Manual C753 (2015)
       and the WBC SuDS Supplementary Planning Document December (2018) with
       particular emphasis on green SuDS that provide environmental/biodiversity
       benefits and water re-use. The approved scheme shall be carried out in
       accordance with the approved details and retained thereafter.
    7) No deliveries shall be taken at or despatched from the site, and no employees
       shall be on site outside the following hours: 7:00 am to 7:00 pm to Mondays to
       Fridays; 7:00 am to 1:00 pm on Saturdays; No use on Sundays or Bank
       Holidays.
    8) Prior to the installation of any external lighting on or within Compound A, A1, and
       A4, full details of the proposed lighting strategy shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The strategy shall include a
       plan to show the location of lighting, isolux contour diagram(s), an operation
       strategy (e.g. details of timed operation), and specifications for all lighting to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6009448


         ensure that levels are designed within the limitations of Environmental Lighting
         Zone 1, as described by the Institute of Lighting Engineers. No external lighting
         shall be installed on or within Compound A, A1, and A4 except in accordance
         with the approved details.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
