Appeal Decision
Site Visit on 6 August 2026 by Finlay Bradford BA (Hons) MRTPI
Decision by Paul Thompson DipTRP MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009759
72 Arnold Crescent, Isleworth, Hounslow TW7 7NU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Ian John Tonkin against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Hounslow.
•   The application Ref is P/2026/0530.
•   The development proposed was originally described as the “erection of a rear roof extension with hip
    to gable conversion and front roof windows to the house, removal of chimney, demolition of rear
    conservatory and side garage, erection of a ground floor side and rear extension, erection of a front
    porch”.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of a
   rear conservatory and side garage and the erection of a ground floor side and rear
   extension and a front porch at 72 Arnold Crescent, Isleworth, Hounslow TW7 7NU
   in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref P/2026/0530, subject to the
   following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location Plan and TSL/IAN/EXT/02, 03, 05,
              and 07.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension shall match those used in the existing dwelling.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. During my site visit, I observed that the chimney had been removed and that the
   rear roof extension, including the hip-to-gable conversion, had been completed.
   The parties agree that these works are permitted development, as confirmed by
   Certificate of Lawfulness ref. P/2025/3702. As these works have already been
   undertaken and are lawful, they no longer comprise a fallback position requiring
   consideration. Furthermore, as they do not form part of the development now
   proposed, it is unnecessary for me to consider them in the determination of this
   appeal. Accordingly, the description of development has been amended to remove

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009759


     these elements, amongst others not constituting development, in the interests of
     accuracy and clarity.
Main Issue
4. With regard to the reasons set out within the Preliminary Matters, the main issue is
   the effect of the proposed ground floor side and rear extension, and front porch on
   the character and appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. Arnold Crescent is characterised predominantly by semi-detached dwellings of a
   similar design, scale and roof form. Whilst many properties have been altered and
   extended over time, including the addition of side extensions and front porches of
   varying designs and scales, there remains an observable uniformity to the
   appearance and massing of development which contributes positively to the
   character of the area. The appeal site comprises a semi-detached dwelling which,
   aside from the hip-to-gable roof extension, remains largely uniform in appearance
   with its attached neighbour and within the wider development pattern. The dwelling
   is set forward of the neighbouring property to its opposite side, resulting in a
   staggered building line and the exposure of a portion of the host’s side elevation.
6. The rear extension would exceed the advised maximum depth set out within the
   Residential Extension Guidelines SPD (2024) (SPD). However, the primary function
   of this limitation is to protect the living conditions of neighbouring occupants with
   regard to light and outlook, an issue which is not raised by the Council.
7. In any event, I observed several rear extensions of a similar depth to the proposed
   development. Where these were smaller, they were not appreciably so nor to an
   extent of which their effect to the character and appearance would be materially
   different to that proposed. Furthermore, the rear extension would be similar in
   depth to the rear structure on the attached neighbouring property. Accordingly, the
   scale of proposed rear extension would not appear incongruous to the host
   dwelling or surrounding area.
8. The SPD sets out that side extensions should be set back by a minimum of 1m to,
   amongst other things, allow the original proportions of the dwelling to remain
   prominent. The side elevation of the dwelling is highly visible and the proposed side
   extension would not be set back from the front elevation. However, its single-storey
   scale and proportions would ensure that the original dwelling would continue to be
   appreciated and therefore prominent in relation to it.
9. The proposed front porch would project beyond the existing bay window. However,
   it would not appear incongruous or dominant in relation to the dwelling or the
   surrounding area. I note that the Council reached a similar finding that its scale
   would be acceptable. While the porch would not strictly be consistent with the
   advice set out in the SPD, I am mindful that the area is characterised by porches
   that project beyond bay windows and, in any event, the bay window would remain a
   prominent element of the dwelling’s front elevation.
10. For these reasons the proposed ground floor side and rear extension, and front
    porch would not have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the host
    dwelling and the surrounding area. Hence, the proposals would not conflict with
    Policies CC1, CC2, and SC7 of the of the London Borough of Hounslow Local Plan


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009759


     2015-2030 which, among other things, aim to ensure seek to ensure that
     extensions and alterations respond sensitively to their context, remain subordinate
     to the host dwelling, and preserve or enhance the established character and
     appearance of the street scene through high-quality design.
Conditions
11. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I recommend a condition requiring
    that the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans. This is
    necessary for enforcement purposes. I also recommend a condition requiring that
    the external materials match those of the existing dwellings, in the interests of the
    character and appearance of the area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
12. For the reasons given above, I recommend that the appeal should be allowed,
    subject to the conditions set out above.

Finlay Bradford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
13. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

Paul Thompson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
