Appeal Decision
Site visit made 11 August 2026
by O Marigold BSc DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009443
Land East of Nordic Barn, Kilkhampton, Bude EX23 9HN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Herman Sundberg against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA26/00089.
•    The development proposed is for use of land for the siting of 3nos glamping pods, provision of hard
     standing, driveway access and installation of solar panel array.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have taken the address of the site from the Council’s Decision Notice, which
       better reflects the location than that used in the application form. The appellant has
       used the same address in the appeal form and so I am satisfied that no party
       would be prejudiced as a result.
3.     Since the appeal was made, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) has been published, on 17 August 2026. The Council and the
       appellant have had the opportunity to comment on this change in policy. I have
       determined the appeal using the current planning policy position.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are whether the proposal would accord with the spatial strategy of
       the Development Plan, in respect of:
           •    its effect on the character and appearance of the area, and
           •    its access to services and facilities.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
5.     The site consists of parts of a field within attractive countryside. It is accessed off a
       rural lane, Stibb Road. As part of the wider site, there is a barn converted to a
       dwelling, together with a hard surfaced entrance and driveway, and an implement
       store. These features are located relatively close to the road. The surrounding
       area has only scattered development, and the site is beyond any settlement.
6.     The site is within the Gooseham to Launcells Area of Great Landscape Value
       (AGLV). It is close to part of the Cornwall National Landscape (NL), also known as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009443


       an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), on the opposite side of Stibb
       Road. The Cornwall Character Area Study, August 2023, identifies the area as
       having an intact rural and pastoral landscape. The rolling and exposed nature of
       the site and its surroundings give an expansive rural character.
7.     The application proposes the erection of three eco-friendly holiday pod buildings.
       They would be constructed of timber, and would have green roofs. The proposal
       includes a solar array to serve the buildings, together with the creation of a
       compacted gravel access drive, across parts of the field.
8.     Policy 2 of the Cornwall Local Plan (CLP), adopted November 2016, seeks to
       maintain the dispersed pattern of development in Cornwall, and to provide homes
       based on the role and function of each place. Policy 3 only permits new housing in
       circumstances that do not apply here. These policies are relevant to the camping
       pods as they provide a form of housing, even if a condition were to be imposed
       requiring their use for holiday purposes.
9.     CLP policy 5 supports new tourism accommodation of an appropriate scale for its
       location. CLP policies 2, 12 and 23 seek to conserve and enhance the natural
       landscape and the distinctive character of Cornwall, including the AGLV. Policy C1
       of the Climate Emergency Development Plan Document (CEDP), adopted
       February 2023, has similar aims. CLP policy 3 also requires that the setting of
       AONBs is conserved and enhanced.
10. The proposed buildings would have a relatively small size and a low height. They
    would use natural materials, a reversable construction method, and have green
    roofs which would help to minimise their visual effects. They would also have a low
    density. Even so, the pods and the array would be located well away from the
    existing buildings. As a result, the proposal would result in appreciable new built
    form intruding into the undeveloped open countryside.
11. The proposed new main access drive would extend hard surfacing across the field
    from the entrance, with little relationship to other physical features. Consequently,
    its scale would have an intrusive and scarring effect on the landscape, on a
    permanent basis. The development would result in paraphernalia associated with
    the use, such as seating and barbeque areas, which would further domesticate the
    site and its surroundings.
12. The adverse effects of the proposal would be prominent in the landscape as well
    as being visible from publicly obtainable viewpoints, for example from Stibb Road.
    Landscaping could be secured by condition, and this is proposed as part of
    Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG). However, given the topography of the land, this
    would be unlikely to sufficiently soften or screen the development. Nor can
    landscaping be relied upon for example in winter months, when foliage is reduced.
13. On this basis, the proposal would harmfully erode the rural and pastoral
    landscape, contrasting with its soft, rolling character. Given the close proximity of
    the site to the NL, for the same reasons as given above, it would detract from the
    NL setting, harming its natural beauty.
14. Accordingly, the proposal would not accord with the spatial strategy of the
    Development Plan, in respect of the character and appearance of the area. It
    would therefore conflict with CLP policies 2, 3, 5, 12 and 23 and CEDP policy C1. I
    give this harm and conflict very substantial negative weight in the planning

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009443


       balance. CLP policy 27 and CEDP policy T1 relate to transport and accessibility
       and so are not relevant to this main issue. I shall consider CLP policy 1 below.
Services and Facilities
15. CEDP policies C1 and T1 seek to maximise the ability of people to make trips by
    public transport and other sustainable modes of travel. This is to support walking
    and cycling for daily living, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. CLP policies
    2 and 12 have similar aims, whilst policy 27 requires development to have suitable
    access. CLP policy 5 supports new tourist accommodation where it would be of an
    appropriate scale for its degree of accessibility by a range of transport modes. CLP
    policy 7 only permits housing in specific circumstances, none of which include the
    proposal.
16. The closest settlement to the site is Stibb, but this is small and has few if any
    facilities. The nearest location with a range of services is the town of Bude, around
    4 miles away. Access to the town would require using country lanes which are
    narrow in places, and do not have continuous pavement or street lighting. As such,
    use of the roads by bike or on foot would be difficult, especially at night, in
    inclement weather, or for those of limited mobility. The same is true of public rights
    of way in the area.
17. Buses travel along Stibb Road, but the nearest stops are some distance from the
    site, and require the use of the road to reach them. In areas without fixed stops, I
    understand that buses may stop at other locations, if requested and safe to do so.
    However, bus drivers may not be willing to stop hereabouts given the narrow
    nature of the road and its 60mph speed limit. Holidaymakers unfamiliar with the
    area may well feel uneasy at relying on such an arrangement. In any case, bus
    services are few with just three in each direction on weekdays, and only one
    service in one direction on Saturdays, with none on Sundays.
18. It follows that future occupiers of the proposal would have few alternatives to the
    private car for accessing services and facilities. Patterns of movement associated
    with holiday use may be different when compared to principal home occupation,
    but I have little reason to believe that trips would necessarily be limited. Some
    occupiers may choose to use electric vehicles and/or to car share, but this is by no
    means guaranteed. In light of the above, the proposal would not limit the need to
    travel or maximise the ability of people to make trips by sustainable modes of
    transport.
19. Many examples of holiday parks and accommodation located in rural areas of
    Cornwall have been provided to me. Some of these are relatively close to the site,
    and are accessed from Stibb Road. These include Wooda Farm Holiday Park, a
    large site which I understand has received planning permission to expand. Two
    sites within the Bude rural area have been granted planning consent for three and
    ten camping pods respectively. Broad reference has been made to other decisions
    relating to similar uses.
20. These decisions are an important material consideration, as is the need for
    consistency. That said, I have only limited details of the circumstances involved in
    these cases, preventing useful comparison. Some of the cases pre-date the
    adoption of current Development Plan policy, as well as the new Framework.
    These decisions must be set against the need to properly apply planning policy.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009443


       Ultimately, I have reached my conclusions against the proposal and policy position
       before me.
21. For the reasons given above, the proposal would not accord with the spatial
    strategy of the Development Plan in respect of access to services and facilities. It
    would therefore conflict with CLP policies 2, 5, 7, 12 and 27, and CEDP policies
    C1 and T1. I give this harm and conflict very substantial negative weight in the
    planning balance. I find no additional conflict with CLP policy 3 in respect of this
    issue. I shall consider CLP policy 1 below.
Other Considerations
22. CLP policy 1 applies a presumption in favour of sustainable development which
    reflects an earlier version of the Framework. There is no dispute that the Council is
    unable to demonstrate an adequate supply of housing land. As such, the policy
    requires that permission is granted unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise, taking into account whether any adverse impacts of the proposal would
    significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits when assessed against the
    Framework, or if specific Framework policies indicate that development should be
    restricted.
23. Framework policy E4 supports the sustainable growth of businesses in rural areas
    including through well-designed new buildings. It recognises that such proposals
    may need to be located outside settlements, and may not be well served by public
    transport. Nevertheless, it makes clear that such proposals should take
    opportunities to use sites physically well-related to existing development, and must
    be appropriate in respect of their siting having regard to the character of its
    surroundings. Given my findings above, the proposal would not meet these
    requirements and so would conflict with policy E4.
24. Framework policy N2 requires proposals to contribute positively to the natural
    environment. Policy N4 makes clear that development within the setting of
    Protected Landscapes, including the NL, should be sensitively located and
    designed to avoid or minimise adverse impacts. In light of my conclusions above,
    the proposal would conflict with these aims and therefore with policies N2 and N4.
25. Framework policy CC2(1)(a) requires that proposals should support good access
    to facilities in order to limit the need to travel, including in respect of location.
    Policy TR3(1) requires that development is located where it can support
    sustainable patterns of movement and enable good accessibility for different
    users. Policy TR3(1)(e) recognises the constraints on connectivity opportunities in
    rural areas. Even so, given my conclusions above, the proposal would not accord
    with these policies.
26. The site is outside of any settlement, and so Framework policy S5 is engaged.
    This sets out types of development which should be approved unless the benefits
    of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. Policy
    S5(1)(b) supports rural tourism development, albeit where a location outside a
    settlement is shown to be necessary.
27. Benefits of the development include economic contributions to the local area
    during construction, and from spending by holidaymakers. They also include
    renewable energy generation, electric vehicle charging, biodiversity improvements
    including through BNG, and social benefits. The appellant does not seek to place

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009443


       undue reliance upon housing delivery matters. However, even taking into account
       the above advantages, I conclude that the benefits of the proposal would be
       substantially outweighed by the adverse effects that I have identified. Accordingly,
       policy S5 does not support it.
28. Overall, I conclude that the proposal would not accord with the policies of the
    Framework, read in the round. The Framework is a material consideration of
    critical importance and therefore weighs heavily against it. Similarly, in respect of
    CLP policy 1, the harm caused by the proposal would significantly and
    demonstrably outweigh its benefits. As such, it would conflict with CLP policy 1.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given, I have found conflict with the Development Plan as a whole.
    The material considerations in this case, including the Framework, do not indicate
    a decision other than in accordance with the Development Plan. This leads me to
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

O Marigold
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
