Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by John Pearce MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009847
The Old Stables, 12 Kenward Court, Hadlow, Tonbridge, Kent TN11 0DX
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Ms Elaine Cardon-Llach against the decision of Tonbridge and Malling
       Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is TM/25/01244/PA.
•      The works proposed are descripted as ‘to replace old wooden windows and doors with bespoke
       timber alternative. The colour brown would be used as this was the original colour but if possible
       would like to use grey if permitted’.

Decision
1.        The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.        As the works proposed relate to a listed building, I have had special regard to
          section 16(2) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
          (as amended) (the Act).
3.        The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
          in August 2026. The revised Framework is a material consideration which should
          be taken into account from the day of publication. Having considered the revisions
          and in light of the principles of natural justice, the parties have been provided with
          an opportunity to comment on the revised Framework.
4.        The proposed replacement windows are described as a bespoke timber
          alternative. Nonetheless, the evidence submitted demonstrates that the
          replacement windows would be constructed from uPVC. Moreover, while the
          description of the proposed works suggests that the windows could be finished in
          a brown or grey colour, it is clear from the evidence before me that brown is
          proposed. I have proceeded with the appeal on this basis.
Main Issue
5.       The main issue is whether the works proposed would preserve the Grade II listed
         building, The Maltings I and II, and any of the features of special architectural or
         historic interest that it possesses.
Reasons
6.       The appeal site comprises part of a former stables building associated with the
         Grade II listed The Maltings I and II1, a pair of large former maltings buildings of
1
    List Entry Number: 1070448

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009847


       the Hadlow Brewery. The Maltings I and II are set at an angle to each other and
       are finished with buff-coloured Flemish bond brick with bands of red brick and red
       brick dressing beneath slate roofs. Two drying kilns at one end of each building
       are finished with pyramid roofs topped with cowls with swan figures.
7.     The special interest of the listed building arises in part from its architectural interest
       and historic function relating to the former use as maltings associated with a local
       brewery. The scale of the buildings embellished by the fine brickwork detailing,
       including the decorative red brick dressings and cogged brick eaves cornice,
       suggests the importance of the brewery within the settlement.
8.     The appeal property is within the former stables building and is located on the
       opposite side of Carpenters Lane from the buildings forming Maltings I and II
       amongst modern residential development. For the purposes of the Act, a listed
       building includes any structure that is within its curtilage which has existed since
       before 1st July 1948. The parties do not dispute that due to its physical layout,
       ownership, and functional links the outbuilding is listed by virtue of being within the
       curtilage of The Maltings I and II.
9.     There is limited substantive evidence before me that details the form and
       appearance of the former stables building prior to its conversion into three
       dwellings. The former stables building has a symmetrical front elevation
       comprising brickwork in a Flemish bond with quoins to the corners and forming
       arched surrounds to windows set within the gable features either side of a central
       archway. Despite its residential conversion, the historic functional relationship of
       the former stables with the brewery and the pleasing architectural detailing mean
       that the building makes a positive contribution to the significance of the designated
       heritage asset.
10. Policy HE4 of the Framework states that heritage assets, as an irreplaceable
    resource, should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance. Policy
    HE6 states that when considering the potential effect of a development proposal
    on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be
    given to the asset’s conservation.
11. The works proposed are for the replacement of the existing timber double glazed
    windows and doors. The existing windows and doors date from the 1980s when
    the building was converted to form the three existing dwellings. Given the
    modernity of the windows and doors, the parties agree the existing windows are of
    no historic value and make a limited contribution to the significance of the listed
    building. No harm would therefore arise from their removal. Nevertheless, the
    majority of the modern timber windows and doors have been retained and provide
    a level of coherence that maintains the former stables appearance as a single
    entity.
12. The proposed windows and doors would be in a uPVC material with a timber effect
    applied to the frames to mimic a wood grain. In addition, the frames would be
    coloured brown to match the existing windows and doors and fitted with double
    glazing. It is suggested that the proposed windows would have a very high energy
    performance, secure with exceptional weather proofing and low maintenance.
    However, the level of detail provided with the appeal does not provide any degree
    of certainty that the new windows and doors would be in the same style as the
    existing ones and reflect the visual and textural properties of timber windows and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009847


       doors. In any event, it is not possible to accurately reflect the textural qualities,
       natural variations and weathering characteristics of timber in a modern material.
       Furthermore, the appropriateness of a window is not solely related to the visual
       appearance, but the authenticity of building materials and local vernacular and
       how this relates to the heritage values of the building. The use of uPVC windows
       and doors would not be an appropriate material for these key elements of the
       building.
13. While the submitted details, including brochures and specifications, indicate that
    the proposed windows would attempt to replicate the characteristics of timber
    windows, there are no precise drawings of the windows and doors, including
    cross-sections showing the composition of the windows and doors. There is a lack
    of precise detail in respect of whether glazing bars would be internal or external or
    the format of panelling on the front door. Accurate and unambiguous drawings are
    necessary to avoid doubt about what is proposed and to allow a robust
    assessment of any consequent effects.
14. Although precise details of the replacement windows have not been provided, the
    use of uPVC would cause harm to the significance of the listed building. Policy
    HE5 2 of the Framework requires that an assessment should identify whether
    proposals would be likely to result in harm to the significance of a heritage asset,
    either from work affecting the asset itself or from development within its setting,
    and that the degree of harm should be identified. The proposed works relate to a
    building that is listed by virtue of being within the curtilage of The Maltings I and II.
    Moreover, the works would be of a small scale and restricted to the replacement of
    windows and doors that are not historic. Nevertheless, the proposal would
    introduce an inappropriate material that relate poorly to the heritage values of the
    building. Consequently, there would be a limited degree of harm to the significance
    of the heritage asset.
15. Policy HE6 3 of the Framework states that any harm to a designated heritage
    asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight. Where a
    development proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    Policy HE6 4 states that the effect on the asset and its significance should be
    weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal and identifies
    enabling energy efficiency as an important public benefit.
16. The appellant indicates that the replacement windows and doors would improve
    security and would be lower maintenance whilst enhance energy efficiency.
    Nevertheless, there is no substantive evidence before me that demonstrates that
    the proposed windows and doors would enhance energy efficiency in comparison
    to the existing double-glazed windows. Moreover, the maintenance levels and
    security capabilities of the windows and doors are private benefits that would not
    weigh in favour of the proposed works. Accordingly, the public benefits do not
    outweigh the harm identified.
17. The appellant has drawn my attention to listed building consent for UPVC windows
    at No 11 Kenward Court, which forms the middle dwelling within the former stables
    building. There is limited information before me detailing the circumstances by
    which consent was granted for these works, including drawings of both the existing
    and proposed windows. Consequently, I cannot make a direct comparison
    between the consented scheme and the works proposed before me.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009847


18. Some of the proposed works are not readily visible from the public realm, including
    the replacement windows and doors to the side and rear of the building. However,
    listed buildings, including curtilage listed buildings, are safeguarded for their
    inherent architectural and historic interest irrespective of whether or not public or
    private views of the building can be gained.
19. I conclude that the works proposed would not preserve the Grade II listed building
    and would conflict with the expectations of s16(2) of the Act. Although
    development plan policies do not strictly apply to applications for listed building
    consent the proposal would also conflict with the policies set out in the Council’s
    decision.
Other Matter
20. The appeal site is within the Hadlow Conservation Area (CA). As required by
    Section 72(1) of the Act, I have paid special regard to preserving or enhancing the
    character or appearance of a conservation area. Given the limited scale and
    discreet position of the appeal site within the context of the CA, including the
    location within a modern development, the proposal would preserve the character
    and appearance of the CA. It is noteworthy that the Council found similarly in this
    regard.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

John Pearce
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
