Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 19th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009199
24 Overton Grove, Birmingham B27 7LP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by M Din against the decision of Birmingham City Council.
•   The application Ref is 2026/00338/PA.
•   The development proposed is a double storey side and rear extension, and single storey rear
    extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on a) the character
   and appearance of the area; and b) the living conditions of the occupiers of Number
   22 Broom Hall Grove (No. 22), with specific regard to privacy.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
4. The appeal property is an end-terrace dwelling located within a small cul-de-sac
   characterised by similarly designed terraces of a consistent scale and appearance.
   The properties are generally set back from the highway behind modest front
   gardens and driveways. Notwithstanding some alterations, the spaces between
   buildings and the largely unaltered form of the dwellings provide a cohesive and
   harmonious street scene which contributes positively to the character and
   appearance of the area.
5. The proposals would occupy much of the existing gap between the appeal dwelling
   and the neighbouring property. As a result, the development would substantially
   reduce the sense of openness that presently exists between the terraces. Given its
   considerable width and height, it would appear as a significant bulky addition that
   would compete with, rather than remain subordinate to, the host dwelling.
6. The shallow roof forms and flat-roofed elements would fail to reflect the prevailing
   roof design of the host dwelling and surrounding properties. The altered proportions

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009199


     of the front elevation, including the smaller-scale fenestration, would introduce an
     incongruous appearance that would appear at odds with the established character
     of the street. Cumulatively, these elements would combine to unacceptably reduce
     the quality of area’s consistent and original feel.
7. Other side extensions present within the street appear subordinate and in keeping
   with the design and scale of their respective host dwellings. Therefore, they do not
   justify an extension of the size and design proposed in this appeal scheme. Given
   its prominent position at the end of the terrace and its visibility from within the cul-
   de-sac, the proposal would be readily apparent within public views.
8. Consequently, the proposed development would cause unacceptable harm to the
   character and appearance of the area, contrary to Policy PG3 of the Birmingham
   Development Plan 2031, 2017 (DP), Policy DM2 of the Development Management
   in Birmingham, Development Plan Document 2031, 2021 and guidance contained
   in the Birmingham Design Guide, Principles Document, 2022 (PD), which, amongst
   other things, seek to ensure new development is of a high quality design that
   responds to site conditions and is appropriate to its location.
Living Conditions
9. The proposal would project further towards the rear boundary, reducing the
   separation distance between the appeal property and No. 22. First floor rear facing
   windows would directly overlook the private rear garden serving No. 22. Whilst a
   degree of mutual overlooking is often characteristic of this type of residential
   environment, the proposed extension would bring additional elevated viewing
   opportunities noticeably closer to the neighbouring property. Consequently,
   occupants of No. 22 would experience an increased perception of being overlooked
   when using their garden. Taken together with the direct views available from the
   proposed windows, this would result in an unacceptable loss of privacy and a
   corresponding adverse effect on living conditions.
10. A condition requiring obscure glazing may afford privacy for the occupiers of No. 22
    when using their rear garden, however, it would not represent a satisfactory
    solution. Requiring the glazing to remain permanently obscure would result in
    inadequate living conditions for future occupiers of those bedrooms in terms of
    outlook. Consequently, imposing such a condition would replace one identified
    harm with another.
11. As such, the proposals would harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
    This would conflict with Policy PG3 of the DP, and guidance contained in the PD.
    Amongst other things, these seek to ensure development does not result in
    unacceptable adverse impacts on the amenity of neighbours including privacy and
    overlooking. Details of Policy TP27 of the DP have not been provided. There is
    however sufficient in the above mentioned policies to come to a view on the appeal
    scheme’s extent of compliance with the development plan.
Other Matters
12. Whilst certain forms of enlargement may be possible under the exercise of
    permitted development rights, no evidence has been provided to demonstrate
    precisely what development could be carried out, whether it would be comparable
    to the appeal proposal, or what its likely effects would be on the character and
    appearance of the area and neighbouring living conditions. As such, the existence

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009199


     of permitted development rights does not materially diminish the harm I have
     identified, and I attach only limited weight to a perceived fallback position.
13. Of the cited examples, only limited information has been provided. Aerial
    photography alone provides only a limited basis upon which to assess the scale,
    design, massing and visual impact of those developments, or their relationship with
    neighbouring properties and the wider street scene. Nor does it allow for a
    meaningful assessment of any effect on neighbouring living conditions. In the
    absence of full planning histories, it is unclear under what policy context these
    developments were considered acceptable, whether they pre-date the adoption of
    the current development plan and design guidance, or what site-specific
    circumstances may have informed those decisions. Indeed, several of the
    reference numbers would suggest that permissions were granted many years prior
    to the adoption of the more recent design policies.
14. The proposals have been considered on their own merits, having regard to the
    particular characteristics of the appeal site and the development. Even if some of
    the examples share broad similarities with the appeal scheme, they do not
    demonstrate that the appeal proposal would avoid the harms that I have set out.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan, and material considerations do not indicate a decision other
    than in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
