Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by A Knight BA PG Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009844
17 Brook Lane, Brookville, Norfolk IP26 4RQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Country Properties (Norfolk) Ltd against the decision of King's Lynn and West
     Norfolk Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01585/O.
•    The development proposed is outline application for construction of self-build dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     In the banner heading above, I have used the description of development provided
       on the application form. I note that it is shown on the decision notice as “Outline
       Application for construction of self-build dwelling and approval of access”.
3.     The appeal scheme relates to an outline proposal, with access to be considered at
       this stage and all other matters reserved for future consideration. I have
       determined the appeal accordingly. Plans have been submitted as part of the
       appeal indicating how one dwelling could be accommodated on the site. I have
       taken these into account for illustrative purposes only.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. The main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
       any implications for the appeal, and I have taken any responses received into
       account in reaching my decision.
5.     The appellant has submitted additional plans ref 2683-10B and 2683-02B. Whilst I
       recognise that the appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme, the
       new plans only slightly relocate what would otherwise remain much the same point
       of access. I have detailed comments on the additional plans from the Local
       Highway Authority (LHA). The additional plans do not involve a substantial
       difference to the application and my accepting them would not cause unlawful
       procedural unfairness to anyone involved in the appeal.
6.     The third reason for refusal cited the prospect that future occupiers of the
       proposed development would experience noise and odour from a nearby poultry
       farm. The Council has since narrowed its concerns to odour alone. I proceed
       accordingly.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009844


Main Issues
7.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the appeal site would be a suitable location for the proposed
                development having regard to the development plan;
           •    the effect of the proposal on highway safety; and
           •    whether the proposed development would provide adequate living
                conditions for its future occupiers with particular regard to odour.
Reasons
Location
8.     The appeal site includes garden land associated with an existing dwelling, 17
       Brook Lane (No17). It is beyond the development boundary for Brookville, which is
       defined in Policy LP01 of the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk Local Plan 2021-2040
       (2025) (the Local Plan) as within Tier 6 of the Settlement Hierarchy.
9.     Local Plan Policy LP02 sets out the adopted approach to residential development
       beyond Tier 6 development boundaries; It will not normally be supported, unless
       allocated through the Local Plan or a Neighbourhood Plan. As neither is true of the
       appeal scheme, it does not comply with Policy LP02.
10. Local Plan Policy LP31 supports proposals for custom and self-build housing,
    subject to respect for local character and compliance with other relevant policies in
    the plan.
11. As set out above, the appeal scheme does not comply with Policy LP02.
    Moreover, there is no means by which I could be certain that the proposed
    dwelling would ultimately be a self-build development. Whilst there is a direct
    reference in Policy LP31 to the use of planning conditions to secure plots for self-
    build, the Council tells me that subsequent appeal decisions have led it to
    conclude such an outcome can, in fact, only be achieved using a legal agreement.
12. I have been provided with no counter argument from the appellant on this point,
    and it is not clear to me that a planning condition securing the plot for self-build
    would be enforceable. There is no legal agreement in place. Taking these matters
    together, I find that the appeal scheme does not have the support of Policy LP31.
13. The appellant contends that the scheme would represent a logical infill or
    rounding-off, rather than encroachment into open countryside. These are not
    matters of relevance to the policies set out above and so do not affect my findings,
    though I shall return to them when I come to undertake the planning balance.
14. I recognise that there is an established café some 0.6m north of the appeal site,
    but the route there is along a stretch of the B1112 that contains no pavements or
    lighting. I find it unlikely that future occupiers of the proposed dwelling would walk
    or cycle there. In any event, I do not consider a café to be a facility likely to meet
    daily domestic needs.
15. A footpath leads south from the appeal site, along the B1112 through the main part
    of Brookville and into Methwold. The latter contains a secondary school, village


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009844


       shop, and primary school some 1.1 miles, 1.5 miles, and 1.8 miles from the site
       respectively.
16. These distances are great enough that few people would walk them very often.
    Cyclists would be encouraged by part of the footpath being a shared surface, but I
    see little reason to believe many would regularly cycle 1.5m with heavy shopping. I
    doubt very much that many children of primary school age would regularly cycle
    1.8m. That the B1112 is fast-moving and the route has no lighting confirms me in
    these views. Overall, it is likely that occupiers of the proposed development would
    depend upon the private car for their day-to-day needs.
17. The site would not be a suitable location for the proposed development having
    regard to the development plan. The proposed development would fail to comply
    with Local Plan Policies LP02, LP18, LP19, LP21, and LP31 where they set out
    the circumstances in which windfall housing will be supported, and where they
    support the Spatial Strategy and Settlement Hierarchy.
Highway safety
18. The original plans relied upon achieving access to the appeal site via Brook Lane,
    which has an existing point of access from the B1112 (the Brook Lane access
    point). The LHA’s concerns over that arrangement related to the Brook Lane
    access point having a loose, unmade surface. It has confirmed that such concerns
    could be overcome if the appellant could demonstrate the legal right to carry out
    resurfacing work.
19. The additional plans submitted with the appeal propose the use of a different
    existing access point off the B1112, one which is found immediately to the north of
    the Brook Lane access point (the northern access point). This also has a loose,
    unmade surface. The LHA again raises no objection so long as the appellant has
    the right to undertake resurfacing work.
20. The guidance on making a planning application states: “The application site should
    be edged clearly with a red line on the location plan. It should include all land
    necessary to carry out the proposed development (e.g. land required for access to
    the site from a public highway, visibility splays, landscaping, car parking and open
    areas around buildings). A blue line should be drawn around any other land owned
    by the applicant, close to or adjoining the application site”.
21. The additional plans draw a red line around the northern access point, but that
    same land was not edged in blue on the original plans. That is to say, I am told
    that the appellant has rights to the northern access point even though they
    declared no such rights when submitting the application. I have little explanation
    for this apparent anomaly.
22. The second reason for refusal came about due to doubts on the part of the Council
    that the appellant had the right to resurface the access point upon which the
    scheme would depend. The additional plans have not overcome such concerns,
    and I cannot be certain that a planning condition requiring appropriate resurfacing
    work could be complied with.
23. The appellant informs me that the northern access point “was considered
    acceptable under application 25/01581/O”. I have so few details about that
    application that I do not know how the issue of the loose surface was addressed,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009844


       much less that the same approach could be taken in this appeal. I also have no
       evidence that the application in question shows the appellant to have rights over
       the access point.
24. It has not been sufficiently demonstrated that the proposed development would
    avoid negative effects on highway safety. As such, conflict arises with Local Plan
    Policies LP13, LP18 and LP21 where they require such a demonstration.
Living conditions
25. A development of 8 poultry units exists to the north of the appeal site following
    application ref 23/00158/FM. This replaced three older units which were directly
    opposite the site.
26. The Council tells me that an Odour Impact Assessment (OIA) submitted with
    application 23/00158/FM predicted ‘moderate’ adverse impacts on No17 and
    ‘slight’ effects on other local residential receptors. Whilst I am told that the OIA
    stated “the overall odour effect of the proposed poultry farm is likely to be
    significant” it is not clear how a mix of moderate and slight effects would equate to
    a significant overall effect for the purposes of this appeal.
27. It is also not clear whether the harm predicted by the OIA would be mitigated by an
    Odour Management Plan required as part of the approval, as cited by the
    appellant. In any event, the evidence before me clearly indicates that the effect on
    the appeal site would be moderate, and I have nothing before me to explain why a
    moderate effect would equate to unacceptable harm.
28. Ultimately, it appears that the Council approved the new poultry units having
    considered their effects on No17. This does not suggest that odour was found
    unacceptable to living standards.
29. Given all of the above, I see little reason to find that the proposed development
    would result in inadequate living conditions for its future occupiers with particular
    regard to odour, and find no evident conflict with Local Plan Policy LP21 in that
    respect.
Other Considerations
30. The Council indicates that the appeal scheme may have the support of Policy
    S5(1)(j) of the Framework, in that there is a shortfall of Self-Build and Custom
    Housebuilding (SBCH) plots. However, even if I accepted that shortfall to comprise
    an evidenced unmet need for the purposes of the Framework, I have set out above
    that the self-build aspect of the proposal cannot be ensured. As such, the proposal
    does not evidently have the support of Policy S5(1)(j).
31. As set out above, the appellant describes the scheme as a logical infill or
    rounding-off rather than encroachment into open countryside. Framework Policy
    S5(1)(e) supports limited infilling within groups of houses.
32. Open fields are found to the north and south of the appeal site. As such, the
    proposed development would not comprise infilling within a group of houses in the
    context of the B1112. The proposed dwelling would continue the pattern of
    development formed by No17 and by 15 Brook Lane, both of which would be to
    one side of it. However, there is no house on the other side of the site and, as
    such, the scheme would not comprise infilling within a group of houses in the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009844


       context of Brook Lane. I do not find the appeal scheme to have the support of
       Framework Policy S5(1)(e).
Planning Balance
33. The Framework cites the Government’s objective of delivering a substantial
    increase in the supply of homes. Notwithstanding the healthy housing land supply
    position in the Borough, the appeal scheme would make a contribution to the wider
    Governmental aim. Given the modest scale of the scheme, that would be a modest
    benefit.
34. Against this, the Framework states that only certain forms of development should
    be approved outside settlements, and provides a list of those forms. I have found
    that the appeal proposal does not fall within that list. As such, the Framework
    provides a clear directive to dismiss the appeal.
35. Framework Policy CC2 requires development to be located where it can support
    sustainable patterns of movement, enable good accessibility for different users,
    make the most of transport infrastructure, support good access to facilities to limit
    the need to travel and the transition to zero-emission vehicles. I have found the
    proposed development would not satisfy these requirements.
36. The adverse effects of the unsuitable location would outweigh the benefits of the
    appeal scheme. Furthermore, in the context of this appeal, the Local Plan Policies
    listed above are not materially inconsistent with the Framework and so should
    continue to be afforded significant weight.
Conclusion
37. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
38. The appeal is dismissed.

A Knight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
