Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 July 2026
by F Rafiq BSc (Hons) MCD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009357
Annexe at 8 Longridge Road, Hurst Green, Lancashire BB7 9QP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Les Howarth against the decision of Ribble Valley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 3/2026/0146.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of annex to separate dwelling house.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the proposed change
       of use of annex to separate dwelling house at Annexe at 8 Longridge Road, Hurst
       Green, Lancashire BB7 9QP in accordance with the terms of the application,
       Ref 3/2026/0146 subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location Plan (Scale 1:1250), Site Plan (Scale
              1:200) and Floor Plans (A1.1).
     3)       Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
              Permitted Development) Order 2015 or any Order revoking and reenacting
              that Order, the areas shown for the parking of vehicles on the Site Plan
              (Scale 1:200) shall be kept available at all times for the parking of motor
              vehicles by the occupants of the dwelling and their visitors and for no
              other purpose.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       on 17 August 2026. I have considered the revised Framework in determining
       this appeal.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is whether the site is in a suitable location for residential
       development, having regard to the proximity of facilities and services.
Reasons
4.     The appeal relates to a detached annexe building in the village of Hurst Green.
       The development plan for the area includes the Core Strategy 2008-2028 (Core
       Strategy), which sets out a strategy to direct new housing development to an


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009357


       identified strategic site, the principal settlements of Clitheroe, Longridge and
       Whalley, and Tier 1 Villages.
5.     The appeal site is situated in a Tier 2 Village, with Policy DMG2 of the Core
       Strategy stating that development in such locations should meet at least one of the
       six considerations set out. There is no substantive evidence that the proposal
       would meet any of these listed considerations.
6.     Policy DMI2 of the Core Strategy requires development to minimise the need to
       travel, with the Framework at Policy TR3 requiring development to be located
       where it can support sustainable patterns of movement and Policy CC2, the need
       to support good access to facilities in order to limit the need to travel. The village of
       Hurst Green provides a number of services, including a primary school, pub, café
       and village hall. Although there is no convenience store or post office in the village,
       there is a bus service that provides the ability to reach shops and employment
       opportunities in other settlements. Whilst the bus service is more limited on a
       Sunday, and does not provide a late-night service, it operates an hourly service
       Monday to Saturday which is when most journeys, such as those to and from
       work, education or shopping are likely to be undertaken.
7.     Reference has been made to narrow, unlit roads, but the highway outside the
       appeal site has a footway and street lighting that provide convenient pedestrian
       access to the village’s facilities and services. Although as an annexe, occupiers
       are more likely to share journeys compared to two separate households, based on
       the evidence before me and my site observations, I do not consider there would be
       a heavy reliance on the private car.
8.     I therefore conclude that the site would be in a suitable location for residential
       development, having regard to the proximity of facilities and services. Although it
       would be contrary to Core Strategy Policy DMG2, it would not conflict with Core
       Strategy Policy DMI2 or the Framework insofar as they seek development to be in
       sustainable locations.
Other Matters
9.     The appeal property is situated at a higher level than properties at Nos. 5 and 7
       The Dene but given the separation distances to these neighbouring properties and
       the existing intervening vegetation, there would be no harmful overlooking effects.
       Concerns have been raised in relation to the impact on wildlife, but I do not
       consider there would be a materially harmful impact arising from this proposal,
       including by way of artificial lighting as it comprises a change of use. There is no
       substantive evidence before me that the proposal would give rise to subsidence.
10. Reference has been made to conditions attached to the original permission for the
    annex and to the setting of a precedent, but each application should be considered
    on its own merits, and I can confirm that I have dealt with it accordingly.
11. No objection has been raised by the Highway Authority in relation to the parking
    arrangements, and no alterations are proposed to the access. I do not consider
    that the proposed development would be harmful in these regards. The appeal site
    is situated within the Hurst Green Conservation Area which should be conserved
    in a manner appropriate to its significance. The appeal proposal, as a change of
    use would be acceptable in this regard.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009357


Conditions
12. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council and have imposed a
    condition requiring compliance with the approved plans. A condition is also
    necessary requiring the parking area to be retained and kept available to ensure
    adequate parking provision is provided. For the sake of clarity and enforceability, I
    have amended the suggested conditions as appropriate.
Planning Balance
13. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
14. It is common ground that the Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year supply
    of deliverable housing sites, with the supply referenced as being 2.24 years.
    Although the proposal would deliver a single dwelling, this provision would be in an
    area where there is a significant shortage of housing supply. The Framework
    states at Policy HO7 that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of
    providing homes that would contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community.
15. The proposal would conflict with Policy DMG2 of the Core Strategy in that it would
    not meet any of the listed considerations for development. However, facilities and
    services are available within the village that can be reached on foot and the bus
    service provides a choice of transport for journeys to employment and shopping
    destinations in nearby settlements. The proposal would comply with local and
    national policies relating to sustainable transport modes.
16. I conclude that the adverse effects arising from conflict with the development
    plan’s strategy to direct new housing development to certain defined locations,
    would not substantially outweigh the benefits when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

F Rafiq
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
