Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009746
41 Hicks Farm Rise, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire HP13 7SX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. Jake Sheppy of Set in Stone Paving against the decision of
    Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/26/02284/FA.
•   The development proposed is for a 4.6 m drop kerb.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a 4.6 m drop kerb at
   41 Hicks Farm Rise, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire HP13 7SX in accordance
   with the terms of the application, Ref PL/26/02284/FA, subject to the following
   conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted relates to the following approved plans,
        drawing references PP-14789480v1 (Location Plan) and
        b36f/uk/1392852/1866012 (Block Plan).
     3) The materials used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
        development hereby permitted shall be as they are set out on the application
        form.
Appeal Procedure, Preliminary Matters and Main Issue
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
3. Having reviewed the recent changes to the National Planning Policy Framework
   (Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues
   in the appeal or the outcome thereof. Since their arguments would not therefore be
   prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
4. At the time of my site visit, a paved front driveway had been completed, with a
   staggered timber boundary around it and a drainage channel to the front. These
   works are not detailed on the submitted plans. There is sufficient information
   available to make an informed assessment of the development from both the plans
   and from what I saw on site. The main issue being its effect on highway safety.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009746


Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal relates to a dwelling with a recently completed paved front driveway. It
   is located on Hicks Farm Rise, a residential street with wide flat footways and a two
   lane carriageway. The street scene is characterised by properties set back from the
   pavement with front gardens and driveways, where several kerbs have been
   dropped to allow for vehicle crossings. It also lies adjacent where it meets Gayhurst
   Road which has a broad junction connecting to Hicks Farm Rise.
6. The appeal property, together with neighbouring dwellings on the same side of the
   road, are situated on a higher ground level, resulting in steeply sloping front
   gardens. At the time the planning application was determined, concerns were
   raised by both the Council and the Highways Officer regarding the gradient of any
   proposed hardstanding and the vehicle manoeuvres when entering and exiting the
   site. Further details were therefore required to demonstrate retaining structures and
   the provision of a level, or as near as practicably possible, parking area which
   included provision for surface water runoff.
7. I noticed on my site visit that these have been achieved. The front garden has been
   substantially regraded. The driveway has been installed with a gradual and
   manageable gradient, and the road junction and surrounding street scene are
   characterised by a spacious layout. Retaining timber walls and a drainage channel
   have also been installed to manage the changes in levels and surface water runoff.
   It would seem therefore that vehicles are able to enter and exit the site safely, as
   the regraded driveway provides a suitable gradient, avoiding abrupt changes in
   level. Off street, in curtilage and pavement parking is not uncommon locally and
   thus road users will be well used to hazards specifically relating thereto.
8. The Council do mention the possibility of conflicting vehicle movements but stop
   short of providing any evidence or indication as to specifically why or how in terms
   of visibility, vehicle manoeuvring or the free flow of traffic. With this and the above
   in mind, the proposed dropped kerb would result in an acceptable impact on
   highway safety. Accordingly, it would comply with Policy DM33 of the Wycombe
   District Local Plan 2019, Buckinghamshire’s Local Transport Plan 4 and the
   Highways Development Management Guidance 2018. Together and amongst other
   things, this policy and guidance require development proposals to be provided with
   safe and convenient access to the highway network.
Conditions
9. For certainty and enforcement purposes, I have set out the usual timescale for
   commencement and identified the approved plans. A condition is also necessary to
   ensure the materials accord with the details submitted in the application form. They
   would be acceptable for the character and appearance of the area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
10. I recommend that the appeal should be allowed given it would comply with the
    development plan and there is nothing compelling to suggest a decision other than
    in accordance therewith.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009746


Inspector’s Decision
11. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed. Planning permission is therefore granted, subject
    to the conditions set out above.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
