Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by H Smith BSc (Hons) MSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009631
Stratton House Hotel, Gloucester Road, Stratton, Gloucestershire GL7 2LE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Aidan Stevens against the decision of Cotswold District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/03108/FUL.
•    The development proposed is erection of plant room, outside dip pool/jacuzzi, shower and sauna.
Appeal Ref: 6009635
Stratton House Hotel, Gloucester Road, Stratton, Gloucestershire GL7 2LE
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Aidan Stevens against the decision of Cotswold District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/03109/LBC.
•    The works proposed are erection of plant room, outside dip pool/jacuzzi, shower and sauna.

Decisions
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and listed building consent is granted for ‘erection of plant
       room, outside dip pool/jacuzzi, shower and sauna’ at Stratton House Hotel,
       Gloucester Road, Stratton, Gloucestershire, GL7 2LE in accordance with the terms
       of the application Ref 25/03109/LBC, subject to the conditions in the attached
       schedule.
Applications for costs
3.     Applications for costs were made by Cotswold District Council against Mr Aidan
       Stevens, and those are the subject of separate decisions.
Preliminary Matters
4.     As the proposal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to sections
       16(2) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) (the Act).
5.     The two appeals concern the same scheme under different, complementary
       legislation. I have dealt with both appeals together in my reasoning.
6.     It is common ground between the parties that the historic garden wall is located
       within the curtilage of the listed building. As such, by virtue of section 1(5) of the
       Act it forms part of the listing.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009631 and 6009635


7.       A revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published in
         August 2026 after the Council made its decision. I have had regard to the revised
         Framework in reaching my decision.
8.       During the appeal stage the appellant submitted a revised Flood Risk Assessment,
         an acoustic impact assessment and a business case. The parties had an
         opportunity to comment on these submitted documents during the appeal stage.
         Therefore, my acceptance of them would not prejudice any parties.
Main Issues
9.       The main issue in Appeal A and the main issue in Appeal B is:
              •   the effect of the proposal on the significance of the Grade II listed1 building
                  known as Stratton House Hotel, in terms of how it is experienced in its
                  setting.
10. Additional main issues in Appeal A are:
              •   whether insufficient information has been submitted regarding noise; and
              •   whether insufficient information has been submitted in relation to flood risk.
Reasons
Flood Risk
11. The appeal site is located within Flood Zone 2 and 3a, largely associated with the
    influence of the nearby Daglingworth Stream and its related overland flow paths.
12. The appellant submitted a revised Flood Risk Assessment, dated April 2026,
    (FRA) during the appeal. The FRA indicates that the site is considered to be at risk
    from a combination of fluvial flooding (associated with channel overtopping and
    constrained flow in the Daglingworth Stream system), surface water flooding from
    intense rainfall events, and limited groundwater influence during prolonged wet
    periods due to the underlying Cotswold limestone geology.
13. I acknowledge that the appellant has submitted information regarding a clear flood
    warning response and evacuation procedures. However, the FRA does not identify
    the existing ground levels at the proposed development location above ordinance
    datum (AOD), the proposed finished floor levels for the buildings (AOD), or the
    Environment Agency’s modelled 1% AEP plus climate change flood level for the
    Dalingworth Stream, which was requested by the Council.
14. It is therefore unclear if the finished floor level of the buildings would be set above
    the 1% AEP plus climate change flood level, and whether proportionate flood
    resilience measures would be in place to ensure the development could be safely
    operated and recovered following a flood event. Consequently, it has not been
    established that the proposed development would be safe for its lifetime and would
    not increase flood risk elsewhere.
15. Furthermore, there is no evidence to support the FRA’s claim that the site
    discharges to the Daglingworth Stream. The proposal would increase the amount
    of hardstanding material at the site. The Council indicates that the FRA does not

1
    List Entry Number: 1187469.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6009631 and 6009635


       provide detail of a sustainable water drainage strategy or provide evidence of
       existing drainage arrangements, infiltration testing, runoff calculations, attenuation
       requirements, or controlled discharge proposals, to which I agree.
16. F7 of the Framework states that development proposals should not present a risk
    from flooding to potential occupiers, users, or visitors, and should not increase
    flood risk elsewhere.
17. F8 of the Framework states that development proposals which could affect
    drainage on or around the development site should incorporate sustainable
    drainage systems to control flow rates and reduce volumes of runoff, in ways
    which are proportionate to the nature and scale of the proposal.
18. For the reasons above, the submitted evidence has not established that the
    proposed development would be safe throughout its lifetime. Nor has it been
    shown that surface water runoff can be managed in accordance with the drainage
    hierarchy or that flood risk would not be increased elsewhere. With the absence of
    substantive evidence to the contrary, I find that it has not been demonstrated that
    the level of risk to users of and visitors to the site, the local community or wider
    environment would not be increased as a result of flooding.
19. The appellant suggests that the proposed development can be made safe for its
    lifetime through detailed design measures secured by planning conditions. Indeed,
    the FRA identifies a range of mitigation measures, including raising finished floor
    levels where appropriate, flood resilient construction, use of water-resistant
    materials, and sustainable drainage systems and appropriate drainage design.
    However, conditions would not be reasonable as any mitigation measures found
    necessary to reduce flood risk and incorporate sustainable drainage systems could
    lead to a substantial redesign of the scheme that is currently before me.
20. As such, I cannot be certain that the proposal in relation to flood risk would not
    result in unacceptable harm to the setting of the listed building due, in particular, to
    the potential for the increase in height of the buildings relative to the listed building,
    due to the need to have finished floor levels set appropriately above surrounding
    ground levels. It would therefore not be reasonable to leave such matters to
    conditions.
21. I acknowledge that the proposal has a limited footprint comprising low-rise
    structures and would incorporate some purpose-built water-compatible or water-
    tolerant facilities. However, these matters do not remove the potential for flooding
    in the buildings and the need to comply with sustainable drainage systems.
22. I therefore conclude that insufficient information has been submitted with regard to
    flood risk. As such, the proposal would fail to accord with Policy EN14 of the Local
    Plan, which amongst other things, seeks to ensure that proposals do not increase
    the level of risk to the safety of occupiers of a site, the local community or the
    wider environment as a result of flooding. It would also fail to accord with F7 and
    F8 of the Framework.
Noise
23. The appeal site forms part of the garden to the south-west of Stratton House Hotel.
    The site is also adjacent to existing residential development. Although there is a
    tall brick wall on the site’s boundary that separates the residential properties from


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009631 and 6009635


       the hotel grounds, the residential properties would be sited within close proximity
       to the proposed plant room. The plant room would operate between the hours of
       09:00 to 20:00, which would be an 11-hour period.
24. During the appeal the appellant submitted an acoustic assessment of the
    proposed new mechanical services equipment (dated 11 May 2026), which would
    include the installation of a fan and pump equipment. I note that the acoustic
    assessment has been undertaken in accordance with the methodology of BS
    4142:2014+A1:2019, which was requested by the Council.
25. The appellant’s acoustic assessment finds that the representative background
    sound levels over the proposed latest operating times to 20:00 hours are LA90
    42dB. This has not been disputed by the Council. As such, the acoustic
    assessment goes on to state that to ensure a low likelihood of adverse impacts to
    neighbouring residential properties, a criterion of LAr 42dB at 1m from the closest
    receptors is recommended as a maximum permissible rating level for the
    cumulative sound from any new mechanical equipment. It recommends that any
    equipment exceeding this limit or exhibiting negative tonality or characteristics
    should have appropriate mitigation treatments applied on installation. The
    appellant has suggested a planning condition could be imposed requiring the
    installed plant to operate within the recommended maximum rating level.
26. The appellant’s evidence indicates that the specific plant details for the proposed
    development are not yet known. Nevertheless, any future plant would be required
    to comply with the acoustic limits specified by the appellant’s acoustic assessment.
    While mitigation may be necessary to secure compliance, given that the
    equipment would all be contained within the plant room, there is no substantive
    evidence before me that such measures could not be accommodated within the
    building or that they would necessitate alterations harmful to the significance of the
    listed building.
27. The Council mentions operational characteristics, but this part of the appeal site is
    already in spa use and while there may be additional use due to the sauna room
    and outdoor dip pool/jacuzzi, the proposed closing time of 20:00 is not overly late
    into the evening and the sauna would be located a reasonable distance from the
    residential properties to ensure noise from voices would not be materially harmful.
    Should the appeal succeed, planning conditions could be imposed to restrict the
    operating hours of the plant room and to ensure it operates within the
    recommended maximum rating level.
28. Consequently, I am satisfied that sufficient detail has been submitted with regard
    to noise. The proposal would therefore comply with Policy EN15 of the Cotswold
    District Local Plan 2011-2031 (adopted 2019) (Local Plan), which seeks to ensure
    development does not result in an unacceptable impact on neighbouring occupiers
    in terms of noise.
Heritage
29. Stratton House Hotel is a Grade II listed building that was constructed during the
    early 19th-century with 20th-century additions. It is mainly constructed in coursed
    squared limestone, with an ashlar porch and coursed rubble to side and rear
    wings. The main part of the building is of three-storeys. The principal entrance
    front faces south-east, with main garden front facing south-west. To the north-east
    and north-west are service wings and yards.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009631 and 6009635


30. The historic lawned garden lies to the south-west of the listed building, where it
    corresponds to the garden elevation and provides a characteristic, picturesque
    landscape setting for the listed building.
31. The listed building has an existing modern extension to its main garden elevation.
    There is also a new spa extension sited next to the appeal site, which incorporates
    a contemporary glazed projection into the garden. A pergola and bar area are
    situated to the south of the garden.
32. Given the above, I find that the special interest and significance of the listed
    building is largely derived from its historical and architectural interests. These are
    drawn from its illustration of an early 19th-century building, constructed from
    coursed squared limestone with pleasing fenestration details. It is also from its
    surviving historic fabric, which includes the historic garden wall that bounds the
    garden.
33. The lawned garden forms an important element of the listed building’s setting,
    making a positive contribution to its significance through its open character and
    planned landscape design.
34. The proposal comprises two detached buildings, which would be used as a sauna
    and a plant room. The structures would be single-storey buildings with flat roofs
    and clad in horizontal timber. A rectangular outdoor pool and a paved area would
    be sited in front of the proposed sauna building.
35. In terms of scale and height, the proposed buildings would remain subordinate to
    the listed building. The proposal would respect the listed building in terms of its
    overall bulk and massing, as the new structures would be low-rise and positioned
    to the side of the property, set away from the principal garden elevation. While the
    proposal’s use of contemporary materials, including the sauna’s large glazing
    panels, would not directly replicate those of the listed building, this approach would
    be appropriate given the variety of materials already present within the existing
    spa extension and the immediate setting of both the site and the listed building.
36. The Council suggests that the design of the proposed plant room and sauna
    buildings would not be high quality, and their appearance would be utilitarian, pre-
    fabricated structures. However, the design adopts a deliberately simple and
    understated architectural approach, which does not attempt to imitate the
    architectural detailing of the listed building. The proposal’s use of horizontal timber
    cladding would provide a natural finish that reflects the garden setting and would
    soften the visual appearance of the buildings. The low-profile form and flat roof
    design would contribute to a lightweight and recessive appearance.
37. Furthermore, an open area of lawned garden would be retained between the site
    and the principal garden elevation of the listed building, which would help to
    preserve a sense of openness within the setting. The proposal would be located
    within a small area of the garden that is already enclosed by mature planting. Its
    position on the northern side of the garden would therefore appear discreet and
    unobtrusive, without creating a sense of visual clutter.
38. The proposed plant room and sauna would be sited next to the historic garden
    wall, which is constructed mainly from brick. However, the appellant’s Planning
    and Heritage Statement (dated September 2025) states that the sauna and plant
    room would be set back from the wall. Therefore, these structures would be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009631 and 6009635


       freestanding buildings that are not physically attached to the wall. As such, they
       would not result in harm to the historic fabric of the wall. Moreover, as they are
       modest in scale and lower in height than the wall, sections of the historic wall
       would remain visible.
39. Whilst the garden historically had visually permeable and lightweight structures
    such as a conservatory and a greenhouse, for the reasons explained above I find
    that the proposed structures would be small and inconspicuous in their setting.
40. I agree with the appellant that the set-back nature of the proposal and its close
    visual relationship with the existing spa extension and spa deck would ensure that
    the proposal is experienced as part of the established spa composition already on
    site, rather than as sporadic or unrelated clutter within the garden.
41. Consequently, although I have found that the design of the development may
    change to ensure flood resilience, the proposal in its current form would preserve
    the significance of the listed building, including in terms of how it is experienced in
    its setting. The proposal therefore complies with Policies EN1, EN4 and EN10 of
    the Local Plan for this main issue. Collectively, these policies amongst other things
    seek to ensure proposals sustain or enhance the character, appearance and
    significance of heritage assets, including their setting. It would also accord with
    Policy EN2 of the Local Plan, which seeks to ensure design quality respects
    character and distinctiveness.
42. If changes are required to ensure flood safety, then a further application for listed
    building consent or amendment may be required.
Other Matters
43. The appellant states that the Council has not produced any technical evidence to
    challenge his acoustic evidence or flood risk assessment. Nevertheless, the
    Council’s Technical Pollution Services and Environmental Protection Senior Officer
    and the Flood Risk Management Officer responded with detailed comments on the
    proposal.
44. Policy S4 of the Framework concerns development within settlements, which
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision
    making policies of the Framework. Policy F7 of the Framework states that where
    development is proposed in a location known to be at risk from any form of
    flooding now or in the future it should be refused unless it meets relevant criteria. I
    have found that not to be the case. Policy S4(c) states that failure to comply with
    one of the national decision making policies which state that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances is likely to mean that the
    benefits of the development are likely to be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects.
45. The proposal would provide economic, social and heritage benefits, including
    continued investment in Stratton House Hotel, supporting the competitiveness and
    long-term viability of an established independent tourism business, safeguarding
    and supporting employment, generating expenditure within the local economy, and
    facilitating continued investment in the Grade II listed building. Nevertheless, these
    benefits would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009631 and 6009635


Conditions
46. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have imposed a condition
    specifying the relevant drawings to provide certainty.
Conclusions
47. Appeal A: The development would conflict with the development plan when taken
    as a whole. There are no material considerations, including the Framework, which
    indicate that the decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal A
    should be dismissed.
48. Appeal B: For the reasons given I conclude that Appeal B should be allowed.

H Smith
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009631 and 6009635


Schedule of Conditions
1) The works hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the date of
   this decision.
2) The works hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the following
   drawings:
         •    Existing OS Location and Proposed Block Plans – 0486-P-001.
         •    Proposed Site Plan – 0486-P-002.
         •    Proposed Sauna Plans and Elevations – 0486-P-003.
         •    Proposed Plant Room Plans and Elevations – 0486-P-004.
         •    Proposed Site Sections – 0486-P-005.
         •    Existing Site Plan – 0486-S-001.
         •    Existing Location and Proposed Block Plan – 0486-S-03.
         •    Sauna and Steam Room – DESHHS2-01.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
