Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009409
Godolphin House Stables, Broughton Lane, Leire LE17 5ER
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mrs. Susan Mycock against the decision of Harborough District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00120/FUL.
•   The development proposed is for the demolition of existing stables approved to be converted under
    24/01385/FUL and re-building similar, in a slightly re-vised position.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Notwithstanding the description of development set out above, which is taken from
   the application form, it is clear from the plans and accompanying details that the
   development also comprises the replacement of the detached barn and conversion
   of it for a garage and tack room, with a mezzanine level for a games room. The
   Council dealt with the proposal on this basis and so shall I.
4. The Council has referred to policies within the new Local Plan which has been
   submitted for examination. However, I am not aware of the exact stage the
   examination has reached, the extent of any unresolved objections to the relevant
   policies or whether these will be considered as consistent with the National
   Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). Consequently, and whilst I have
   taken these policies into account, I have considered the appeal under the adopted
   development plan at the time.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the principle of the proposed development with specific regard to
   its location.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal site comprises land in equestrian use with an existing detached stable
   building, a detached barn and a menage. The field surrounding these areas is also
   within the appellant’s ownership and the site is accessed via Broughton Lane.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009409


7. Although the site lies in close proximity, it is clearly beyond the Limits to
   Development boundary for Leire, as shown on Figure 3 of the Leire Neighbourhood
   Plan 2022 (LNP). It therefore falls outside of any defined settlement boundary and
   is more closely associated with its rural surroundings than with the built up area of
   the village. Therefore, for policy purposes, the site is within the countryside, and the
   proposal would conflict with Policy SS1 of the Harborough Local Plan 2019 (HLP),
   which seeks to direct development to appropriate locations in accordance with the
   settlement hierarchy, and development in the countryside will be strictly controlled.
   Furthermore, the proposal would not fall within any of the types of acceptable
   development in the countryside under Policy GD3 of the HLP.
8. The site’s access is existing, and no objections were raised from the Highway
   Authority. The journey and distance to reach the edge of Leire is also relatively
   short. However, it would require travel along a section of Broughton Lane, which is
   a narrow unlit road with no footway, that is subject to a national speed limit of 60
   miles per hour. The quality of the route is poor and to travel between the site and
   village by foot, pedestrians would be required to do so on the carriageway.
   Pedestrian access would therefore be unsafe, particularly during hours of darkness
   or inclement weather, as well as for those with pushchairs and/or a physical
   disability. Local services and facilities are available within Leire. However, the
   nature of the route is such that any future occupiers would be unlikely to rely on
   walking as a realistic means of access to these. Moreover, whilst public transport is
   available within the village, there are no nearby bus stops within easy walking
   distance of the appeal site.
9. As a result, occupants of the proposed dwelling would be heavily dependent on the
   use of private vehicles to access everyday services and facilities. The site therefore
   represents an unsustainable location for a new dwelling. Moreover, it has not been
   demonstrated how the proposal would meet the identified housing requirement for
   Leire. Therefore, whilst the proposal would accord with certain elements of Policy
   H2 of the LNP, it would conflict with criteria a), b) and d). It would also conflict with
   Policy H5 of the HLP, which requires, amongst other things, for new housing to
   maximise the density on sites from where a full range of services and facilities is
   accessible by walking, cycling and public transport.
10. The proposal would contribute to the shortfall in the supply of self-build homes.
    There is support for such in Policy H5 of the HLP. However, the policy specifies
    that such is limited to ‘any location suitable for housing’. As set out above, the
    appeal site is within the countryside, outside any defined settlement boundary, and
    in an unsustainable location. Consequently, the site cannot be regarded as suitable
    for housing, and the proposal therefore conflicts with this Policy.
11. Part 2 of Policy GD2 of the HLP permits development adjoining the existing or
    committed built up areas, subject to it meeting criteria a) to g). Policy GD4 of the
    HLP permits new residential development in the countryside where it is in
    accordance with Policy GD2, falls within one of the exceptions listed from a) to f), of
    which criterion a) is applicable.
12. Whilst the proposal is for housing on a small site of no more than four dwellings,
    the appeal site is neither within, nor physically or visually connected to the nearby
    settlement of Leire. It is separated from the built-up area of the village by an
    intervening large field and land, as well as a dismantled railway line which provides
    a clear demarcation to the settlement boundary. The buildings to its south, located

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009409


     on the opposite side of the lane, do not represent a continuation of the settlement,
     due to their separation via this railway line and a mature, landscaped strip.
     Moreover, no substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that the
     proposed dwelling would meet an identified local need for housing of a particular
     type, whether through a rural housing needs survey or a neighbourhood plan.
     Accordingly, the appeal site does not adjoin the built up area of the village and
     does not fall within the scope of Policy GD2, nor would it satisfy any of the stated
     criteria of Policy GD4.
13. There is an extant planning permission for the change of use and alteration of the
    existing stable block to a single dwelling. Even with the costs and difficulties
    involved with works adjacent to the water main (a matter to which I will return), it is
    the appellant’s desire to stay close to the village. Taking into account their
    mortgage situation, they would have to implement the approved scheme. As such,
    there is more than a theoretical prospect of this permission being carried out.
14. The extant scheme is a conversion and as such has to be in the countryside. Such
    development is sometimes permitted as an exception to policies that restrict most
    types of new development as a matter of principle, in line with a preferred approach
    to encourage sustainable patterns of development, directing it to those areas that
    have the best access to services and facilities on which future occupiers would rely
    day to day. This reduces the need to travel and, in the case of some policies,
    protects the intrinsic character of the countryside. With this in mind, one would
    need to be satisfied of a sufficiently justified reason to not only make an exception
    against these principles but also to afford considerations sufficient weight to make a
    determination contrary to the adopted development plan. To accept it is a simple
    matter of there being a dwelling on the site regardless of the outcome of this appeal
    as the sole matter to balance would serve to undermine the principles of spatially
    strategic planning policies such as the Council’s settlement hierarchy.
15. The plans illustrate the approximate location of the water main beneath the stables.
    The appellant has dug a trench over 1500mm deep in an attempt to find it.
    However, no formal survey data, utility records or other technical evidence has
    been provided to verify the precise location, route or depth of the water main. There
    is also no evidence to demonstrate that the water main is at a risk of failure, or that
    any such failure would necessitate the demolition of the stables to enable repairs.
    This risk to the water main and the cost in putting any perceived issue right is
    therefore only speculative as things stand and is not supported by substantive
    evidence.
16. Additionally, I am not persuaded that the appellants would be unable to implement
    the extant conversion permission, particularly as they have indicated that there is a
    realistic prospect of that approval being carried out, even despite the associated
    costs and constraints. With this and the above in mind, I cannot ascribe sufficient
    weight to the fallback to be able to justify the appeal scheme, given how it would
    conflict with the Council’s relevant policies in a fundamental way.
17. For the above reasons, the proposed development would not occupy a sustainable
    location, nor a safe pedestrian access to the site, resulting in a high degree of
    reliance on the private car for day-to-day needs. It would therefore conflict with the
    aforementioned policies of the HLP and the LNP. The broad aims of which are set
    out above and seek to support sustainable development, while directing growth to
    appropriate locations in accordance with the settlement hierarchy. Development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009409


     and new housing outside settlements are limited to specified purposes, with infill
     and redevelopment sites in Leire restricted to certain circumstances, including sites
     with safe vehicular and pedestrian access.
18. Policy S5 of the Framework refers to the principle of development outside of
    settlements, explaining that only certain forms of development should be approved.
    The scheme does not comprise any of the development types listed in a. or b.
    Criterion c. relates to the replacement of an existing building, these should be for
    the same use. As the proposed dwelling would replace a stable building and
    therefore involves a different use, the proposal would not meet this exemption.
    Criterion d) refers to the redevelopment of previously developed land and the site
    contains a stable, a barn and a menage. However, these occupy only a small part
    of a wider field, and the proposal includes an area of undeveloped land. Therefore,
    the site cannot be regarded, as a whole, as previously developed land.
19. As the Council cannot demonstrate the required housing land supply and the
    proposed dwelling would address this evidenced unmet housing need, criterion j) is
    relevant. However, for the reasons set out earlier, the appeal site is not physically
    well related to settlement of Leire.
20. The proposal would therefore fail to meet any of the forms of development that
    should be approved outside settlements and would not accord with Policy S5 of the
    Framework. Furthermore, the site lies outside any settlement or group of houses
    and would result in an isolated dwelling. As it does not meet any of the
    circumstances in which isolated homes in the countryside are supported under
    Policy HO11, the proposal also conflicts with paragraph 3 of Policy S5.
21. Additionally, whilst the existing access would be utilised and the proposal would be
    for one dwelling, it would still generate an increased level of movement within a
    rural, countryside setting in association with a residential use that does not
    currently exist. For the above reasons, although the appeal site lies in close
    proximity to Leire, the nature of the route to the village means that its location
    would not limit the need to travel by private car, nor would it offer a genuine choice
    of transport modes for residents and users. Consequently, the proposal would not
    be situated in a location capable of supporting sustainable patterns of movement
    and would also conflict with Policy TR3 of the Framework.
Other Matters
22. I have not been provided with details of the cited approvals for residential
    developments granted permission outside of settlement boundaries (Refs.
    25/01007/FUL, 25/00478/FUL, 24/01148/FUL and 25/00292/FUL). Therefore, I
    cannot be satisfied that they are sufficiently comparable, such that it would change
    my findings. In any case, these approvals related to either the erection of multiple
    dwellings, involved the conversion of an existing barn, or related to a site
    elsewhere, within a different area context. I have assessed the appeal scheme on
    its own planning merits and in regard to its own context, for which I find it
    unacceptable for the reasons set out.
23. The Council expressed substantive concerns about the design and appearance of
    the proposals in the delegated report. This has not however translated to a reason
    for refusal. It is unclear as to why, but the appellant has explained that the
    increased height would be modest and that the proposed buildings would be
    screened by the hedgerow, ensuring that they would not appear prominent.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009409


     Whether or not I disagree with the Council in their assessment in this regard, it
     would not change my findings with regards to the main issue.
24. The appellant contends that Policy H1 of the HLP is out of date because the
    Council cannot currently demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing
    sites. However, no conflict with this specific policy has been identified by the
    Council within their decision or the reason for refusal. This decision has dealt with
    the matter of housing land supply and the implications thereof.
25. The proposal would have no unacceptable impact upon the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers, it would use matching materials and have a design similar
    to the existing buildings and implement recommendations to address flood risk and
    surface drainage. However, these acceptable matters would not fully address the
    concerns set out, which relates to the principle of the proposal.
Planning Balance
26. The proposed development would not occupy a sustainable location and would
    conflict with the spatial strategy of the HLP, the LNP and the Framework. Since
    these relate to the principle of the appeal scheme and the future application of
    relevant policies of the development plan, I afford these matters significant weight.
27. The proposal would contribute to the housing shortfall through the provision of a
    smaller home. It would also add to the supply of self-build homes within the area,
    where there is a gap in meeting demand for this type of accommodation. However,
    as a single self-build unit, it would make a very limited contribution to addressing
    these shortfalls and I therefore afford this moderate weight. I am mindful of Policy
    HO7 of the Framework and the weight it suggests is given to the benefits of
    providing new homes. That said, this appears to be more related to evidenced
    needs of the community as identified through such assessments. No such evidence
    has been provided with the appeal.
28. There would be some economic benefits of the scheme in creating employment
    and expenditure for local supplies and services during the construction phase, and
    through the additional support for local service and facilities following its
    occupation. However, any effects would be temporary or very limited in their scope
    due to the scheme being for one dwelling. The proposal would also allow for a
    home to be created for the appellant and would remedy the appellant’s personal
    circumstances in relation to their current mortgage situation. However, this would
    be a private benefit and would therefore carry limited weight. Environmental
    benefits would be achieved through the improved energy efficiency of the proposed
    new dwelling, installation of solar panels and the harvesting of rainwater and these
    carry moderate weight.
29. Taking all of the above factors into account, when assessed against the Framework
    as a whole, the adverse effects relating to the location of the proposal would
    substantially outweigh the limited benefits of the development. The Framework
    does not therefore indicate that the appeal scheme should benefit from planning
    permission.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009409


Conclusion and Recommendation
30. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    and material considerations do not indicate a decision should be made other than
    in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend the appeal is dismissed.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
31. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
