Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 July 2026 by S Jamieson BA(Hons) MPlan MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009460
157 Lodge Lane, Hyde, Tameside SK14 4LB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Nigel Allen of Spire Developments Ltd against the decision of Tameside
    Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/00965/OUT.
•   The development proposed was originally described as ‘outline application for the erection of 2 no.
    new two-bedroom dwellings. Approval is sought for Access, Layout, and Scale. Appearance and
    Landscaping are reserved matters’.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and outline planning permission is granted for 1no. two-
   bedroom dwelling with means of access, layout and scale to be considered with all
   other matters reserved at 157 Lodge Lane, Hyde, Tameside SK14 4LB, in
   accordance with the terms of application, Ref 25/00965/OUT, subject to the
   conditions in the attached schedule.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issue in
   nor outcome of the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have
   proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
4. The description of development above is taken from the decision notice which
   accurately reflect amendments made during the course of the planning application,
   and thus the appeal before me. However, I have removed the words ‘amendments
   received 18th February 2026 reducing the number of units to 1’ as these do not
   describe the act of development.
5. The application form seeks outline planning permission with means of access,
   layout and scale to be considered, with all other matters reserved for subsequent
   approval. Therefore, I have considered the proposed plans on the basis that the
   appearance and landscaping details are indicative only.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009460


Main Issue
6. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal site comprises the side garden of 157 Lodge Lane (No 157), an end-
   terrace dwelling within a short row of two-storey Victorian houses. The site
   occupies a corner plot within an established residential area. Surrounding
   development includes terraces, semi-detached and detached dwellings of differing
   ages, scales and designs. There is also variation in plot sizes, building lines and
   the relationship between buildings and their side boundaries. As such, the area
   does not exhibit a uniform or tightly defined pattern of development.
8. The submitted plans indicate that the proposed dwelling would be modest in scale
   and comparable in height, width and proportions to No 157 and the adjoining
   terraced dwellings. The proposal would extend the existing terrace from three to
   four properties, creating a row similar in length to the neighbouring terrace.
   Consequently, the dwelling would appear as a logical and proportionate
   continuation of the existing terrace.
9. The proposed dwelling would project forward of the semi-detached dwellings on
   Shirley Avenue to the rear. Nevertheless, the curved alignment of Shirley Avenue,
   the staggered siting of dwellings along it, and the varied building lines evident
   throughout the area mean that any reduced visibility between Lodge Lane and
   Shirley Avenue and the altered relationship with these neighbouring dwellings
   would not appear unduly prominent or incongruous. This is particularly so given the
   modest width of the proposed dwelling, which the plans indicate would be able to
   follow the building line of the host terrace and the neighbouring terraced row.
10. Furthermore, the dwelling would be set back from the highway and retain a
    substantial proportion of the existing frontage and side garden. Accordingly, the site
    would continue to provide a sense of openness at the junction of Lodge Lane and
    Shirley Avenue. Having regard to the modest scale of the proposed dwelling and
    the garden area that would remain, the development would not result in a harmful
    loss of spaciousness. Rather, it would assimilate within the mixed pattern of
    development that characterises the area.
11. In terms of appearance and landscaping, these matters are reserved for
    subsequent approval. Nevertheless, the reserved matters process would enable
    detailed consideration of the dwelling's design, materials, roof form, fenestration
    and hard and soft landscaping, ensuring that the final appearance of the
    development responds appropriately to the character and appearance of the area.
12. Consequently, the proposed development would have an acceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the area. In this regard, it would accord with Policies
    H9 and H10 of The Tameside Unitary Development Plan Written Statement –
    Adopted Plan (20024) and Policy JP-P1 of the Places for Everyone Joint
    Development Plan Document for Bolton, Bury, Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale,
    Salford, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan 2022 to 2029 (2024) (PfE) which require,
    amongst other things, that developments are of high quality and respect and
    acknowledge the character and identity of the locality.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009460


Other Matters
13. Amendments to the Biodiversity Gain (Town and Country Planning) (Amendments
    and Transitional Provisions) (England) Regulations 2026 came into effect on 6
    August 2026. They removed the self and custom build exemption for mandatory
    Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) contributions. However, they also introduced a new
    0.2 hectare exemption for small sites. The appeal site area equates to 0.032
    hectares. The proposal would therefore not be liable for BNG, and the standard
    condition therefore would not apply.
14. Subject to conditions, there is no objection to the proposed development from the
    Highway Authority. It has also been confirmed that the level of parking that would
    be provided and the new access onto Shirley Avenue would be acceptable. Given
    the above, the evidence before me, and observations made during my site visit, I
    am satisfied that the appeal scheme would have an acceptable impact on highway
    safety and the existing road network.
15. Wildlife may be present in the area, but I have no substantive evidence that the
    proposed development would disturb or cause any harm to them. Biodiversity
    enhancement measures can also be secured by a planning condition, as well as
    part of any landscaping proposals submitted at reserved matters stage.
16. There would be sufficient separation between the new dwelling and neighbouring
    windows and gardens to ensure acceptable levels of privacy, outlook and light for
    neighbouring occupiers would be maintained. Any inconvenience experienced
    relating to construction works would likely be short-term and a private matter
    between parties. Any noise and disruption from the construction phase would also
    be temporary and the hours of operation of the construction can be controlled by a
    condition.
17. Further details regarding the disability and/or health conditions of elderly local
    residents have not been provided. Claims have not been substantiated by the
    individuals referred to, nor has any specific evidence been provided to suggest that
    the proposed development would prejudice their quality of life. It is also beyond the
    remit of this appeal to consider boundary disputes, which would be a private civil
    matter between landowners. Similarly, unneighbourly behaviour, or any damage
    caused to services or connections is outside the scope of this appeal.
Conditions
18. Planning conditions are necessary to secure the submission of the reserved
    matters applications within specified timeframes and to require commencement of
    the development (Conditions 1 and 2). In the interests of clarity and for
    enforcement purposes, it is also necessary to state the approved plans in relation
    to the access, scale and layout (Condition 3).
19. To protect the character and appearance of the area, it is necessary to secure
    details of cycle storage and for storage and collection of refuse (Conditions 4 and
    5). Details of hard and soft landscaping, means of enclosure and external materials
    to be used are not for consideration under this outline planning proposal, and are
    inherently required as part of any subsequent reserved matters application(s).
    Separate conditions requiring the submission and approval of these details are
    therefore not necessary.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009460


20. In the interest of minimising risks from potentially contaminated land, a condition
    requiring that an investigation and risk assessment be carried out should any
    contamination be discovered during the proposal’s construction is necessary; and
    that if contamination is found or suspected at any time during development, all
    works would stop until a remediation strategy detailing how this contamination will
    be appropriately addressed has been submitted to, and approved in writing by the
    local planning authority (Condition 6).
21. The Council’s ecology officer comments confirm that the development should
    contribute to and enhance the natural and local environment, as required by PfE
    Policy JP-G8. A condition is therefore necessary in the interests of protecting and
    enhancing biodiversity (Condition 7).
22. In the interests of highway safety and ensuring sufficient off street parking
    provision, a condition is necessary requiring the existing car parking space to be
    retained during construction and that the approved parking layout is retained
    thereafter (Condition 8). In view of the residential nature of the area surrounding the
    site, it is also reasonable to control the hours when construction materials are
    delivered and when building operations take place on the site, in order to protect
    the living conditions of occupiers of nearby dwellings (Condition 9).
Conclusion and Recommendation
23. For reasons given above, the appeal scheme would comply with the development
    plan. I therefore recommend it be allowed.

S Jamieson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
24. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed. Outline planning permission is therefore granted in
    the above terms, subject to the conditions set out in the attached schedule.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009460


Schedule of Conditions
1) Details of the design and external appearance of the development hereby permitted
   and the landscaping of the site, "the reserved matters", shall be submitted to and
   approved in writing by the local planning authority before any development takes
   place. Development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.

2) Application(s) for the approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the local
   planning authority before the expiration of three years from the date of this
   permission. The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration
   of two years from the date of the approval of the last of the reserved matters to be
   approved.

3) Insofar as the details relate to the access, scale of the building and layout of the
   development only, the development hereby permitted shall be carried out in
   accordance with the following approved plans:

    Existing Plot (1:1250 @ A4);
    Existing and Proposed Front Elevations – Drawing No. LL/1NH/01, dated 12-02-26;
    Existing and Proposed Rear Elevations – Drawing No. LL/1NH/02, dated 12-02-26;
    Proposed Gable Elevation (With Landscaping) - Drawing No. LL/1NH/03, dated 12-
    02-26;
    Existing and Proposed Gable Walls (Without Landscaping) and Proposed Floor
    Plans - Drawing No. LL/1NH/04, dated 12-02-26;
    Proposed Design (1:500 @ A2); and
    Street Scene Dimensions (1:500 @A2).

4) Application(s) for approval of reserved matters shall be accompanied by details of
   the provision of secure and weatherproof cycle storage provision to LPCB LPS1175
   Security Rating 2 for the approved dwelling. The cycle storage arrangements shall
   be implemented in accordance with the approved details prior to first occupation of
   the development hereby permitted and shall be retained as such, and for the
   intended purpose, thereafter.

5) Application(s) for approval of reserved matters shall be accompanied by details of
   the means of storage and collection of refuse generated by the development. The
   details shall include scaled plans showing the location of storage and the means of
   enclosure. The refuse storage arrangements shall be implemented in accordance
   with the approved details prior to the first occupation of the development hereby
   permitted and shall be retained as such thereafter.

6) No works other than the excavation of the foundations and / or piling works for the
   development shall be undertaken at the site until the CLS2A Contaminated Land
   Screening Form has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
   authority. Where necessary, a programme of investigation (including soil analysis
   and/or ground gas monitoring) shall be undertaken at the site in order to enable an
   assessment of the risks posed by contamination to be carried out. The proposed
   scheme of investigation shall be agreed with the local planning authority prior to
   being undertaken.

    Where necessary, a remediation strategy detailing the works and measures
    required to address any unacceptable risks posed by contamination shall be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009460


    submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local planning authority. The strategy
    shall include full details of the information that will be obtained in order to
    demonstrate the scheme has been appropriately implemented. The approved
    remediation scheme(s) shall be fully implemented and a verification / completion
    report demonstrating this and that the site is suitable for its proposed use shall be
    submitted to, and approved by, the local planning authority.

    If, during development, contamination not previously identified is encountered, then
    the local planning authority shall be informed and no further development (unless
    otherwise agreed in writing with the local planning authority), shall be undertaken at
    the site until a remediation strategy detailing how this contamination will be
    appropriately addressed and the remedial works verified has been submitted to, and
    approved in writing by the local planning authority. The remediation strategy shall be
    fully implemented and verified as approved.

7) A scheme for biodiversity enhancement measures shall be submitted to and
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved scheme shall be
   implemented prior to the first occupation of the development and shall be retained
   as such thereafter.

8) The existing off street parking space associated with No 157 Lodge Lane shall be
   retained and remain free from obstruction during the construction works. Prior to the
   first occupation of the development hereby permitted, the off street parking
   arrangements as shown on the proposed site plan, shall be provided and retained
   as such thereafter.

9) During the period of construction, no work (including vehicle and plant movements,
   deliveries, loading and unloading) shall take place outside the hours of 07:30 and
   18:00 Mondays to Fridays and 08:00 and 13:00 Saturdays. No work shall take place
   on Sundays and Bank Holidays.

End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
