Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by K Dryden BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009850
Barn at land off Bakers Lane, Holt, Dorset BH21 7BY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mr Andrew Wilson against the decision of Dorset Council.
•   The application reference is P/PAAC/2025/06052.
•   The development proposed is change of use from agricultural barn to residential dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
   (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for development consisting of a
   change of use of a building that is part of an established agricultural unit and any
   land within that building’s curtilage, or a former agricultural building that was (but is
   no longer) part of an established agricultural unit and any land within that building’s
   curtilage, to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses), together with building
   operations reasonably necessary to convert or extend the building. Limitations to
   the development permitted under Class Q are set out in paragraph Q1 of the
   GPDO.
3. Paragraph Q1(i) states that development is not permitted by Class Q if the
   development under Class Q(b) would result in an extension that, amongst other
   criteria, is sited anywhere other than to the rear of the existing building (criterion ii),
   or extends beyond a wall that forms a side or principal elevation of the existing
   building (criterion vi).
4. Prior approval has previously been granted at the appeal site1 for ‘Class Q
   conversion of barn to form 1 C3 dwelling’, where the permission remains extant.
   The proposal seeks an extension to the building under the 2024 amendments 2 to
   the GPDO. A previous prior approval application3 was refused at the appeal site
   prior to the submission of the proposal before me.
5. The Council refused the application on the basis that the proposed extension to the
   building would not be located on the rear elevation of the building; and that the
   proposed extension extends beyond a wall that forms a side or principal elevation

1
  P/PAAC/2024/07631
2
  SI 2024/579
3
  P/PAAC/2024/06150

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009850


     of the existing building. From the evidence provided, I am satisfied that the
     proposal would comply with the other criteria of Class Q of the GPDO. As such,
     there is no need to give them further consideration in this decision.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the proposal would be permitted development under
   Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO, having regard to the provisions and
   limitations of Class Q1(i)-(ii) and Q1(i)-(vi).
Reasons
7. The appeal site relates to a disused barn situated within a wider site owned by the
   appellant, which includes a residential property, Kingsettle Lodge, accessed from
   Baker’s Lane. The barn is located close to the site entrance to Kingsettle Lodge,
   with the openings of the barn focused towards the interior access road leading to
   the main dwelling and parking area, rather than towards Bakers Lane.
8. There is dispute amongst the parties regarding the identification of the principal
   elevation of the building. The appellant sets out that previous prior approval
   applications submitted to the Council, including the extant consent, have identified
   the east elevation overlooking Baker’s Lane as the principal elevation. It is stated
   that there are inconsistencies in the Council’s approach, where previous plans for
   the extant application were accepted and approved and which were annotated
   showing the east elevation as the principal elevation, though that scheme did not
   propose any extensions and the Council’s assessment indicated ‘N/A’ for the
   limitations at Q1(i)(ii) and Q1(i)(vi).
9. Notwithstanding any inconsistencies between the Council’s consideration of the
   principal elevation in previous decisions relating to the appeal site and its
   assessment of the proposal before me, I have determined this appeal on its own
   merits, having regard to the proposal that is the subject of this appeal. In doing so, I
   have had regard to the appellant’s arguments that identification of the principal
   elevation should be based on the completed scheme. However, the
   aforementioned criteria at Q1(i)(ii) and Q1(i)(vi) both clearly refer to the existing
   building, and I have assessed the proposal on this basis.
10. The GPDO itself does not define ‘principal elevation’. The appellant has referred to
    the Permitted Development for Householders Technical Guidance (2010) (TG) in
    their assessment of the building’s principal elevation. The TG states that, in most
    cases, the principal elevation will be that part of the house which fronts (directly or
    at an angle) the main highway serving the house; I also note the Planning Portal
    guidance submitted by the appellant in relation to defining the principal elevation of
    a structure. This guidance is mainly aimed at existing dwellings, and refers to
    typical or most scenarios, but importantly not all. Therefore, although I have had
    regard to this guidance, it is not determinative and the assessment is ultimately a
    matter of planning judgment based on the specific site circumstances.
11. At my site visit, I noted that the openings and doorway to the barn fronted the
    internal driveway area, and that there were no noticeable fenestration or
    architectural features on the east elevation overlooking Baker’s Lane, which was
    screened from the road by vegetation and wooden boundary fencing. As such,
    there was no visual or functional relationship with the lane. Furthermore, whilst the
    appellant contends that there is an established street scene at Bakers Lane in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009850


     which buildings front the highway, I observed that the lane is verdant and rural in
     character, and that there is variation in the relationship between adjacent
     residential properties and the highway, with some properties set back substantially
     from the lane.
12. The main means of accessing the building is not clearly seen from Bakers Lane
    and having regard to the previous use of the building, it is likely that loading and
    unloading operations took place in the gravelled area facing the west elevation of
    the building. Based on my observations and the other evidence before me, the west
    elevation forms the front and principal elevation of the existing building, with the
    rear of the existing building facing the lane to the east.
13. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would fail to
    comply with Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q1(i)-(ii) of the GPDO, as the proposed
    extension would not be sited to the rear of the existing building. Additionally, the
    proposal would not satisfy the requirement of Q1 (i)-(vi) as the proposed extension
    would extend beyond a wall that forms a principal elevation of the existing building.
    Consequently, and notwithstanding that the proposal may comply with the other
    limitations of Paragraph Q1, the conflict with Q1(i)(ii) and Q1(i)(vi) means the
    proposal would not satisfy the requirements of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
    GPDO, and therefore is not development permitted by it.


Other Matters
14. The evidence provided by the Council indicates that the appeal site lies within the
    zone of influence of the Dorset Heaths Special Area of Conservation (SAC). New
    residential development within this zone of influence is likely to have a significant
    effect on the SAC through increased recreational pressures. The Council’s
    submitted evidence indicates that mitigation for proposed residential developments
    that would result in a net increase in residential units would be required.
15. The grant of planning permission under Article 3(1) of the GPDO is subject to the
    provisions of the GPDO for each class of development and compliance with
    regulations 75 to 78 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017
    (as amended) (Habitats Regulations). Effectively, Article 3(1) provides a
    precommencement condition which must be met, where the development would
    affect a European protected habitat, such as a SAC, before the works can be
    undertaken as permitted development. This includes a separate application to the
    Council under regulation 77 of the Habitats Regulations to allow the Council to
    undertake an appropriate assessment and, depending on the outcome, this would
    determine whether, in terms of that matter, the scheme could be undertaken as
    permitted development under the GPDO. However, since I am dismissing the
    appeal for other reasons, it is not necessary to address this matter in any further
    detail.
16. The provisions of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO do not require regard to
    be had to the development plan or the provisions of the National Planning Policy
    Framework, nor do they require an assessment of material harm or matters relating
    to the Council’s five-year housing land supply. Consequently, these matters do not
    alter my overall conclusions.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009850


17. Whilst it is noted that the proposed extension would provide additional living space
    for future occupiers, and that there is an extant permission at the site under which a
    subsequent planning application could be made to extend the building, these
    matters do not alter my overall conclusions. Moreover, matters relating to a
    permitted development fall back position are not relevant considerations in a prior
    approval application.
18. It is also claimed that an undesirable outcome would arise if the Council’s
    assessment were followed, namely that an extension would be erected along the
    east elevation adjacent to the highway. However, this is not a relevant
    consideration in the determination of this appeal, which relates strictly to the
    application of the GPDO provisions.
19. Furthermore, I have had regard to the appeal decisions cited by the appellant,
    including appeal references APP/Y3940/W/24/3352918 and
    APP/M2840/W/25/3362279. However, I have not been provided with the full details
    of those schemes, including the relevant plans and supporting documentation, and
    am therefore unable to undertake a meaningful comparison with the proposal
    before me. In any event, the addresses do not share the same site context, and I
    am required to determine the appeal on its own merits. Consequently, these
    decisions do not alter my overall conclusions.
20. The application has attracted interested party representations raising a number of
    issues. However, unlike an application for planning permission, the matters for
    consideration under this prior approval application are restricted to those set out in
    the GPDO. I am satisfied that sufficient evidence has been provided in respect of
    the other Criteria of Class Q, which are not matters of dispute in this appeal.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



K Dryden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
