 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by C J Leigh BSc(Hons) MPhil MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:09 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009643
 110 Sundon Park Road, Luton, LU3 3AG
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Ayesha Perveen against the decision of Luton Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00210/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is the conversion and change of use of grass verge to permeable hard
     standing and vehicle crossover to provide 1 off street parking space.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main issues
2. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on, firstly, the
   character and appearance of the surrounding area and, secondly, highway and
   pedestrian safety.
Reasons
Character and appearance
3. There is a grassed verge in front of the appeal property, with paved footways in
   front and behind this verge. A verge is also seen on the opposite side of Sundon
   Park Road, where there are a number of driveways serving font parking areas to
   houses; the verge on the eastern side of the road near the appeal property is more
   continuous.
4. There are fine trees in the grassed verges along Sundon Park Road, and these
   provide good tree cover and an attractive verdant setting to houses, and views
   along the road. I concur with the appellant that those trees are the prime contributor
   to the quality of the street scene; the grassed verges are attractive, but are lesser
   features in the road. This is moreover the case in the vicinity of the appeal site
   where residents park on the wide paved area in front of the verge, and so the visual
   quality of the verge is diminished; the appellant has provided evidence of this
   occurring for many years, and I saw the parking at my site visit.
5. The proposals would see the removal of part of the grassed verge to provide
   access to a new parking area at the front of the property. This would have a
   minimal effect on the quality of the street scene, with the creation of an additional
   hardsurfaced area not obtrusive between the existing two paved footways (ie in
   front and behind the verge), and as the important trees would be retained. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009643


     pattern of new access would be consistent with the pattern seen on the opposite
     side of the road, and elsewhere along Sundon Park Road.
6. Of particular note in this appeal is the fact that the Council granted permission for
   essentially the same development in 2021 (ref. 21/00424/FULHH). From the
   information provided to me it is apparent the character of the site and the wider
   area was very similar to now, and the decision was made against the policies of the
   current development plan. The Council considered there would be no adverse
   impact on the street scene, and I draw similar conclusions now.
7. On the first main issue I therefore conclude the proposed development would not
   be harmful to the character and appearance of the surrounding area, and so would
   be consistent with Policies LLP1, LLP25 and LLP31 of the Luton Local Plan 2011-
   2031 which, amongst other matters, seek to ensure all new development preserves
   the character of the area, responds to the townscape and street scene, and does
   not compromise the quality of the local environment.
Highway and pedestrian safety
8. The submitted drawings show a depth of the forecourt to the house of 5.07m and a
   parking space indicated of 2.40m x 4.80m, with two different options for parking.
   Appendix 2 of the Local Plan sets a minimum size of a standard parking bay to be
   2.4m x 4.9m and the Highways Authority have objected to the proposal on the
   basis of inadequate space to park a car in both options.
9. I concur that Option 1 for parking, which is parallel to the highway, is very likely to
   involve significant manoeuvring in reverse and forward gear across the footways in
   order that a vehicle could fit into that space. I saw at my site visit the footway
   adjoining the house, ie the narrower, easternmost one, was well-used by
   pedestrians. Such manoeuvring over the footway by vehicles would be hazardous
   to pedestrians.
10. The appellant states that a parking space of 4.8m length should be seen as
    acceptable, which is said to be a more commonly used standard. They also say
    that there is sufficient space on the forecourt for 4.9m. I acknowledge there is room
    for the parking space as shown, and also for 4.9m. However, the parking space is
    shown in front of the front door to the house. Either length of parking space would
    still mean a car would park directly in front of that door. With that arrangement there
    is then so little space remaining I consider it extremely unlikely that an occupier
    could actually park in the space and reasonably access the house. This situation
    does not exist at other driveways in the area which are either deeper (as seen on
    the opposite side of the road) or where the front door is positioned differently (as
    seen at No. 106 to the south).
11. The consequence of the above situation is that the occupier would in all probability
    not park the full length of the space if they wished to use their front door, ie they
    would park further away from the front door so they can enter the property. This is
    very likely to lead to an overhanging vehicle to the footway: the scenario envisaged
    by the Highways Authority, and which led to their objection on Option 2 on the
    same grounds. I have commented that the footway in front of the house is well-
    used, and any obstruction to this relatively narrow footway would have an adverse
    impact on pedestrian safety.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6009643


12. I acknowledge that the Council permitted the same arrangement in their 2021
    permission (ref. 21/00424/FULHH), with no objection from the Highways Authority
    at that time. However, there is an objection in this case and I have carefully
    considered the reasons why the Highways Authority now raise their concerns
    regarding highway and pedestrian safety, which is shared by the Council as local
    planning authority. I have had regard to the appellant’s views on this and I looked
    carefully at the matter at my site visit. It is my view there would be such harm, and
    that overrides any comments or decisions made in the past.
13. On the second main issue it is therefore my conclusion that the proposed
    development would be harmful to pedestrian safety. This would conflict with the
    relevant Policy LLP32 of the Local Plan, which requires development to reduce the
    safety risk to motor vehicles and non-motorised and vulnerable users.
Conclusions
14. I acknowledge the appellant’s wish to have off-street parking, and that this would
    provide a valuable facility for their particular needs. I have also found there would
    not be any harm to the character and appearance of the area. However, I must
    balance these against other matters of acknowledged importance and it is my
    overall conclusion that the harm to pedestrian safety is sufficient to outweigh the
    other considerations. The appeal is dismissed accordingly.

C J Leigh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
