Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 September 2026
by S Sharp BSc(Hons) BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009619
Cosy Cow Shed, Road from Carters Cross to Sunnylands Cross, Dalwood, Devon
EX13 7EB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mark Scorer against the decision of East Devon District Council.
•    The application reference is 25/1721/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of existing dwellinghouse (restricted to use for holiday
     accommodation purposes) to permit unrestricted residential occupation.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
      existing dwellinghouse (restricted to use for holiday accommodation purposes) to
      permit unrestricted residential occupation at Cosy Cow Shed, Road from Carters
      Cross to Sunnylands Cross, Dalwood, Devon EX13 7EB, in accordance with the
      terms of the application, reference 25/1721/FUL, subject to the following
      conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development shall be carried out in accordance with the following
              approved plans and documents: PP-14255853v1 – Location Plan 18-August-
              2025, Block Plan 1:500 – Cosy Cow Shed.
Preliminary Matter
2.    During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
      opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
      in my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue is whether the appeal proposal is an appropriate location for an
      unrestricted residential dwelling, having regard to the spatial policies of the
      development plan.
Reasons
4.    The appeal property is part of a group of houses and a Methodist Church within
      the countryside outside of a settlement. It is used for holiday accommodation.
      Aside from the Methodist Church, I am not aware of any other services and
      facilities within the group. Currently, occupiers of the holiday accommodation


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009619


      would have to travel to the nearest settlement, Dalwood, or further afield for
      services and facilities they need during their stay.
5.    As part of my site visit, I walked from the property to Dalwood and back again. The
      settlement has a pub, village hall, church, shop and café. The journey is on unlit
      roads, devoid of segregated footways, and an uphill, moderately steep incline was
      encountered on the return leg. There were no sheltered places to sit and rest
      enroute. The journey in each direction took approximately 7 minutes. Such
      characteristics could provide conducive conditions for walking during clement
      weather in the daylight. Existing occupiers of the property on holiday would have
      the flexibility to avail of these favourable conditions and walk at their leisure.
      Nevertheless, given the limited services in Dalwood, as well as the probable desire
      to visit attractions further afield such as the coast, it’s likely that many journeys to
      and from the appeal property would currently be by car.
6.    The proposed development would introduce a different character of trip to and
      from the appeal property. Whilst trips to access everyday convenience goods may
      be common to both holiday and unrestricted residential accommodation, the latter
      would likely generate trips to employment, medical and educational providers.
7.    Home working could be possible, and Dalwood’s facilities also include a preschool
      nursery outside of the settlement’s limits. Nevertheless, it is probable that future
      occupiers of the proposed development would turn to car borne trips after nightfall
      and/or in inclement weather, as well as to access other necessary services and
      facilities in Axminster and further afield. The trips and associated carbon emissions
      would likely be materially greater in number and scale respectively for the
      proposed use compared to the current use, albeit not significant in scale overall.
8.    In this context, I find that future occupiers’ reliance on car borne trips would conflict
      with Strategies S3 and 5B and policy TC2 of the East Devon Local Plan (2016)
      (EDLP) which advise that development proposals should contribute to reducing
      carbon emissions and journeys by car. It would also conflict with Strategies 1, 7
      and 27 which seek, through the setting out of a hierarchy of locations for
      development, to restrict housing with unrestricted occupancy in the countryside.
Other Matters
9.    My attention has been drawn to a number of other appeal decisions within the
      evidence before me. I have had regard to all of these in reaching my decision but
      find that they all have materially different spatial contexts and/or histories which
      mean that they are not determinative in this instance.
10. The appeal property is within the Blackdown Hills National Landscape designation.
    In reaching my decision I have sought to further the statutory purposes of this
    protected landscape, specifically to avoid harm and contribute to the conservation
    and enhancement of its natural beauty, special qualities, and key characteristics.
11. The site lies within the River Axe Special Area of Conservation (SAC) catchment.
    The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 requires that
    the impact of projects on protected sites is assessed. An Appropriate Assessment
    must be undertaken if a project is likely to have a significant effect on such sites
    (either individually or in combination with other plans or projects). In the appeal
    property’s location, this can include where proposals have the potential to affect
    water quality through increased occupancy and resultant nutrient loading into the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009619


      River Axe. The Council concluded that the current use is permitted for 365 days
      per year and, as such, the proposed development would not increase the
      intensity/extent of occupancy and nutrient loading. I have no evidence to disagree
      and, as such, my screening opinion is that the project would not likely have a
      significant effect on the SAC. An Appropriate Assessment is not required.
12. Schedule 7A (Biodiversity Gain in England) of the Town and Country Planning Act
    1990 introduced a requirement for biodiversity net gain (BNG). However, in this
    instance, the proposed development would benefit from the small site exemption.
13. The Framework is a material consideration. The appeal property’s location is
    outside of a settlement, clearly separated from Dalwood’s built-up envelope. Policy
    S5 of the Framework is applicable, rather than S4. Policy S5 advises that only
    certain forms of development, as listed in the policy, should be approved outside
    settlements. It then advises that such developments should be approved, unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies (NDMPs) in the
    Framework.
14. Part 2 of the policy clarifies that the circumstances in which the benefits of
    approving development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where the development
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the NDMPs which state that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
15. One of the listed forms of development, described in category d) of part 1 of the
    policy is the redevelopment of previously developed land (PDL) (including a
    material change of use to residential or mixed-use including residential). The
    appeal property accords with the definition of PDL in the glossary in Annex B of
    the Framework.
16. I have no evidence before me to indicate that the development would conflict with
    relevant NDMPs that state that development should be refused. These include
    policies L3(4) - efficient use of land/density of development, DP3(3) - design
    policies/principles, TR6(4) - highway safety/impact on transport network, F6(1) and
    F7(2) - flood risk, N2(2) – biodiversity, N6(1)(a) - sites of international importance,
    N6(2) - irreplaceable habitats, and HE6(5) - heritage assets. I find that other
    NDMPs stating development should be refused are not relevant because they, for
    example, are restricted to other types of use, or major developments.
17. Policy CC2 of the Framework advises that, in order to contribute to climate change
    mitigation and the transition to net zero, development proposals should accord
    with policies TR3 and TR4 so that, amongst other things, sustainable patterns of
    movement are prioritised. Policy TR3 advises that proposals which could generate
    a significant amount of movement, in the context of the area within which they
    would be situated, should be in locations that are sustainable. It clarifies that this
    means the location should limit the need to travel, particularly by private car, and
    offer a genuine choice of transport modes for residents and users, unless the
    nature of the development would make this impractical.
18. I have already found that the proposed development would not result in a
    significant number of movements in absolute terms given it is for just a single
    dwelling. In relative terms, the trips would not be significant given the number of
    dwellings already served by the road which the appeal property fronts, and that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009619


      this road connects Dalwood to the A35. I also find that the change of use nature of
      the proposal means that a genuine choice of transport modes for future occupiers
      would be impractical. Overall, I find no conflict with policies CC2, TR3 and TR4 of
      the Framework, having had regard to all these policies’ criteria.
19. There is no dispute between the parties that there would be no harm arising from
    the loss of the holiday accommodation, but I find that there would be benefits
    derived from the supply of one dwelling, the unrestricted occupancy of which
    would result in the supply of an additional home in the EDLP area. Notwithstanding
    that the current housing land supply is the equivalent to 3.5 years, I only afford this
    benefit minor weight. Nevertheless, the proposed development would not result in
    the benefit being substantially outweighed by adverse effects, given there are
    none of the latter.
20. I have already identified that the appeal property’s location as part of a group of
    houses is not isolated. Part 3 of policy S5 of the Framework and its trigger to
    assess the proposed development against policy HO11 is therefore not applicable.
    The appeal property is not within the Green Belt or land designated as Local
    Green Space. As such part 5 of policy S5 is also not applicable.
21. In the context of the above, I find that the proposed development would accord
    with policy S5 of the Framework and there is no conflict with the relevant NDMPs.
Planning balance
22. I have already found that the proposed development would result in a material
    increase in car-borne trips with the resultant increase in carbon emissions,
    compared with the existing use. This effect results in conflict with the development
    plan as a whole.
23. However, the Framework is a material consideration of critical importance in
    decision making. In this instance, I find it is a material consideration of sufficient
    weight to indicate that my decision should be made other than in accordance with
    the development plan. My reasons for this are as set out in this decision,
    principally being that the benefits derived from the proposed development would
    not be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects. I therefore find in favour of
    the proposed development.
Conditions
24. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans, for the
    avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty.
25. Based on the information available, this permission is considered to be one which
    will not require the approval of a biodiversity gain plan before development is begun
    because a statutory exemption applies.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

S Sharp
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
