Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by A Hunter LLB (Hons) PG Dip MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009228
406, 408 and 410 Beverley Road, Kingston Upon Hull HU5 1LW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Afacan and Carol Sahin against the decision of Kingston-Upon-Hull
     City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01099/FULL.
•    The development proposed is described as the “retention of metal fencing, canvas canopies affixed
     to the front elevation of the premises. Canvas Canopies, detached from the building and affixed to
     the ground. Metal storage racking affixed to ground.”

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The address stated in the banner heading above, has been altered from the
       address set out on the application form, to reflect the properties within the red line
       to which this appeal relates.
3.     On my site inspection I saw that works had commenced on the proposed
       development, and that all the canvas canopies were in situ, along with the metal
       fencing. However, at the time of my inspection, the position of the metal storage
       racking was not consistent with the submitted plans. Consequently, I have dealt
       with the appeal on the basis of the canopies and metal fencing having been
       installed and the metal storage racking being a proposed development.
4.     The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised on 17
       August 2026. Both main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
       how the changes affect their respective cases, and any responses received have
       been taken into account in my decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are;
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the Beverley Road
                Conservation Area (the CA);
           •    Highway safety;
           •    Whether the proposed layout provides inclusive access for users; and,
           •    Crime and disorder risks.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009228


Reasons
Effect on the CA
6.     Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       (the Act) requires when determining proposals in conservation areas that special
       attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character
       or appearance of that area. Policy HE4 of the Framework says heritage assets are
       an irreplaceable resource and should be conserved in a manner appropriate to
       their significance. Policy HE9 adds that development within or affecting the
       significance of conservation areas, should where possible, retain and conserve
       buildings that make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of
       conservation areas, and consider the area’s architectural or historic interest.
7.     The CA covers an extensive part of Beverely Road, which is a busy thoroughfare,
       and includes a mixture of residential and commercial uses. It comprises mostly
       terraced properties along both sides of the road, some of which are at the back
       edge of the pavement, with others being setback behind front gardens, although
       many of these have been lost to forecourt parking and hard surfaced areas. The
       Beverley Road Conservation Area Character Appraisal & Management Plan,
       adopted February 2025 (BRCACAMP), says a key feature of the CA is its largely
       retained historic layout, although it recognises that parts of it are in a poor
       condition. It says the CA is weakened by negative features such as the loss of
       uniformity to groups of buildings, including at ground floor level; poor quality shop
       fronts and materials; modern alterations; and the loss of front boundary
       treatments.
8.     The BRCACAMP recognises that awnings and canopies were historic features in
       the CA on what are said to have been Victorian and Edwardian buildings, but they
       have all since been removed, and the introduction of modern and fixed awnings
       are said to harm the CA. It adds that the introduction of traditional awnings and
       canopies, where appropriate, should be integrated with high-quality materials and
       design. One of its key priorities is the removal of unauthorised awnings and
       canopies. In regard to front boundary treatments, the BRCACAMP states that they
       should not usually exceed 1.2 metres in height and be of good design.
9.     The appeal property comprises 3 no. inner terraced properties, each having a
       shop unit at ground floor level, which are operated as one larger shop. The
       properties, like the others in this terrace between Suffolk Street and May Street are
       all three storeys high, setback from the pavement, with forecourts in front of them,
       which with the exception of those at the appeal site, are open areas with hard
       surfacing.
10. The new canopies attached to each of the buildings are fixed to the ground within
    the front forecourt, and whilst they are described as retractable, it is unclear at
    what times they would be retracted. At the time of my site inspection they were in
    the extended position, as also set out within the photographs submitted by the
    Council. Without any substantive evidence to the contrary, I also find it likely that
    they would be in this position during the trading hours of the shop.
11. Whether the new canopies attached to the buildings can be retracted or not, when
    they are extended, their bold colour, siting, scale and forward projection make
    them highly visible in the streetscene, when looking up and down Beverley Road
    and from Grafton Street. Furthermore their unsympathetic and uncoordinated

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009228


       appearance, along with their functional design is incongruous when seen in the
       context of the other terraced properties in this parade of shops that do not have
       canopies or awnings. This harm is further compounded by the siting, scale and
       appearance of the free-standing canopy within the front forecourt, that is
       positioned at the back edge of the pavement, which is a wholly discordant feature
       in the CA. It also partly obscures views of the buildings behind it, and its design
       makes no reference to the traditional appearance of the nearby properties, and it
       introduces an illegible form of development into what would be an open area in
       front of the buildings conflicting with the historic uniformed layout of properties, and
       harms the CA.
12. In terms of the proposed racks, given that they would be sited in front of the
    buildings and their considerable length, they would further complicate the
    appearance of the forecourts. Their functional design, which measures some 1.8
    metres in height, would introduce a form of development that was significantly
    harmful to the open areas in front of the buildings, allowing goods to be stalled at
    height, very near to the pavement, creating a jarring appearance alongside the
    frontages of other properties in the terrace, partly obscuring views of the building
    and harming the appearance of the CA. Collectively the new canopies and racks
    would fail to preserve the character or appearance of the CA, and they would harm
    the heritage asset.
13. The new railings, although a bit taller in height than the maximum height set out in
    the BRCACAMP, are lightweight and are likely located along some of the original
    boundary positions at the front of the appeal property. As a result, their siting, and
    design is not harmful to the CA. However, this is a neutral factor that does not
    outweigh the above identified harm.
14. It is acknowledged that Beverley Road contains many different commercial uses,
    including some similar awnings, canopies and modern additions, some very close
    to the appeal site. Even so, I am not aware of the planning history of those
    examples, including whether they have been granted planning permission, so I can
    only attach limited weight to them, and they do not outweigh my findings above in
    regard to this appeal proposal. Whilst it has also been said that the effects of the
    structures can be reversible, permission is sought on a permanent basis and the
    appeal must be determined accordingly.
       Balance
15. I have found that the proposed development would harm the CA. Policy HE6 of the
    Framework says that, when considering the potential effect of a proposed
    development on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
    should be given to the asset’s conservation and requires public benefits to
    outweigh such harm.
16. Those benefits in this case would be the provision of canopies and outside storage
    racks to support the viability of the existing retail business; provide an active
    frontage within an existing shopping area; and support local economic activity.
    Whilst that may be so, the overall benefits from these structures to the wider
    shopping area are likely to be very limited, and it is unclear why canopies of an
    appropriate and traditional design consistent with the BRCACAMP could not be
    installed at the appeal property to secure these same or similar benefits for the
    existing retail business and wider area, or why the goods could not be stored


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009228


       elsewhere at the appeal property. I therefore attach limited weight to these
       benefits, even when taken collectively.
17. Against this background, these public benefits are limited and do not outweigh the
    harm identified above to the significance of the designated heritage asset.
    Accordingly, there is conflict with Policy HE6 of the Framework.
       Conclusion
18. I therefore conclude that although the proposed railings would not be harmful to
    the CA, the proposed canopies and racking would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the CA, and that they would neither preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the CA, contrary to the duty in the Act. For the same
    reasons, there would be conflict with the relevant parts of policies 14,15,16, and 19
    of the Hull Local Plan 2016-2032, adopted November 2017 (HLP) that collectively
    seek to promote local distinctiveness, avoid harm to the significance of heritage
    assets, ensure a high quality environment, including the design, scale, materials
    and detailing of development, and in terms of its effect on the surrounding built
    form. In addition, the new canopies, and racks would also conflict with the
    objectives of the BRCACAMP, in terms of its objectives that are set out above.
    Furthermore, there would be conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework insofar as
    it requires development proposals to respond to their context (the history,
    character and features of their site and its setting), integrate with and enhance
    their surroundings; such as through, the use of materials and architectural
    features, and the restoration, re-use and integration of heritage assets.
19. The Council referred to conflict with its Supplementary Planning Document 2:
    Heritage & Archaeology, undated (SPD2). However, as SPD2 is mainly
    informative, particularly regarding Hull’s evolution and archaeology, I did not find
    the proposed development to be in conflict with it on this main issue.
Highway safety
20. There is a dropped kerb to the front side of the appeal site, immediately opposite
    part of the area that does not have railings across it. I also saw that there was no
    storage of produce on the front of the appeal site nearest to the dropped kerb. The
    available parking area for vehicles is also small and would likely result in them
    reversing into or out of the appeal site onto Beverley Road. Although there may
    not be any change in its use for parking to that which occurred before works
    commenced, the reduced available space and the layout changes would materially
    alter the situation.
21. Whilst the appellant has said it is not their intention to use this for means of
    vehicular access, there is no proposal to remove the dropped kerb, or to enclose
    the area to prevent this from occurring. Moreover, it has been said that it may be
    used informally for access and parking, but there is no reference to how frequently
    this would be. Evidence submitted by an interested party has included a
    photograph showing the area in use by a parked car when the canopies and metal
    railings were in place. There is a reasonable prospect that it could be used in such
    a way, particularly considering there are parking and loading restrictions along this
    part of Beverley Road at certain times, and with other forecourts nearby being
    used for parking vehicles. I therefore cannot be certain that the space on the
    forecourt adjoining the dropped kerb would not be used for parking, which could be
    on a regular basis, and I must assess the appeal proposal on this basis.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009228


22. Although only a snapshot in time, I saw on my site inspection that Beverley Road
    was busy with constant traffic, including pedestrians, cyclists, and motor vehicles.
    The appeal site is also opposite the junction with Grafton Street, and near to
    Beverley Road’s junctions with Suffolk Street and May Street, there is also a petrol
    filling station on the opposite side of the road, and a controlled pedestrian crossing
    point nearby. Nearest to the kerb alongside the appeal site is an allocated cycle
    lane, and there is a designated bus lane on the opposite side of the carriageway.
    As such, this immediate area is likely to put several competing demands on drivers
    both using this section of road, and those seeking to enter or leave the forecourt
    area at the appeal site. This, together with the limited size of the available parking
    area, and the position of the proposed racks and canopy supports nearest to the
    pavement edge, is likely to create conditions prejudicial to highway safety,
    particularly for pedestrians, cyclists, and vulnerable users, including those with a
    pushchair or within a wheelchair, when drivers are manoeuvring into or out of the
    space.
23. It is noted that the Council has not provided traffic data regarding accidents in the
    vicinity, but this factor carries little weight and does not mean that the proposed
    arrangement would be safe.
24. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would be harmful to highway
    safety and conflict with HLP policies 14, 26 and 28 that amongst other things
    require development to promote public safety, and provide safe vehicular access
    to and from the site in relation to classified roads. The dismissal of the appeal for
    this reason would also accord with policies TR4 criterion 1.c and TR6 criterion 4. of
    the Framework that says amongst other things, development should minimise the
    scope for conflict between pedestrians, cyclists, and vehicles and that it should be
    refused if there would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Proposed layout arrangement
25. The Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) contained in the Equality Act 2010, sets
    out the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, harassment and victimisation,
    and to advance equality of opportunity and foster good relations between people
    who share a protected characteristic and people who do not share it. In this case
    the duty applies in relation to the safety of those with visual impairments, who
    would have a protected characteristic. In reaching my decision, I have kept these
    interests at the forefront of my mind. However, they are qualified rights, and
    interference may be justified in the public interest. The concept of proportionality is
    key, but any such adverse effects would weigh against the proposal.
26. The proposed development includes fixed supports to the ground serving both the
    free-standing canopy and the canopies attached to the buildings. The proposed
    plans indicate that at least some of these would likely be near to the entrance
    points into the forecourt area, before entering the shop itself, and where goods
    would also be displayed. This arrangement would likely cause restrictive
    movements for customers coming into and out of the shop and moving around the
    forecourt. Furthermore, their position could cause an obstruction and hazard to
    those with visual impairments by creating barriers to their movements around the
    forecourt and into the shop. Although the Council has said a clear width of 1.5
    metres would be required for such spaces, it is unclear how this figure has been
    calculated or on what basis it is recommended. Nevertheless, if I had been minded
    to allow the appeal, and notwithstanding the proposed plans, a condition could

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009228


       have been imposed, requiring a layout plan for the display of goods and areas for
       pedestrian movements around the forecourt area and into the shop, to ensure
       there would be no unacceptable obstructions and hazards, including for vulnerable
       persons and those with visual impairments.
27. I therefore conclude that the layout of the proposed development subject to an
    appropriate condition, could be capable of providing inclusive access for its users
    and comply with HLP policies 14,19, and 26 insofar as they require accessibility to
    be maximised and for a high-quality environment that has an inclusive design,
    along with encouraging active and healthy lifestyles, including for those that are
    mobility impaired. The proposed development would also be consistent in this
    respect with the relevant part of the social objective of the Framework contained in
    paragraph 17 that seeks to create safe places.
Crime and disorder
28. Section 17 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 requires local authorities to do all
    that it reasonably can to prevent crime and disorder in its area. Along with the
    relevant part of paragraph 17 as set out above, Policy DP3 criterion f. of the
    Framework, states public spaces should be safe, secure, and accessible.
    Furthermore, Policy P5 which states malicious threats and other hazards should
    be anticipated, which includes potential safety risks and the fear of crime, including
    for women and girls, and that proportionate mitigation in response to such risks
    should be considered.
29. The position of the new structures and proposed racks would mean that the front
    forecourt areas of the terrace of properties the appeal site is part of, were not all
    open, as they were prior to the works commencing. However, the forecourt areas
    to either side of the appeal site are open, and there are views of them and the front
    of the appeal site from their respective sides when approaching them on this side
    of Beverley Road. In addition, there would be views of the front forecourt areas to
    either side of the appeal site from the opposite side of the road, which would
    include views of people walking from Suffolk Street onto this part of Beverley
    Road. To this extent, I am content that there would be no concealed or hidden
    areas created by the proposed development. There would also be good
    surveillance from the staff and users of the front forecourt of the appeal site, and
    from the flow of passing pedestrians, cyclists, and vehicles. In view of this, the new
    canopies, metal railings, and proposed racks should not increase the risks of crime
    and disorder in this immediate area.
30. Furthermore, the Council has not presented any substantive evidence to support
    its objections in this regard, such as crime reports in the immediate area, since the
    works had commenced at the appeal site.
31. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would satisfy the
    requirements of HLP Policy 14 in respect of promoting public safety and
    minimising the risk of crime. In addition, the proposed development would not be
    inconsistent with the relevant parts of the Framework that are set out above.
Other Matters
32. The appellant has referred to other policies of the development plan, including
    those relating to its location within a designated Shopping Centre, that are said to
    support the principle of the proposed development. I have had regard to these, but

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009228


       the development plan must be read as a whole and complying with part of it does
       not mean complying with it as a whole.
33. I note the comments from interested parties, in addition to the above issues,
    including, but not limited to health and safety issues; the condition of the wider
    area; and how goods are stored at the site. Whilst I can understand the concerns,
    subject to planning conditions as appropriate, there is no compelling evidence
    before me that would lead me to come to a different conclusion to the Council on
    these matters.
Conclusion
34. Although the proposed development would not cause unacceptable crime and
    disorder risks, and subject to a condition it could provide inclusive access, it would
    be harmful to the character and appearance of the CA, and to highway safety. As
    such the proposal conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole.
35. Policy TC2 of the Framework says substantial weight should be given to
    supporting the overall vitality and viability of the town centre and improving local
    shops that provide day to day services for the local community. Policy L2 of the
    Framework also says substantial weight should be given to making better use of
    vacant and under-utilised land. Furthermore, Policy S3 of the Framework has a
    presumption in favour of sustainable development, and Policy S4 states
    development within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing
    so would be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework. Collectively these policies
    and those points raised by the appellant weigh in favour of the of the appeal
    proposal.
36. Against this, Policy S4 criterion 2 c. states that failing to comply with one of the
    national decision-making policies that state development proposals should be
    refused, is likely to mean the benefits of a proposal are outweighed by the adverse
    effects. In this case, and the harm to the character and appearance of the area
    and conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework, the unacceptable highway safety
    impacts and conflict with Policy TR6 of the Framework, that both state
    development should be refused, along with the conflict with Policy HE6, strongly
    indicate to me that the benefits of the limited scale of the proposed development,
    including the substantial weights set out above, and those points raised by the
    appellant, are outweighed by the adverse effects in this case.
37. Accordingly, there are no other considerations, including the Framework and those
    points raised by the appellant that indicate a decision should be made other than
    in accordance with the development plan. I therefore dismiss the appeal.



A Hunter
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
