 Appeal Decisions
 Site visit made on 27 August 2026
 by Les Greenwood MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 10 September 2026


 Appeal A: Ref 6009241
 Pavement outside Esso, East Lancashire Road, Liverpool L11 2FT
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne for BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
      Liverpool City Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25F/2902.
 •    The development proposed is the installation of 1No BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
      payphones.

 Appeal B: Ref 6009242
 Pavement outside Esso, East Lancashire Road, Liverpool L11 2FT
 •    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
      consent.
 •    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne for BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
      Liverpool City Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25A/2901.
 •    The advertisement proposed is 2No digital 75 inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
      Street Hub unit.


Decisions
Appeal A: Ref 6009241
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of 1No
   BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT payphones at the pavement outside
   Esso, East Lancashire Road, Liverpool L11 2FT in accordance with the terms of
   the application, Ref 25F/2902, subject to the conditions set out in the attached
   Schedule.
Appeal B: Ref 6009242
2. The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of 2No digital
   75 inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit at the
   pavement outside Esso, East Lancashire Road, Liverpool L11 2FT in accordance
   with the terms of the application, Ref 25A/2901. The consent is for 5 years from the
   date of this decision and is subject to the 5 standard conditions set out in Schedule
   2 of the 2007 Regulations and the additional conditions set out in the attached
   Schedule.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decisions 6009241 and 6009242


Preliminary matters
3. The address for these proposals refers to ‘Esso’, but the petrol station adjacent to
   the site was being operated by EG at the time of my site visit.
4. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. Having regard to the changes in the Framework and
   the comparatively minor scale and nature of these appeal proposals, I consider that
   further consultation on this matter was not necessary. I take the new Framework
   into account in this decision.
Main Issue
5. For planning applications and appeals (Appeal A), decisions must be made in
   accordance with the plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise1.
   Advertisement proposals (Appeal B) are, in contrast, subject to control in the
   interests of amenity and public safety, bearing in mind material provisions of the
   development plan and any other relevant factors2.
6. With these requirements in mind, the main issue for both appeals is the effect on
   the safety of public highway users.
Reasons
7. This part of East Lancashire Road is a multi-lane dual carriageway arterial route,
   designated the A580, passing through a commercial area. It has footways and
   street lighting to both sides. The appeal site is on the north side, in front of a petrol
   station (which incorporates fast food outlets) and near to a coffee shop. On the
   south side of the road opposite is retail park with a hotel, a cinema, shops and
   restaurants.
8. The proposal is to replace an existing phone box with a new ‘street hub’ unit,
   approximately 3m high by 1.2m wide by 0.35m deep, to provide communications
   services and carry 2 illuminated digital advertising screens. The new unit would be
   in the same location on the grass verge, but would be slightly wider than the phone
   box so would overlap very slightly into the tarmac footway. The Council has 3 key
   safety concerns about the new unit: (1) it would obstruct pedestrian movement on
   the footway, potentially causing pedestrians to walk on the grass verge which could
   be a slipping hazard next to the carriageway; (2) it would encourage pedestrians to
   cross the dual carriageway from the busy commercial area opposite without using a
   pedestrian crossing; and (3) it would interfere with drivers’ visibility.
9. Taking these points in order – firstly, no evidence has been submitted regarding the
   amount of use of this footway by pedestrians. From my observations on a weekday
   mid-morning, use is very light. This seems likely to be the case as there are few
   premises nearby on this side of the road. The footway width would be narrowed to
   about 1.6m as it passes the proposed unit. Although this is less than optimal, it is
   wide enough to allow 2 pedestrians to pass each other or for a pedestrian to pass a
   wheel chair user, as advised by Department of Transport guidance3. The pinch
   point would be minor and pedestrians could reasonably be expected to wait for

1
    Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
2
    Regulation 3 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations
    2007
3
  Inclusive Mobility: A Guide to Best Practice on Access to Pedestrian and Transport Infrastructure

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
 Appeal Decisions 6009241 and 6009242


     each other, if necessary, in the probably unusual event that their paths meet at this
     point. It seems unlikely that pedestrians would walk around the unit, onto the grass
     verge, as this would inconvenience them more than waiting momentarily for
     another pedestrian to pass. There would, even in such cases, be enough space
     between unit and carriageway for this to happen reasonably safely.
10. Secondly, the nearest light controlled pedestrian crossing is only about 100m away
    and leads directly to the access drive for the retail park. This does not seem an
    unreasonable distance to go to get to a crossing for a busy dual carriageway. There
    are no crossing barriers in place along the road, so it is possible that some people
    might cross without using the formal crossing in any case, to get to the petrol
    station and the nearby coffee shop, but I see no reason why the proposed unit
    would significantly encourage this behaviour.
11. Thirdly, The proposed installation would be set about 1.6m away from the
    carriageway, on the outside of a shallow bend, so that it would not interfere with
    drivers’ forward visibility along the A580. The main potential effect would be on
    visibility for drivers leaving the petrol station to re-enter the A580, using an exit
    about 30m from the proposed unit. Given this separation distance, the slight bend
    of the road and the set back of the unit from the carriageway, the proposal would
    not significantly interfere with drivers’ or cyclists’ visibility.
12. Furthermore, in all these respects, the effects of the proposed new unit and
    advertisements would be much the same as that of the existing phone box, so that
    there would not be any significant new effect on safety. Finally, I note that the
    Council does not raise any issue regarding the proposed advertisements distracting
    drivers, subject to conditions controlling lighting and imaging.
13. I conclude that the proposal would not significantly affect the safety of public
    highway users. It accords with Liverpool Local Plan policies TP1, TP6, UD9 and the
    Framework, which taken together aim to provide a well-designed pedestrian
    environment that avoids adverse impacts on highway safety. The Council also cites
    conflict with LLP policies TP3 (safeguarding land), TP8 (car parking) and SP3
    (design of development in centres), but I find no direct relevance to the issue of
    highway safety as raised by this appeal.
Conditions
14. For Appeal A, I impose a condition specifying the relevant plans to provide
    certainty. Conditions requiring the use of external materials and the removal of the
    existing kiosk, both as proposed, are necessary to preserve the character and
    appearance of the local area and, for the latter of these, also to protect highway
    safety.
15. For Appeal B, a condition requiring removal of the existing kiosk is also necessary
    for the same reasons. A set of conditions controlling the signs’ illumination and
    images, generally as recommended by the Council’s highways officer, is also
    needed for safety reasons. In respect of illumination, however, the highways
    officer’s recommended maximum luminance levels are well below those
    recommended by the Institute of Lighting Professionals Professional Lighting Guide
    PG 05/23. I consider the appellant’s proposed luminance levels, which are
    reasonably in line with that guidance, to be more reasonable. I note that the signs
    would be fitted with controls that automatically dim and change the brightness of
    the screens depending on the time of day and weather conditions.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decisions 6009241 and 6009242


Conclusions
16. For the reasons set out above, and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that both appeals should succeed.
Les Greenwood
INSPECTOR

SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
Appeal A: Ref 6009241
1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
    of this decision.
2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
    following approved plans: 001A, 002A and 003A.
3) The street hub unit hereby permitted shall not be installed other than in accordance
    with the details of materials set out in the application form.
4) The street hub unit hereby approved shall not be brought into operation until the
    existing BT kiosk on the site has been completely removed.
Appeal B: Ref 6009242
1) The advertisements hereby approved shall not be displayed until the existing BT
    kiosk on the site has been completely removed.
2) The levels of internal illuminance shall not exceed 2500 cd/m² during daylight hours
    or exceed 600 cd/m² during twilight and night hours, as defined by official lighting
    up times.
3) The screen display shall only show 2 dimensional static images, shall contain no
    moving images, animation, video or full motion images and no messaging shall
    spread across more than 1 screen image.
4) The advertisement display shall not change more frequently than every 10 seconds
    and the rate of change shall be instantaneous.
5) The illumination of the advertisements shall not at any time be intermittent.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
