Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026 by S Jamieson BA(Hons) MPlan MRTPI
Decision by H Jones BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009969
23 Tweedale Crescent, Madeley, Telford TF7 4EA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Miss John/Shannon Houghton/Bickley against the decision of Telford
    and Wrekin Council.
•   The application Ref is TWC/2026/0156.
•   The development proposed is erection of a single storey rear extension, erection of a first-floor
    extension above existing garage and creation of a front porch.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published and, in making my recommendation, I have had regard
   to its content. I am satisfied that the revisions do not affect the substance of the
   main issue in the appeal. Since the main parties would not therefore be prejudiced,
   I have proceeded without further consultation.
4. I have been provided with a copy of policies DD1 and DD3 of the emerging Telford
   and Wrekin Local Plan Review. Although the evidence before me indicates that the
   emerging plan is at an advanced stage, I have very limited information on the
   extent to which there maybe unresolved objections to these policies or the
   requirement for modifications to be made to them. Consequently, the precise
   content of the policies could be the subject of change. In the circumstances, I
   attribute limited weight to the emerging policies.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal dwelling is located at one end of a suburban cul-de-sac, where there is
   much commonality in the age, type, scale and design of properties. Like the appeal

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009969


    dwelling, most properties on the street are two-storey, semi-detached dwellings
    which feature hipped tiled roofs, red brick elevations and similar patterns of
    fenestration. While some properties have been altered or extended, most commonly
    through the addition of front porches and single-storey side garages or carports,
    two-storey side extensions are not a prevalent feature of the street scene. As a
    result, dwellings tend to be modest in scale, semi-detached pairs retain a balanced
    appearance, and the overall coherence of the street contributes positively to the
    character and appearance of the area.
7. Spanning the full width of the garage, the side extension would considerably widen
   the dwelling at first-floor level. It would have a recessed front elevation, however, its
   roof ridge level would match the existing house and, consequently, this widening
   would occur without design interventions which would effectively break down the
   extension’s considerable mass. As a result, the first-floor extension would form an
   unduly large and visually dominant addition to the dwelling, which would be at odds
   with the more modest scale and appearance currently exhibited by both the dwelling
   and neighbouring properties.
8. Unlike the conservatory it would replace, the proposed rear extension would occupy
   the full width of the ground floor elevation and, overall, it would be a far larger
   addition to the rear of the property. The rear extension, due to its brick construction,
   would also have a more solid appearance than the conservatory. Therefore, the rear
   extension would result in the property’s western elevation becoming elongated and
   of considerable mass. This mass would be visible from the street and the adjacent
   public right of way.
9. Overall, even though much of the garden would still remain undeveloped,
   cumulatively, the first-floor and rear extensions would substantially increase the
   dwelling’s size, bulk and visual presence. Altogether, these extensions would be
   unsympathetic additions to the dwelling which would erode the visual coherence
   and balanced appearance exhibited within the street scene.
10. Some of the design details proposed, including the use of matching materials and
    the provision of a hipped roof to the first-floor extension would be appropriate in
    their own right. However, for the reasons I have given, this would not overcome or
    mitigate the harm which would arise from the scale and form of the development
    proposed.
11. Consequently, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the area. It would conflict with policies BE 1 and BE 2
    of the Telford & Wrekin Local Plan 2011 - 2031 (2018) (Local Plan) which require,
    amongst other things, that developments respect and respond positively to their
    context and enhance the quality of the local built environment; demonstrate an
    integrated design approach from the outset; and in relation to residential alterations,
    that developments respect the character of the area and remain in keeping with the
    existing building.
Other Matters
12. The Appellants have referred to the exercise of permitted development rights as a
    potential fallback position. However, no detailed plans relating to an alternative
    permitted development scheme have been provided. Permitted development rights
    are subject to a host of conditions and limitations and, from the detail before me, it
    is not at all clear that these permitted development rights could be exercised to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009969


     extend or add to the property in a manner which would result in effects similar or
     more harmful than the appeal proposal. In such circumstances, the existence of
     permitted development rights does not weigh in the proposal’s favour to any
     meaningful extent.
13. Conditions securing matching materials, obscure glazing, particular construction
    hours, and compliance with the submitted plans would not sufficiently mitigate or
    overcome the harm I have set out in my main issue. The Council also raises no
    concerns regarding the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers, parking provision or highway safety, and I have no reason
    to disagree. Nevertheless, the absence of harm in these respects is a neutral
    consideration and does not overcome or justify the harm identified.
14. I acknowledge that the Appellants sought to engage with the planning process and
    made certain design amendments in response to officer feedback. Furthermore,
    neighbouring occupiers may be supportive of the proposal. However, these matters
    do not render the scheme acceptable, nor do they address my concerns.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. The proposed development would have a harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, it would conflict with policies within the development plan
    as a result and, overall, I find that it conflicts with the development plan taken as a
    whole.
16. The Framework establishes a presumption in favour of sustainable development.
    Since the site lies within a settlement, the Framework indicates that development
    should be approved unless its benefits are substantially outweighed by adverse
    effects when assessed against the Framework's national decision-making policies.
17. The benefit in this case is derived from the development generating a remodelled
    and modernised dwelling with additional floorspace. This, in turn, would better meet
    the needs of its occupants.
18. Against this, the harm to the character and appearance of the area means that the
    development conflicts with national decision-making policy within the Framework
    (DP3(1)) which sets out that development should respond to their context so that
    they integrate and enhance their surroundings. Policy DP3 further sets out that
    proposals should be refused when this would not be achieved. Therefore, I attach
    substantial weight to this harm. Taking these points together, the benefits of
    granting planning permission would be substantially outweighed by adverse effects.
19. Together, Local Plan policies SP 1 and SP 4 require developments to accord with
    local and national policies. Due to the adverse effects I have identified, and the
    related policy conflicts, the development conflicts with both of these policies.
20. Overall, the development conflicts with the development plan as a whole and there
    are no material considerations, including the Framework, that indicate the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with the development plan. I therefore
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Jamieson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009969


Inspector’s Decision
21. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

H Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
