Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by S Simms BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009303
Land adj. 50 Middleton Way, Fen Drayton, Cambridgeshire CB24 4SU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Philip Rust against the decision of South Cambridgeshire District
     Council.
•    The application reference is 25/04091/OUT.
•    The development proposed is the erection of two self-build dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal form was completed using the address and description of development
       on the decision notice, which I take as agreement to their use, albeit in the banner
       heading I have omitted narrative that does not describe development.
3.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the
       latest Housing Delivery Test results were published on 17 August 2026. I invited
       the main parties to comment on any implications of these for their cases and took
       their responses into account in reaching my decision.
4.     The application was submitted in outline with all matters reserved except access.
       The drawings include detail beyond access, which I have treated as illustrative.
5.     A unilateral undertaking was submitted by the appellant after the final comments
       stage. The Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England states that, for written
       representations appeals, an executed and certified copy of any obligation must be
       provided at the time of making an appeal. I return to this matter later.
Main Issue
6.     The main issue is whether the proposal is in a suitable location, having particular
       regard to the accessibility of services and facilities.
Reasons
7.     The appeal site is part of a former smallholding on the Fen Drayton Former Land
       Settlement Association (LSA) Estate. A primary school, village hall and recreation
       ground are at the edge of the village, about 1.0km away, and a pub and church are
       about 1.5km and 1.7km away in the centre. The nearest shops are about 1.3km
       away in the next village of Fenstanton, with other services further away within the
       same village. I saw that there is also a filling station closer to the site.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009303


8.     The private road fronting the site is narrow, unlit and has no footway. As such, it is
       unlikely to feel safe for most pedestrians and cyclists, particularly after dark. At one
       end is a road with a footway to the village and the other leads to a busy road with a
       narrow pavement cycleway to Fenstanton. The appellant states that pedestrian
       access is secured via Mill Road, which is lit, but this road runs parallel to Middleton
       Way, so it is unclear how useful a route that might be in practice.
9.     The village has a bus service, and two others serve Fenstanton. However, stops
       are realistically only accessible by cycle, and I have no evidence as to frequencies
       or cycle storage facilities. Whilst there is a guided busway that is likely to be well
       served and has a cycleway alongside, it is further away. Overall, flat landscape
       means that some limited local facilities are accessible by cycle, but not walkable.
       Other facilities and public transport are much less accessible.
10. I accept that opportunities for sustainable transport solutions vary between urban
    and rural areas, and that routes need not be lit to be usable. However, in this case,
    I am satisfied that the proposal would be heavily car dependent and therefore not
    in a suitable location. The County Council as local highway authority has not
    objected but only commented on the direct effects on the adopted highway rather
    than sustainable travel, or indeed any impact on the private road.
11. Redevelopment within the Fen Drayton Former LSA Estate is supported by Policy
    H/5, and the details it requires of sustainable living could be dealt with at reserved
    matters stage. However, I have no evidence as to the footprint of any redundant
    buildings that the proposal might replace, which the policy also requires.
12. The proposal would therefore conflict with Policies S/2, S/7, H/5 and TI/2 of the
    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan 2018, which promote sustainable travel, permit
    only uses outside settlements that are supported by other policies or which need a
    countryside location, and seek to reduce the need to travel, especially by car.
Other Matters
13. The appellant considers the district’s housing land supply fragile due to large
    allocations, unfunded infrastructure, viability pressures and unrealistic build-out
    rates. However, I have no evidence that there is less than five years’ supply or that
    less than 75% of the requirement has been delivered over the last three years.
14. There is a shortfall of 456 serviced self-build or custom build plots against demand
    for 843 in the district. The appellant states that appeal decisions demonstrate that
    substantial weight is attached to self-build provision, but this was given moderate
    weight in the decision supplied. Furthermore, I do not have the evidence on which
    these appeals were determined; for example, the extent of shortage of housing
    land or delivery, either generally or of self-builds.
15. The proposed dwellings are described as self-build, and an unsigned unilateral
    undertaking to market them as serviced plots to people on the Council’s self-build
    register for one year was submitted with the appeal. A different, signed, unilateral
    undertaking to similar effect, was submitted after final comments. However, it was
    undated and did not contain a plan of the land that it referred to. Consequently, I
    consider it unlikely to be enforceable.
16. The proposal would add to the housing supply, provide economic benefits during
    construction, and future occupiers would be likely to support local services and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009303


       facilities. Electric vehicle charging points (EVCPs) would aid decarbonisation but
       are now required for all new dwellings, and, whilst the lay-by would reduce traffic
       conflict, I am unclear about its effect on pedestrians or cyclists.
17. I am supplied with a copy of planning permission reference 25/03945/FUL for the
    erection of a self-build or custom build dwelling and garage at land adjacent to 46
    Middleton Way, granted on 11 December 2025. However, I have no further details,
    for example, of any existing building that it may have replaced.
18. The appellant states that, because the site has hosted agricultural structures, it is
    previously developed land. However, the definition in the Framework specifically
    excludes land last occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings, so I find that the
    site does not comprise previously developed land.
Planning Balance
19. Outside settlements, unless the benefits would be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework, then Policy S5 of the Framework requires development which
    would address an evidenced unmet need to be approved if it is physically well-
    related to an existing settlement and of a scale that can be accommodated.
20. Policy CC2 of the Framework requires development to be located where it can
    support sustainable patterns of movement, enable good accessibility for different
    users, make the most of transport infrastructure, support good access to facilities
    to limit the need to travel and the transition to zero-emission vehicles. I have found
    that it would not be so located, and the limited benefits of the EVCPs and a lay-by
    mean that, overall, I attach significant weight to this conflict.
21. Policy HO7 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to providing
    homes that meet needs, including for people wishing to commission or build their
    own homes. However, I have found that the proposal would not contribute to such
    a need, and so I attach only modest weight to this.
22. The adverse effects of the unsuitable location would substantially outweigh the
    benefits of general needs housing, its construction and support to local services,
    EVCPs and a lay-by. I have also found that the proposal would not be suitably
    related to an existing settlement and that its need for access to services and
    facilities could not be accommodated by available infrastructure.
23. Furthermore, in the context of this appeal, Policies S/2, S/7, H/5 and TI/2 of the
    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan 2018 are not materially inconsistent with the
    Framework and so should continue to be afforded significant weight.
Conclusion
24. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. So, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Simms
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
