Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by H Whitfield BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009541
32 Bromley Road, Lewisham, London SE6 2TP
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against a
       refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr J Hogman (Beeches Group Holdings) against the decision of the Council of the
       London Borough of Lewisham.
•      The application Ref is DC/25/141224.
•      The development proposed is alterations, conversion from former children's nursery (Class E(f)) to a nine-
       bedroom House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) (Class Sui Generis), removal of rear canopy structure,
       provision of additional roof light windows, provision of cycle storage at rear and visitor cycle stands to
       forecourt, provision of refuse storage to forecourt, provision of one disabled parking space to forecourt, re-
       surfaced permeable forecourt, provision of ramped entrance on forecourt.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       For the avoidance of doubt, I have taken the description from the Council’s decision
         notice as this is the same used by the appellant on their appeal form and statement
         and better reflects the extent of the appeal scheme.
3.       The appeal building is within the Culverley Green Conservation Area (the CA). In
         accordance with Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
         Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) I have been mindful of my statutory duty to pay special
         attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of
         the CA.
4.       The appellant has submitted a Daylight and Sunlight Report1 (DSR) with this appeal, in
         response to the Council’s second reason for refusal. Amended plans have also been
         submitted which seek to amend the ground floor layout and show the retention of the
         external chimney stacks. The amendments proposed to the scheme are relatively
         minor and do not make a substantial difference or fundamental change to the
         development when compared to the plans upon which the Council made its decision.
         The Council has also had the opportunity to review and comment on these plans and
         documents such that accepting them would not cause unlawful procedural unfairness
         to anyone involved in the appeal. I have therefore determined the appeal on the basis
         of the amended plans and report.
5.       The Council has confirmed that the layout of Studio 1 and the ground floor kitchen on
         the amended plans is now sufficient to be accessible for a wheelchair user. Based on

1
    Right of Light Consulting (dated 20 April 2026)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009541


       the evidence before me I see no reason to come to a different conclusion and therefore
       shall not consider this matter further.
6.     The Council’s third reason for refusal referred to the loss of the chimney stacks and
       excessive height of the front boundary treatment. The amended plans show the
       retention of the external chimney stacks, and the appellant has confirmed that no
       alterations are proposed to the existing front boundary. On this basis the Council has
       confirmed that the amended plans address its third reason for refusal. I shall return to
       this matter later in the decision.
7.     Whether future occupants of the north-facing ground floor studios would be provided
       with adequate levels of sunlight was not initially raised as a concern by the Council.
       However, this was assessed by the appellant in the DSR. Both main parties were given
       the opportunity to comment on the conclusions of the DSR and their implications on the
       appeal and I have had regard to any comments received.
8.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (2026) (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework, and I have had
       regard to any comments received.
Main Issues
9.     The main issues in this appeal are:
           •    whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living conditions
                for future occupants having particular regard to outlook and light;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the character of the area, with
                particular regard to the concentration of Houses of Multiple Occupation (HMOs).
Reasons
Living conditions
10. The appeal relates to a two-storey semi-detached building understood to have last
    been in use as a children’s nursery. The appeal scheme proposes the conversion of
    the building to a 9-bedroom HMO with a maximum occupancy of 16 people. The
    Council’s concerns in this respect relate to Studios 2 and 3 which are located on the
    ground floor.
11. In respect of outlook, Studios 2 and 3 would be double occupancy rooms and would
    have two windows in the north facing elevation that would serve the main bedroom
    spaces. These windows would look out onto the boundary wall and side elevation of
    the neighbouring property over a relatively short distance. From the evidence before
    me and what I saw on site, this would have an enclosing and deadening effect on the
    outlook from these rooms. While these studios would also be served by some roof
    lights, as these would be high level, they would also have restricted outlook.
    Consequently, there would be very limited outlook from these studios which would not
    be conducive to a high-quality living environment or provide adequate living conditions
    for future occupiers.
12. While I note that windows already exist in this location, they do not currently serve
    habitable rooms. Moreover, even when in residential use, these windows would’ve
    served rooms within a larger dwellinghouse where occupants would’ve had access to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009541


         other spaces through the property with improved outlook. This would not be the case in
         the appeal scheme as future occupiers of these studios would be reliant on their
         bedrooms as their only private habitable space and would not have access to alternative
         living areas. As such, the two are not directly comparable. Whether or not the Council’s
         HMO standards specifically refer to outlook does not override the requirement to ensure
         the studios are provided with acceptable living conditions in this respect either.
13. The Council also raised concerns in relation to daylight levels in Studio 2. As set out
    above, the main bedroom area for Studio 2 would be served by two north facing
    windows and a roof light. The windows would look out onto the side access, boundary
    wall and neighbouring property over a relatively short distance. The DSR confirms that
    when measuring the amount and distribution of daylight within the room, Studio 2
    would surpass the BRE2 minimum illuminance recommendations. While the Council
    has highlighted that the window serving the dressing/study room in Studio 2 has not
    been assessed within the DSR, the daylight findings in relation to windows 1 and 2 are
    undisputed by the Council. Given the dressing/study room would be relatively small
    and served by a large window opening which has a similar relationship to the site
    boundary as windows 1 and 2, there is nothing before me to suggest that this room
    would not receive adequate levels of daylight for its intended use either.
14. However, the DSR concludes that as Studios 2 and 3 would have no habitable room
    windows which would face within 90 degrees of due south and would not receive a
    total of at least 1.5 hours of sunlight on 21 March, they would not meet the BRE
    numerical targets for sunlight exposure. Accordingly, these studios would not appear
    reasonably sunlit in accordance with BRE Guidelines. The DSR states that sunlight
    exposure is an aspirational target and that falling short of these recommendations does
    not amount to noncompliance with the BRE guidelines. However, while the BRE guide
    provides useful tests which indicate when a space may not feel well lit, an overall
    judgement about living conditions still must be made, having regard to the standard of
    accommodation proposed and local and national policies.
15. In this case, the occupants of this HMO would share kitchen facilities which would not
    appear to provide dining space and no communal living spaces are shown.
    Accordingly, occupants would be entirely reliant on their bedrooms as their only private
    habitable space. This emphasises the importance of ensuring such spaces provide
    acceptable internal living conditions. Although they would be provided with adequate
    daylight, the occupiers of Studios 2 and 3 would not have access to at least one
    habitable room that would meet the BRE numerical targets for sunlight exposure, and
    these studios would have very restricted outlook. Accordingly, I find that Studios 2 and
    3 would be gloomy, oppressive and insufficiently sunlit which would not be conducive
    to an acceptable standard of internal amenity for future occupants. This conflicts with
    Policy P3 of the Framework which states that developments should provide healthy
    living conditions for occupiers, particularly in terms of adequate access to light and
    Policy DP3 of the Framework insofar as it supports well-designed, liveable
    developments that will function well over the lifetime of the development.
16. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal scheme would fail to
    provide acceptable living conditions for all future occupants with particular regard to
    outlook and light. This is contrary to Policies QD8 and HO8 (part A d.) of the Lewisham
    Local Plan 2025 (the LLP) and Policy D6 of the London Plan (2021) insofar as they
    seek to ensure that developments provide a high standard of residential

2
    Building Research Establishment Site Layout Planning for Daylight and Sunlight – a guide to good practice (2022)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   3
Appeal Decision 6009541


       accommodation which are comfortable and fit for purpose and that HMOs provide high
       quality accommodation with adequate functional living spaces and layouts.
HMO concentration
17. The appeal relates to a two-storey semi-detached building located on the western side
    of Bromley Road in an area predominately characterised by large semi-detached and
    detached villas, some of which appeared to be in commercial use and used for
    specialist housing. The appeal building is understood to have last been in use as a
    children’s nursery and consent is sought for the conversion of the building to a 9-
    bedroom HMO with associated alterations and facilities.
18. Policy H9 of the London Plan sets out that Boroughs should promote efficient use of
    the existing housing stock to reduce the number of vacant and under-occupied
    dwellings and take account of the role of HMOs in meeting local and strategic housing
    needs. Policy HO8 of the LLP relates specifically to HMOs. Part A of this policy sets out
    the criteria which proposals for sui generis/large HMOs must satisfy to be permitted.
    The Council has not raised any objections to the scheme in relation to its compliance
    with paragraphs a or c of part A of Policy HO8 and based on the evidence before me, I
    see no reason to reach an alternative view. In respect of section d of part A, I have
    found that the appeal scheme would not provide high quality accommodation for all
    future occupants. However, insofar as this main issue relates to the concentration of
    HMOs, the council’s concerns centre around paragraph b of part A.
19. Paragraph A b. requires development proposals for large HMOs to contribute to
    inclusive and mixed neighbourhoods and to not result in a harmful overconcentration of
    HMOs. The policy goes on to explain that this will be assessed where the character of
    the area has changed or local amenity has been adversely impacted as a result of
    various factors. Whether a particular number or percentage of HMOs in a given area
    comprises an overconcentration is not defined within the policy.
20. In this respect, the Council rely on the Lewisham HMO Review and Evidence Paper
    (2022) (the HMO Review), which was written in response to local concerns about the
    impact of HMOs across the Borough. However, the HMO Review does not appear to
    be a Supplementary Planning Document or part of the adopted development plan, and
    it is unclear whether it has been subject to any form of independent scrutiny.
    Accordingly, while it is capable of being a material consideration, I attach only limited
    weight to its contents.
21. The appeal site is located within the Rushey Green Ward which the HMO Review
    states has seen the second highest increase in the number of licensed HMOs in the
    Borough from 2017. The appeal site is also within an area which has a predicted HMO
    concentration of between 10 and 20%. The HMO Review sets out that a 10%
    concentration is the tipping point at which HMOs may give rise to harmful effects and
    where neighbourhoods go from balanced to unbalanced communities. On this basis,
    the evidence from the HMO Review predicts that the appeal site is within a ward that is
    overconcentrated with HMOs.
22. However, the HMO Review is some 4 years out of date and ward level data is
    inherently broad. Figure 3 which predicts HMO overconcentration’s also appears to
    include residential institutions, care homes and other specialist housing. It is therefore
    unclear whether the predicted overconcentration accurately reflects the current
    situation and number of HMOs within the ward and immediately surrounding area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009541


23. More specifically, the appeal site is located along Bromley Road which, as of 2022, the
    HMO Review states was recorded as having the highest number of private rented
    HMOs in the Borough at 33. However, as a long street, this would appear to make up
    only a small proportion of the total properties on the road. While the Council has
    referred to Nos 30 and 34 which are understood to have changed use from C3(a) use
    in recent years, from the evidence before me, these do not appear to be in use as
    HMOs. The more localised review of HMOs undertaken by the appellant (based on
    details from the Council’s website from February 2026), shows that HMOs do not
    appear to be clustered around the appeal site or along Bromley Road. While this map
    does not provide a detailed breakdown of the occupancy of each unit identified, it
    nevertheless provides a more recent indication of the proximity of other HMOs to the
    appeal site, which the Council has not sought to dispute.
24. I also have no substantive evidence before me that demonstrates that the potential
    impacts associated with HMOs in terms of visual amenity from poorly maintained
    properties, noise, parking pressure, waste management, pressure on community
    facilities or anti-social behaviour have adversely affected the character of Bromley Road.
    The complaint data cited by the Council predominantly relates to poor housing
    conditions and inadequate property management, which are matters that are addressed
    through established licensing and enforcement procedures. No evidence has been
    presented to indicate that the proposed development would be poorly managed or result
    in comparable concerns. Moreover, there is no indication that the application site or
    adjacent roads are directly associated with the complaint figures cited.
25. The contention that HMO numbers can reasonably be assumed to have increased in line
    with previous trends is speculative and not substantiated by any up-to-date evidence.
    Moreover, as the appeal site is not currently in use as a conventional family dwelling, the
    appeal scheme would not result in the loss of family housing or a larger dwelling from
    the housing stock within the Borough. There is also insufficient information before me in
    this case to demonstrate that the proposal's incremental contribution to the
    concentration of HMOs in the area would result in harm, either through cumulative
    effects or by undermining the balance of the local community or that access to
    ‘conventional’ housing in the area is being compromised by changes of use.
26. The Council has referred to part D of Policy HO8 and a lack of demonstrated local
    market demand for HMOs. However, part D relates to proposals for purpose-built shared
    living accommodation in the sui generis use class. As this scheme relates to a change of
    use of an existing building it is not determinative in my consideration of this main issue.
27. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal scheme would not harm
    the character of the area, having particular regard to the concentration of HMOs. This
    complies with Policy HO8 of the LLP insofar as it seeks to prevent the harmful
    overconcentration of HMOs to support inclusive and mixed neighbourhoods and to
    ensure an appropriate distribution of different types of housing provision across the
    Borough in a way that protects the character and amenity of surrounding areas.
28. While the Council has referred to Policies GG1, GG2 and H9 of the London Plan in its
    reason for refusal, it is unclear how the Council considers the scheme would conflict
    with these policies. However, given they set out, amongst other things, that Boroughs
    should take account of the role of HMOs in meeting local and strategic housing needs,
    seek development that delivers inclusive communities and enable the development of
    brownfield land, the appeal scheme would not conflict with these policies either.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009541


Other Matters
29. The Council has raised concerns in relation to the size of the shared kitchens and the
    ventilation for Studio 3’s bathroom, which were not cited in its reasons for refusal.
    Concerns have also been raised about the size of the ground floor kitchen following the
    amended plans. However, given my findings above, these issues would not be
    determinative in this case, and I have therefore not considered them further.
30. Reference has been made to the scheme adding to the affordable housing supply which
    the appellant contends is much needed in the area. However, there is no mechanism
    before me that would secure the HMO for affordable housing. Nevertheless, I accept
    that this scheme would contribute to the mix and choice of housing within the area and
    align with policies within Chapter 6 of the Framework which seek to significantly boost
    the supply and variety of homes and meet the needs of different groups in the
    community. This type of intensification plays an important role in meeting housing needs
    and could be more attainable than if the building were to be brought back into use as a
    single family dwelling. However, while small-site intensification is encouraged by local
    and national policies, such support is not unequivocal. Noting that these policies, and
    others within the development plan, also seek to ensure that developments provide
    acceptable living conditions for all future occupants, which I have found would not be the
    case in this instance.
31. I note there have been no objections from interested parties. However, this is a neutral
    factor and does not alter my conclusions above.
Culverley Green Conservation Area
32. The CA Character Appraisal (the CACA) sets out that the CA is mainly an Edwardian
    residential suburb built at the turn of the last century. Wide tree-lined streets enhance
    its grid-layout and Bromley Road is noted to be a major thoroughfare which was once
    the main coaching-route between London and Kent. The importance of this main coach
    road is noted to have stimulated the development of elegant villas along its length.
    Insofar as is relevant to this appeal, the significance of the CA therefore derives from
    its townscape qualities, varied historic buildings and architectural and historic interest.
    The appeal building is one of the large semi-detached villas on Bromley Road and
    shares architectural detailing with 34-46 Bromley Road. Despite having been rendered
    white over the historic brickwork, it is a well-preserved example of the historic
    properties of the CA and thus makes a positive contribution to its significance.
33. The amended plans show the retention of all external chimney stacks, and the
    appellant has clarified that no changes are proposed to the front boundary wall, which
    would be retained as existing with additional planting behind. On this basis the Council
    has confirmed that the amended plans would address its third reason for refusal. Save
    for these matters, the Council has not detailed any other specific concerns in relation to
    the effect of the development on the significance of the CA. Given the physical
    alterations proposed to the building are now relatively discrete, the development overall
    has been found by the Council to be acceptable, and the amended plans address the
    only points of concern raised by the Council in relation to the CA, I see no reason to
    come to a different conclusion.
Planning Balance
34. The appeal scheme would fail to provide acceptable living conditions for all future
    occupants, contrary to the aforementioned policies of the LLP and London Plan. This

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009541


       is sufficient to bring the development into conflict with the development plan when read
       as a whole. Development that conflicts with the development plan should normally be
       refused unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
35. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed
    by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    this Framework.
36. The scheme would provide a nine bedroomed HMO that could accommodate up to
    sixteen occupants, bringing this underutilised property back into use and resulting in a
    more effective use of the building to meet the needs for housing in a sustainable location
    with access to services and facilities. This would contribute to the mix and choice of
    housing within the area and align with policies within the Framework which seek to
    significantly boost the supply and variety of homes. There would also be some economic
    benefits through future occupiers contributing to the local economy. However, given the
    scale of the development, any associated social, economic or environmental benefits
    would be relatively modest, even taking account of the objective of significantly boosting
    the supply of housing in the Framework and the Council’s housing land supply position.
    Therefore, the weight attached to these benefits overall is moderate.
37. On the other hand, I have found that the development would fail to provide acceptable
    living conditions for all future occupants. This conflicts with paragraph 2 of Policy P3 of
    the Framework which states that developments should provide healthy living conditions
    for occupiers, particularly in terms of adequate access to light, and paragraph 1 of
    Policy DP3 of the Framework insofar as it supports well-designed, liveable
    developments that will function well over their lifetime. For the reasons set out above
    relating to the nature of the scheme and function of Studios 2 and 3, this conflict with
    the national decision-making policies attracts substantial weight.
38. Paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 of the Framework states that development proposals should
    be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of this policy. No
    clear justification has been put to me in this case. In accordance with paragraph 2.c. of
    Policy S4, this represents a circumstance where the benefits of approving a
    development are likely to be outweighed by adverse effects. However, even if I were to
    set this aside, the scheme remains contrary to national decision-making Policy P3 of
    the Framework and given the nature of the scheme and fact that living conditions for
    some of the future occupiers would be poor, this conflict attracts substantial weight.
39. As such, in the specific circumstances of this case, the benefits of the development would
    be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework. In the context of Policy S3 of the Framework,
    the presumption in favour of sustainable development therefore does not apply.
Conclusion
40. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as a
    whole and the material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be made
    other than in accordance with it. Accordingly, I conclude the appeal should be
    dismissed.

H Whitfield
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
