Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 July 2026
by R Standfield BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009359
76 Mallard Way, Aldermaston, Reading, West Berkshire RG7 4US
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr T Cross against the decision of West Berkshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02769/HOUSE.
•    The development proposed is single storey rear extension.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.    The National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was updated on 17 August
      2026. Both of the main parties to this appeal have had the opportunity to comment
      in light of the revised document and such comments as were submitted have been
      taken into account accordingly.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues are:
     •     whether there would be an increased risk of flooding from surface water; and
     •     the effect upon trees nearby the site.
Reasons
Surface Water Flood Risk
4.    The site falls within Environment Agency (EA) flood zone 2. The Council further
      identifies the area as having a high surface water flood risk due to the water table
      being very close to ground level. The residential use of the site qualifies the
      proposed development as ‘more vulnerable’ to flood risk. The submitted Flood
      Risk Assessment (FRA) sets out measures to ensure that the extended dwelling
      would be safe from flooding.
5.    The NPPF states that all development should be safe for its lifetime and should not
      increase flood risk elsewhere. Together with the NPPF, Policies SP5 and SP6 of
      the West Berkshire Local Plan Review 2023-2041 (the Local Plan) seek to
      manage and reduce flood risk from all sources. This includes the implementation
      of sustainable drainage systems.
6.    Whilst there would be limited additional surface water generated over and above
      that arising from the current hardstanding, the introduction of a dual-pitched roof

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009359


      and the fall introduced to the replacement patio would collect and concentrate
      surface water drainage into channels.
7.    The purpose of the FRA is to provide proportionate evidence that the level of flood
      risk would be acceptable. Whilst the EA has raised no objection to the proposed
      development, I am not provided with any assessment of drainage capacity at the
      site. There is also no evidence that either the proposed French drain or the
      soakaway would provide a workable drainage solution in this location.
8.    The Council’s Sustainable Drainage Systems Supplementary Planning Document
      (SPD) (2018) confirms that high groundwater levels may prevent the use of some
      types of drainage that rely on infiltration. It advises that the base of an infiltration
      unit must be at least 1 metre above the highest expected groundwater level. This
      suggests that the drainage strategy as proposed may not be suitable for this site.
      Whilst a viable drainage strategy would represent betterment to the overall
      circumstances of the site, the information provided is not sufficient to make this
      conclusion.
9.    The matter of a water table at or very close to ground level distinguishes this case
      from others where sustainable drainage may be secured by planning condition.
      Planning conditions are used in circumstances where concerns about a
      development can be addressed and made acceptable. Given the uncertainty
      regarding the ability to provide adequate sustainable drainage measures by the
      means proposed, the matter is not suitable to be addressed via planning condition.
10. The appellants suggestion to attach a condition raising the finished floor level of
    the extension would not deal with the potential risk of surface water building up
    and flowing into neighbouring land. This could therefore potentially increase flood
    risk elsewhere.
11. I have been provided with details of a similar extension permitted at a nearby
    property on Mallard Way. In that case, the FRA provided assurance that the
    construction of the extension via a block and beam floor would provide some
    capacity for floodwater under the building. The proposal was also considered in
    light of the fallback position for a larger extension. As such, there are key
    differences in the circumstances before me, and I therefore afford the example
    limited weight.
12. My attention has also been drawn to the fact that the appeal property remains in its
    original form in a locality where residential extensions are common. It may also
    have the potential for development under permitted development rights. However,
    I do not have a specific proposal before me that could be constructed under those
    rights to allow comparison of its impact. As such, I give this possibility limited
    weight in my decision.
13. For the above reasons, the information provided does not show that the proposed
    development complies with Policies SP5 and SP6 of the Local Plan, which require
    the use of sustainable urban drainage systems to adequately manage flood risk.
Trees
14. The appeal site is a two-storey end-of-terrace dwelling positioned adjacent to the
    Kennet and Avon Canal at the end of the Mallard Way / Heron Way housing
    development. A triangle of land to the rear is bounded by the canal corridor and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009359


      rail line, with no formal public access. The land is heavily vegetated, including
      mature trees. Whilst not protected by way of Conservation Area designation or
      Tree Protection Orders, the trees are valued for their contribution to the natural
      environment. They make a positive visual contribution to the area, particularly to
      the canal corridor with its public right of way.
15. The construction of the proposed soakaway, potentially within the root protection
    zones of trees, would risk damage to their root systems. In this instance, the
    potential impact could be addressed by the imposition of planning conditions.
    These could ensure that the siting of any drainage measures is outside the root
    protection zones, and that appropriate tree protection measures are agreed and
    employed. As such, the proposed development could comply with Policies DM15
    and DM28 of the Local Plan which require the protection and management of
    trees.
Other Matters
16. The site is in proximity to the North Wessex Downs National Landscape where I
    have a duty to seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing its natural
    beauty. The proposed development is very small in scale, sits among existing
    dwellings, and far enough from the National Landscape boundary that it would not
    harm the landscape, which would be conserved. I am therefore satisfied that my
    statutory duty is discharged.
17. The site is positioned within an Impact Risk Zone for the nearby Site of Special
    Scientific Interest (SSSI) and within a red impact zone for Great Crested Newts. As
    I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, I have not considered this further.
18. There is reference to the absence of constructive engagement between the
    Council and the agent or appellant before the planning application was decided.
    However, this is not an issue that I can address as part of this planning appeal.
Planning Balance
19. NPPF Policy S3 applies a presumption in favour of development with Policy S4
    providing that development proposals within settlements should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies of the NPPF.
20. NPPF Policy L2 promotes the effective use of land by way of creating floorspace
    within an existing plot however the current absence of evidence regarding safe
    access and egress in relation to flood risk prevents substantial weight being
    afforded in this respect. The benefit of improved living accommodation for the
    occupants of the dwelling is afforded limited weight in favour of the proposal. The
    overall improvement of the surface water drainage arrangements could be a
    benefit subject to an acceptable scheme however at present, this is not evidenced.
21. The proposed development would conflict with other policies of the NPPF,
    including Policies CC3 and DP3.2b in relation to climate change adaptation, and
    Policies F7 and F8 which specifically relate to the risk of flooding both to the site
    and elsewhere. Policy F8.1 states that development proposals should not present
    a risk from flooding to potential occupiers, users, or visitors, and should not
    increase flood risk elsewhere. The proposal has failed to show that this could be
    achieved.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009359


22. In addition, the proposed development would conflict with the broad objectives of
    Policy N2 in relation to the natural environment albeit that this could be addressed
    by planning conditions.
23. In combination, I afford the adverse effects substantial weight.
24. As such, the adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making
    policies of the NPPF, would substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposed
    development and would therefore fail to comply with the forms of development that
    could be approved under Policy S4. Therefore, the presumption in favour of
    development in Policy S3 is not engaged.
Conclusion
25. Due to the identified risk of flooding, the proposal conflicts with the development
    plan as a whole. There are no material considerations, including the NPPF, that
    indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. As
    such, the appeal is dismissed.

R Standfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
