Appeal Decision
by Andrew Owen MA BA(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009266
Land North East of Ballinderry House, Folkestone Road, Church Hougham
CT15 7AB
•   The appeal is made under section 174 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Johnny Delaney against an enforcement notice issued by Dover District
    Council.
•   The notice was issued on 9 April 2026.
•   The breach of planning control as alleged in the notice is: without planning permission the material
    change of use of land to a caravan site for the siting of static and touring caravans for residential
    occupation and associated engineering operations.
•   The requirements of the notice are to:
         1. Stop using the land, or any part of the land, as a caravan site.
         2. Remove all caravans (both static and touring) from the site.
         3. Remove from the land all areas of hardstanding, including any gravel, crushed stone,
         concrete, paving, access tracks or other surfacing installed in connection with the unauthorised
         use.
         4. Excavate and remove from the land any cesspits, septic tanks, foul drainage systems or
         other waste-water installations introduced in connection with the unauthorised use.
         5. Backfill any excavations left by the removal of cesspits, pipework or other installations using
         clean, inert material.
         6. Regrade and level the land where necessary following removal works to return the site to its
         former ground levels.
         7. Restore the land to the condition it was in before the breach occurred, including the
         reinstatement of soil or natural ground cover where required.
         8. Remove from the land all rubble, waste, spoil and debris resulting from compliance with this
         Notice.
•   The period for compliance with the requirements is: 6 months.
•   The appeal is proceeding on the ground set out in section 174(2)(g) of the Town and Country
    Planning Act 1990 (as amended).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed and the enforcement notice is upheld.
Procedural matters
2. As the appeal is proceeding on ground (g) only, I did not consider it necessary to
   conduct a site visit. The main parties were consulted on this matter, and both
   agreed a site visit would be unnecessary. I have therefore determined the appeal
   on that basis.
Appeal on ground (g)
3. The appeal on ground (g) is made on the basis that the period specified in the
   notice in accordance with section 173(9) of the Act falls short of what should
   reasonably be allowed.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009266


4. The appellant suggests that the period of compliance is inadequate because the
   Council have an insufficient supply of gypsy and traveller sites and they therefore
   have nowhere else to live. They therefore propose a 12 month period for
   compliance instead.
5. A decision on a section 78 appeal1 relating to the development, and dated 14
   August 2026, referred to evidence provided by the Council which indicated the
   need for gypsy and traveller pitches had been met and exceeded, which the
   Inspector accepted. I note the appellant’s claim that they have no knowledge of any
   other available sites, and that the Council have not suggested any to them.
   Nonetheless, this does not disprove the Council’s stance. There is no substantive
   evidence before me to indicate I should take a contrary view to the previous
   Inspector, or to justify a longer compliance period than set out in the notice.
6. On that basis, 6 months is a reasonable period of time to allow the appellant to find
   alternative accommodation and restore the site to its former condition. This is
   particularly the case given the time that has already elapsed since the previous
   appeal decision and because this appeal seeks only to mitigate the requirements of
   the notice not quash it.
7. I have had regard to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights as
   incorporated into the Human Rights Act 1998. Article 8 affords the right to respect
   for private and family life, including the traditions and culture associated with the
   gypsy and traveller way of life. It is a qualified right, and interference may be
   justified where that is lawful and in the public interest.
8. Interference with those rights under Article 8 is inevitable in this instance given this
   appeal is proceeding on ground (g) only and therefore it is inevitable that the
   appellant and his family are required to leave the site. Dismissing this appeal, and
   requiring compliance with the notice sooner than they would wish, would remedy
   the breach promptly and be in the public interest in accordance with Dover District
   Local Plan (2024) policies NE2, H3 and H4 which seek to protect the character and
   appearance of the countryside and the natural beauty of the National Landscape.
9. That balance of human rights and interference with them is subject to the best
   interests of children and there is no consideration more important than that. I
   understand from the recent appeal decision, that there are four children residing at
   the site. Leaving the site, and the settled base it has provided, including with regard
   to access to education, would therefore not be in their best interests. But as
   detailed above, that is inevitable given the appeal proceeds on ground (g) only, and
   a longer period of compliance would extend the harms resulting from the
   development as set out in the notice.
10. Gypsies share the protected characteristic of race for the purposes of the Public
    Sector Equality Duty (PSED) under s149 of the Equality Act 2010. Also, it is
    understood that two adults at the site may have a disability, which is also a
    protected characteristic. The Equality Act sets out the requirement to have due
    regard to the need to eliminate discrimination and advance equality of opportunity
    between persons who share a relevant protected characteristic and persons who
    do not. Given this appeal is proceeding on ground (g) only and the appellant will be
    required to leave the site whatever the outcome, there would be only a temporary
    benefit in terms of advancing equality or eliminating discrimination by allowing the
1
    Ref 6009267


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009266


     appellant the opportunity to remain on site for a longer period than set out in the
     notice, and in that case the harms resulting from the development would also be
     sustained. Dismissing the appeal would therefore be a proportionate response to
     the PSED.
Conclusion
11. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should not succeed. I shall
    uphold the enforcement notice.

Andrew Owen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
