Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 July 2026
by R Standfield BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009258
9 Union Street, Ramsbury, Wiltshire SN8 2PR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Lee Davies against the decision of Wiltshire Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/2025/09209.
•    The development proposed is off street parking.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.    The National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was updated 17 August
      2026. Insofar as the contents are relevant to this appeal, the NPPF remains
      broadly consistent, therefore, I am satisfied no party would be disadvantaged by
      not having the opportunity to comment on the revised NPPF.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the character and
      appearance of the site and its surroundings, taking into account whether it would
      preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the Ramsbury Conservation
      Area (RCA).
Reasons
4.    The appeal site is located in the village of Ramsbury on the eastern side of an
      historic rural lane, Union Street, which features a substantial earthen bank upon
      which dwellings are positioned, set back from the highway. The street is
      incorporated within the RCA, the Statement for which highlights the embankment,
      trees and hedging as characteristic features which contribute positively to this part
      of the conservation area.
5.    Section 72 (1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
      requires special attention to be paid to preserving or enhancing the character or
      appearance of conservation areas. The significance of the RCA is due to its
      ecclesiastical relationship with nearby Salisbury together with its landscape setting
      and development on the line of the London to Bristol coaching route. This has
      informed its historical layout and pattern of historically important buildings.
6.    The RCA Statement (2023) also notes the historic structure of streets, buildings
      and footways that no longer reflect levels of car ownership and the conflict that has
      consequently arisen. The narrowness of Union Street prevents any on street

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009258


      parking although two dwellings have created slim parking bays that are partially
      set in. Off road parking is provided at a number of dwellings with two key sections
      cut out of the embankment serving three dwellings. Residents who do not have
      parking on site are able to park in the surrounding streets, notably Whittonditch
      Road to the north and Newtown Road to the south.
7.    Dwellings to the western side of Union Street are not subject to the same change
      in ground level and are both more visible and accessible from the highway.
8.    The embankment, as a distinctive landscaping feature, is most pronounced
      towards the northern and southern ends of Union Street where it retains a verdant
      and attractive enclosure of the highway. The central section has been subject to
      excavation for vehicular access points as noted above and reinforced with
      retaining walls however still contributes positively to the street scene and largely
      maintains the rural aesthetic and sense of enclosure. Previous applications for off
      road parking at the site have been referenced by the Council although no details
      have been provided and I am therefore unable to assess any degree of
      comparability with the current appeal. In any event, appeal decisions must be
      made on the basis of the merits of each individual case.
9.    The excavation required to provide the proposed parking space would be narrow
      and deep. Whilst this would minimise the impact upon the longer views up and
      down the street, within the vicinity of the site the impact would be pronounced. The
      visibility splays and excavation would result in a noticeable change in enclosure
      and the proposed floor scape, with an entrance strip of porous blocks, would
      increase visual prominence. Whilst the proposed development would result in the
      loss of only a small part of the overall embankment, the feature, noted for its
      distinctiveness, would be harmed and the proposal would undermine the positive
      contribution that the embankment makes to the character and appearance of the
      RCA.
10. My attention has been drawn to the existing driveways and cut-in lay-by that have
    already affected the embankment to the eastern side of Union Street. I have not
    been provided with the details of these projects or the circumstances for the
    consideration of each scheme. However, having observed each of these during my
    site visit, four driveways appear to have been provided as part of dwelling
    construction and all of these, plus the layby appear to pre-date the publication of
    the RCA Statement in 2023 which provides the character assessment for the
    conservation area and identifies the embankment as an important feature.
11. As such, I afford these examples limited weight and I am not persuaded that the
    cumulative impact within the immediate locality of the appeal site wouldn’t further
    erode the quality of the street scene and undermine the ambitions of the Council to
    protect the embankment as it stands currently. In any case, examples of where a
    noteworthy feature of a conservation area has previously been adversely affected
    is not a good reason to perpetuate this harm.
12. Policy HE6 1 of the NPPF states that substantial weight should be given to the
    conservation of a designated heritage asset and in HE6 4, any harm to, or loss of,
    the significance of such an asset requires clear and convincing justification along
    with an assessment of the harm weighed against any public benefits resulting from
    the proposal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009258


13. In this instance, there would be some temporary economic benefits associated
    with the engineering works and creation of the parking space. The reduction in
    overspill street parking to the appearance of the conservation area represents a
    small benefit to the wider public in relation to economic, social and environmental
    objectives. However, this would be at the expense of a part of the conservation
    area that holds significance, and I am therefore not persuaded that the public
    benefits would be of sufficient magnitude to outweigh the harm to the significance
    of the heritage asset, and the considerable importance this carries.
14. Therefore, the harm that would be caused to the significance of the RCA lacks
    clear and convincing justification. The public benefits, taken as a whole, would not
    outweigh the substantial weight that the conservation of designated heritage
    assets carries.
15. It would thus be contrary to Policies 57 and 58 of the Wiltshire Core Strategy
    (2015) which seek to ensure appropriate design quality and preservation of
    heritage assets. It would also fail to meet the requirements of part II section 72 (1)
    of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 and Chapter
    20 of the NPPF, which collectively require development to conserve heritage
    assets in a manner appropriate to their significance.
Other Considerations
16. The site is within the North Wessex Downs National Landscape. This is a
    protected landscape, and I have a duty to seek to further its statutory purposes
    which are to conserve and enhance the natural beauty of the area. In this case,
    given the nature and location of the development, it would leave the natural beauty
    of the National Landscape unharmed, and the duty is thereby discharged.
17. The ability to charge an electric vehicle has also been presented as a future
    opportunity at the site. Whilst a potential benefit, there are alternative means for
    electric car charging available to public users and this factor is therefore not
    determinative.
18. The appellants have put forward a need for the parking space within close
    proximity of their home to support a family member who holds a blue badge due to
    limited mobility. Further, a number of interested parties have submitted
    representations in support of the proposal, noting the need of the family member
    and the lack of on street parking availability. I have had due regard to the Public
    Sector Equality Duty (PSED) set out under s149 of the Equality Act 2010, and the
    clear personal benefit to the family member enabling improved and safer access to
    the home. However, in this instance, the permanent harm to the designated
    heritage asset caused by the proposed development outweighs its benefits in
    terms of eliminating discrimination against persons with protected characteristics,
    advancing equality of opportunity for those persons and fostering good relations
    between them and others. I conclude that it is proportionate and necessary to
    dismiss the appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009258




Conclusion
19. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the NPPF and the PSED, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. As such, the appeal is dismissed.



R Standfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
