Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009772
Pavement outside 297 King Street, Hammersmith, W6 9NH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for [outline]
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Nathan Still against the Council of the London Borough of Hammersmith and
     Fulham.
•    The application Ref is 2025/03048/FUL.
•    The development proposed is ‘the Installation of a multifunctional Hub unit consisting of a free-
     standing structure featuring an integrated digital advertisement display screen on one side and
     emergency functionality including the provision of a defibrillator available for public use on the other
     side.’

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for the installation of a
       multifunctional Hub unit consisting of a free-standing structure featuring an
       integrated digital advertisement display screen on one side and emergency
       functionality including the provision of a defibrillator available for public use on the
       other side is refused.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Alongside the non-determination of the planning application, which is the subject of
       this appeal, I understand that a concurrent application for express consent to
       display an advertisement on the proposed hub has also not been determined as of
       the date of this decision. However, the evidence before me indicates that an
       appeal has not been lodged against that application. While the description of
       development in the banner heading above references an integrated advertisement
       display screen, for the avoidance of doubt I have not assessed the proposal on the
       basis of advertisements being displayed, only that the screen would form part of
       the hub.
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published by the Government. This is a material consideration in
       the decision-making process from the day of publication. As the changes do not
       affect the main issues in this decision, it was not necessary to offer the main
       parties an opportunity to comment on the implications for this appeal.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues in this appeal are the effects of the proposal on the character and
       appearance of the area, including the setting of conservation areas, and on
       highway safety.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009772


Reasons
Character and Appearance
5.     The appeal site is located on the footpath lining the south side of King Street. The
       vicinity includes a number of commercial units at street level, with trees, planting
       and some street furniture including cycle racks. I found the street to be wide,
       verdant and spacious and overall, it provided a very pleasant urban environment
       which has clearly taken a sustained effort to produce.
6.     The boundaries of both the Westcroft Square (WS) and Ravenscourt and Starch
       Green (RSG) Conservation Areas are located on the opposite side of King Street
       to the north and northeast respectively. While the setting of a conservation area
       does not have statutory protection, I have had due regard to policy HE5 of the
       Framework which states that development proposals affecting heritage assets
       should be accompanied by an assessment of the significance of the assets
       affected (including any contribution made by their setting) and of the potential
       effect of the proposal on their significance. This is not before me.
7.     From my own observations, the character and appearance, and thereby
       significance of the WS, is derived in part from the distinctive commercial frontage
       facing south on King Street which evidently contains a large number of Buildings of
       Merit (BoM) and is highlighted as a key contributor to the significance of the
       conservation area due to its high quality buildings and its historic value as a centre
       of commerce.
8.     The significance of the RSG is derived in part from the large park at its heart which
       bears its name, as well as the high quality of its buildings, many of which are listed
       or of local merit and its varied layout telling of its evolution over time.
9.     I am mindful of the definition of setting given in the glossary of the Framework,
       which advises that this includes the surroundings in which a heritage asset is
       experienced. It goes on to state that its extent is not fixed and may change as the
       asset and its surroundings evolve. Moreover, elements may make a positive or
       negative contribution to the significance of a heritage asset.
10. Given the proximity of the appeal site to both conservation areas, I don’t dispute
    that the location would be within their respective settings. Given the considerably
    important contribution that King Street makes to the significance of the WS, the
    appeal site as part of the setting of the conservation area makes a significantly
    positive contrition to the WS as a designated heritage asset.
11. With regards to the RSG conservation area, the appeal site is in relatively close
    proximity to the south end of Ravenscourt Park, although it is at a somewhat more
    oblique angle. That being said, the spaciousness and verdant nature of the tree
    lined streets offer a pleasant backdrop to the park and as such the setting makes a
    positive contribution to the significance of the conservation area in its own right.
12. The proposed hub would be of 2.64 metres (m) height, 1.33m width and 0.3m
    depth with a 0.6m projecting canopy. It would seemingly be of dark grey or black
    colouration and include a touch screen to the covered side and a large screen to
    the rear, albeit there is no consent at present to display advertisements on this
    side. The hub would appear somewhat monolithic in its form and given its size
    would be a significant and prominent addition to a street scene which is generally


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009772


       clear of furniture. This loss of space with an overtly modern design and
       incongruous appearance would harm the character and appearance of the local
       area. As a result of this harm, it stands to reason that it would also harm the
       significance of both conservation areas through harm to their respective settings.
13. This would conflict with policies DC1, DC8, and DC10 of the Hammersmith and
    Fulham Local Plan (adopted February 2018) (HFLP) or D8 of the London Plan
    (TLP) (adopted March 2021). Among other things, these seek to ensure that the
    significance of the borough’s historic environment is preserved by protecting,
    restoring and enhancing its heritage assets. This would also conflict with policy
    HE4 of the Framework which advises that heritage assets, as an irreplaceable
    resource, should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance. I will
    return to this issue later in this decision.
14. The Council has also provided policy DC9 of the HFLP and suggested that the
    proposal also be refused against this policy. However, this relates to
    advertisements and given the express consent application is not before me, I have
    disregarded this policy.
Highway Safety
15. The proposed hub would be located on the footpath circa 3.7m from the roadside
    and 7m from the edge of adjacent buildings. I note that the Council does not take
    issue with the clearance which would remain to allow the convenient flow of
    pedestrians on the footway. A cycle lane runs parallel to the road positioned
    between the front of the path and a floating bus stop. The cycle lane includes a
    pedestrian crossing between the path and the bus stop. The road was moderately
    trafficked at the time of my visit in the mid-afternoon hour and is single
    carriageway.
16. Given the above characteristics, there is clearly a lot of considerations and
    interactions between pedestrians and cyclists in particular. Although the hub would
    be positioned adjacent the pedestrian crossing of the cycle lane it would be set
    back from the path edge by over 3m and orientated east to west. As such, it would
    be unlikely to obscure views for pedestrians approaching the crossing from the
    path or cyclists using the segregated lane.
17. With regards to the useability of the hub for wheelchair users, guidance seeks a
    width of 1.5m to enable the safe manoeuvring in this scenario. I understand that
    there would be some 2.4m distance, and while it may include the area around the
    adjacent tree, I see no reason why this would preclude the convenient use of the
    hub by a wheelchair user. Although there is reference to a replacement of an
    existing hub, from my observations on the site visit there was no hub present.
18. Overall, the proposal would not increase risk of conflict between pedestrians and
    cyclists, nor would it present difficulties for its use to wheelchair users. This would
    accord with policies T3 of the HFLP and T1, T2 and D5 of TLP. These generally
    seek to ensure highway and pedestrian safety in the transport network of London
    and ensure development is convenient and welcoming with no disabling barriers.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
19. I have found harm to the character and appearance of the area. This weighs
    against the scheme significantly. I have also found harm to the setting of the two


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009772


       conservation areas. As designated heritage assets, I must have regard to policy
       HE6 of the Framework which states that any harm to a designated heritage asset
       will be a matter of considerable importance and weight wit the effect of this
       weighed against the public benefits resulting from the proposal. The lack of harm
       to highway safety is neutral in the balance.
20. I acknowledge that there would be some benefits to the proposal. This includes
    free Wi-Fi, telephone use, defibrillator and wayfinder. These all contribute to the
    aims of section 9 of the Framework to support high quality communications
    networks. However, this is with the caveat that equipment respects important
    environmental safeguards and support is not ubiquitous. These benefits are given
    limited weight.
21. There is reference to the removal of an existing hub elsewhere adjacent 22 King
    Street. There is an existing and proposed street view image showing the hub
    removed, although from this image that location is materially different to the appeal
    site with its own characteristics and it is not clear whether it has similar
    considerations as the proposal, such as its proximity to heritage assets for
    example. As such I attach only limited weight to this consideration.
22. Overall, the proposal would be contrary to the development plan and aims of the
    Framework to preserve the historic environment. There are no material
    considerations which indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
