Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 June 2026 by A Morrison MTCP MRTPI
Decision by H Marriott MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009317
Lodge Cottage, North Leys Road, Hollym, East Riding Of Yorkshire HU19 2SB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Philip Lyon against the decision of East Riding of Yorkshire Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00068/PLF.
•   The development proposed is first floor extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. In this instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal are unaffected by
   the revisions to the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that there is no requirement to
   seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no party would be
   disadvantaged by this.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. Lodge Cottage is a modest detached dwelling situated adjacent to a field on the edge
   of a rural village. Its simple one-and-a-half-storey form, steeply pitched roof and gable-
   end windows serving the upper floor create a balanced and attractive appearance.
   Despite later single-storey additions to the side and rear, it retains a coherent scale and
   composition that positively contributes to the character and appearance of the area
6. The proposed first-floor addition would occupy the full depth of the existing side
   extension and would be characterised by a substantially higher two-storey eaves line
   and a gabled roof with a noticeably shallower pitch than that of the dwelling's main roof.
   Additional windows within the upper front and rear gables would further emphasise its
   vertical scale. Taken together, these features would result in an awkward and poorly
   integrated form that would appear visually unbalanced and out of keeping with the
   simple proportions of the dwelling.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009317


7. Furthermore, the considerable length of the extension, combined with its elevated
   eaves, would result in a bulky and dominant addition that would overwhelm the
   dwelling’s modest proportions. Even though the overall height of the enlarged dwelling
   would likely be lower than that of many traditional two-storey houses, and views from
   some parts of the surrounding area would be filtered by existing soft landscaping and
   neighbouring development, including the holiday park, these factors would not
   materially lessen the visual effects of the proposed development. The resulting
   massing would remain readily apparent within the street scene. Moreover, although the
   extension would be built in matching materials and the roof of existing side extension
   would be removed, these measures would not overcome the harmful effects arising
   from its scale, form and massing.
8. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would have a harmful
   effect on the character and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.
   The scheme would therefore conflict with Policies ENV1 and S4 of the East Riding
   Local Plan Update 2025 – 2039 (2025) which require development to be of a high-
   quality design that respects the character and appearance of its village and countryside
   setting, including by being of an appropriate scale and massing. For the same reason,
   the proposed development would conflict with the policies of the Framework relating to
   achieving well-designed places.
9. Furthermore, the proposal would conflict with the guidance contained within the East
   Riding Design Code Supplementary Planning Document 2025, which advises that
   extensions should be designed to assimilate with the original building, including
   through the use of eaves lines that are set at or below existing levels.
Other Matters
10. I acknowledge that the proposed extension would provide additional bedroom
    accommodation for the occupants, however this is a largely private benefit that attracts
    very limited weight in support of the scheme. I am also mindful of the submissions
    indicating that no objections were received from third parties. However, the absence of
    objection does not constitute a benefit of the scheme, nor does it justify permitting
    development that would cause harm. Overall, the above matters are insufficient to
    outweigh the harm that I have identified to the character and appearance of the host
    dwelling and surrounding area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
11. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

A Morrison
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

H Marriott
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
