Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 September 2026
by B. Johnson BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009318
Monometer House, 128 Rectory Grove, Leigh-on-Sea, Southend-on-Sea SS9 2HN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Dr Christopher Hall of Monometer Holdings Ltd against the decision of
     Southend-on-Sea City Council.
•    The application reference is 26/00091/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as “Erection of ancillary storage building for associated
     commercial storage”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development was revised by the Council during the application
       determination period. However, I have determined this appeal based on the
       original description which I consider is accurate.
3.     The appellant has provided an amended proposed elevations drawing (revision
       P5, dated April 2026) with additional height dimension annotations as part of the
       appeal. The original drawings clearly illustrated the height and scale of the
       proposed development and the adjacent buildings. The annotations on the
       amended drawing set out clearly the correct height measurements for clarification.
       I have accepted the submission of this amended drawing as no party has disputed
       it and I am satisfied that no party would be prejudiced as a result of accepting it.
4.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       issued on 17 August 2026. Annex A, Paragraph 1 states that this version of the
       Framework applies to decision-making from the day of its publication, therefore
       references to the Framework in this decision are to the August 2026 version. I
       have sought the views of the main parties on the implications of the new
       Framework and had regard to comments provided.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
       •   the character and appearance of the site and the area; and
       •   the living conditions of the occupiers of 4 Grange Road (No. 4), with particular
           regard to outlook and sense of enclosure.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009318


Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     The appeal site comprises part of the car park of Monometer House, a commercial
       building. The site is immediately adjacent to a 2-storey residential property at No. 4
       and sits in an elevated position above Grange Road. The proposal involves the
       erection of a building on stilts with external staircase and the retention of existing
       surface parking underneath. The proposed building and staircase would be sited
       parallel to No. 4 and would extend beyond the building line of No. 4 to the front
       and rear. It would be approximately 4.8 metres (m) high with the staircase platform
       being approximately 2.2m high.
7.     The appeal site has an open character due to the lack of built form and functions
       as a gap between existing commercial and residential buildings. The character of
       the wider area is mixed, informed by the existing commercial building and
       residential properties along Grange Road. There are a variety of common
       materials evident in the wider area, notably brick and render.
8.     The height and design of the proposal would make it a prominent feature within the
       site and would erode the site’s open character. Due to the siting of the proposal
       adjacent to No. 4, it would be largely read in a residential rather than commercial
       context. The proposal would be a prominent alien feature within this residential
       context due to its design, the raised level of the site and the jarring external
       materials (particularly the use of timber cladding). I note that there is a hedge
       along part of the site boundary on Grange Road, but this would not provide
       effective screening due to its low height compared to the proposed development.
9.     In conclusion, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the site
       and the area. It would therefore not accord with Policies KP2 and CP4 of the
       Southend-on-Sea Borough Council Core Strategy (December 2007) (the Core
       Strategy) and Policies DM1 and DM3 of the Southend-on-Sea Borough Council
       Development Management Document (July 2015) (the DMD), which are consistent
       with the Framework. These policies, taken together, encourage development
       proposals to achieve excellence in design to create a sense of place, respond
       positively to local context and respect the character and scale of sites and existing
       neighbourhoods. The proposal would also not accord with the Design and
       Townscape Guide Supplementary Planning Document (2009) (the DTG SPD)
       which states that the successful integration of any new development is dependent
       upon the appropriate scale, height and massing in relation to the existing built
       fabric.
10. The proposal would not accord with Policies DP3(1) and DP3(2) of the Framework,
    which, amongst other things, state that development proposals should respond to
    their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings, and
    create visually attractive, distinctive and characterful development to establish or
    maintain a strong sense of place and pride, including through the use of a
    coherent palette of materials, design features and planting.
Living conditions
11. The proposed building and staircase would be sited in close proximity to No. 4,
    would sit in an elevated position to No. 4 by virtue of the site level differences, and
    would extend beyond its front and rear building lines.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009318


12. With regard to the rear elevation of No. 4, while there is vegetation along part of
    the side boundary that would partially obscure views, the proposal would still be
    prominent and oppressive (particularly in winter) when viewed from the rear
    windows of No. 4 and would dominate the part of the garden closest to the house.
    As a result, it would cause harm to outlook and would create a harmful sense of
    enclosure.
13. With regard to the front elevation of No. 4, the proposed external staircase would
    be imposing when viewed from windows at ground floor and first floor levels. While
    the staircase would have a more lightweight appearance than the proposed
    storage structure, it would still have the appearance of a relatively solid physical
    form. As a result, it would dominate the outlook from the front windows of No. 4
    and give rise to a harmful sense of enclosure.
14. In conclusion, the proposal would not provide acceptable living conditions for the
    occupiers of No. 4 with particular regard to outlook and sense of enclosure. It
    would therefore not accord with Policies KP2 and CP4 of the Core Strategy and
    Policies DM1 and DM3 of the DMD, which are consistent with the Framework.
    These policies, taken together, state that development should secure good
    relationships with existing development and protect the amenity of immediate
    neighbours having regard to, amongst other things, outlook and visual enclosure.
    The proposal would also not accord with the DTG SPD which seeks development
    that is designed so as not to be unduly obtrusive to adjacent buildings and is not
    overly dominant in relation to the existing built fabric.
15. The proposal would not accord with Policy DP3(1) of the Framework, which states
    that development proposals should respond to their context so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings.
Other Matters
16. The principle of commercial development in this urban location is acceptable. The
    proposal would facilitate the efficient operation of an existing business by providing
    on-site document storage for an organisation based in Monometer House and
    could provide benefits relating to further expansion and job creation. This accords
    with Policy E2 of the Framework which states that substantial weight should be
    given to economic benefits of proposals for commercial development which allow
    businesses to invest, expand and/or adapt. The principle of the proposed
    development is supported by Policy L2(1)(b) of the Framework which states that
    substantial weight should be given to the benefits where a development proposal
    would make better use of underutilised land such as building on or above car
    parks.
17. The location of the proposal would support sustainable patterns of movement and
    would limit the need to travel by private car, which accords with Policy TR3 of the
    Framework. I afford this benefit moderate weight. The provision of a green roof
    would accord with Policy N2 of the Framework, and I afford limited weight to this
    benefit.
18. The appeal site lies close to the north-western boundary of the Leigh Conservation
    Area (the CA). There is agreement between the main parties that the proposal
    would not cause harm to the setting of the CA. I have no reason to disagree,
    bearing in mind the responsibilities set out in Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009318


19. Several matters were raised by interested parties, including the potential for
    impacts relating to fire safety, fear of crime and overlooking of adjacent properties
    to the rear of the site. As the appeal is being dismissed for other reasons, these
    matters do not need to be explored in detail.
Planning balance and Conclusion
20. I have found there would be substantial conflict with development plan policy
    which seeks to prevent adverse impacts on character and appearance and living
    conditions.
21. The adverse effects of the proposal substantially outweigh its benefits when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Therefore, the presumption in favour of sustainable development established by
    Policy S3 of the Framework does not apply to this appeal.
22. In conclusion, the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole
    and there are no material considerations which indicate a decision should be taken
    otherwise than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



B. Johnson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
