Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by J Kirkaldy BSc (Hons) PGDip MRTPI
Decision by Martin Seaton BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 03 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009762
Flat 4, 3 Grimston Avenue, Folkestone, Kent CT20 2QE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Ms Rodica Wheeler against the decision of Folkestone and Hythe District
    Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/1555/FH.
•   The development proposed is for retrospective consent to replace 4 no. timber windows with uPVC
    windows, and proposed replacement of 5 no. timber windows with uPVC windows.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to replace 4 no. timber
   windows with uPVC windows, and proposed replacement of 5 no. timber windows
   with uPVC windows at Flat 4, 3 Grimston Avenue, Folkestone, Kent CT20 2QE in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/1555/FH, subject to the
   following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 23085.01 Rev A and 23085.03.
     3)       Notwithstanding the submitted details, prior to the installation of the
              replacement windows hereby approved, exact specifications for each window
              to be replaced in the form of drawings showing finish, colour, method of
              opening, depth of reveal, glazing specification including unit thickness and
              sections at a scale of 1:5 detailing frame dimensions, glazing bars, heads,
              cills and jambs shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved details and shall be retained as such.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Planning permission was granted in 2009 (reference: Y09/0734/SH) for the
   installation of five replacement uPVC windows to the front and rear elevations, and
   that permission was subsequently implemented. This is a material consideration in
   the determination of the appeal.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009762


4. I have omitted the word ‘retrospective’ in the description, because in itself it is not
   defined as an act of development.
5. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of
   the main issue in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have
   proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve or enhance the character
   or appearance of the Folkestone Leas and Bayle Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal site comprises a second floor flat and attic room within 3 Grimston
   Avenue, a detached building with a visually prominent front gable with bay windows
   and strong façade articulation.
8. Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   places a statutory duty on decision makers to pay special attention to the
   desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a
   Conservation Area.
9. Policy HE6:1 of the Framework makes it clear that when considering the impact of
   a proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
   should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE6:5 says where a proposal
   will lead to harm to the significance of the heritage asset, this harm should be
   weighed against the public benefits of the proposal.
10. The site lies within a CA, the significance of which is derived both from its historic
    evolution as a fishing settlement that expanded following the introduction of the
    railway and developed into a fashionable seaside resort, and from the quality of its
    built environment. The area is characterised by tree lined avenues and imposing
    period buildings distinguished by features such as bay windows, basements,
    prominent chimney stacks, and strong, formal architectural compositions.
    Collectively, these elements contribute to its special character and appearance.
    Furthermore, many of the buildings within the CA have retained much of their
    original form, materials, and architectural detailing, reinforcing its historic
    significance and sense of place.
11. There are a variety of window styles, materials, and window sizes within the
    building. The windows on the ground and first floors differ from those at second
    floor and attic, being taller in form and incorporating opening lights with narrow
    moulded glazing bars. I also noted there to be considerable design variations of
    windows within the immediate surrounding area. A number of windows within the
    appeal property are already UPVC windows, and whilst some UPVC windows in
    nearby properties may not have benefited from the necessary planning permission
    in the past, they nonetheless form part of the established street scene and
    character.
12. The Council refers to a dismissed appeal at Flat 3 (reference: Y19/0832/FH) which
    involved the replacement of timber windows with UPVC. However, I am mindful that
    case related to first-floor windows more readily visible from the street level on
    Grimston Avenue. By contrast, the windows proposed for replacement in this

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009762


     appeal are at second-floor and roof level, where they are viewed from a greater
     distance and angle, and where their frame detail is difficult to discern from the
     public realm. The side elevation windows would also be mainly seen in oblique
     views. Consequently, the visual impact of the proposed replacement windows
     would be limited.

13. Whilst the proposal would replace the existing timber windows with UPVC and
    would therefore not be a like-for-like replacement, this does not mean it would
    materially affect the external appearance of the building. In this regard, the design,
    proportions and detailing of the replacement windows are of particular importance.
    Although I have limited details before me regarding the precise specification of the
    proposed windows, which are of varying sizes, I would agree with the Council that
    any such details could be satisfactorily secured by condition, and that an
    appropriate design solution would be achievable. Based on the evidence before
    me, the proposed windows would broadly replicate the form and appearance of
    those they would replace. Viewed as a whole, the effect on the composition of the
    building would not be significant and its principal architectural features would
    remain dominant and unchanged.
14. I recognise that the existing timber windows are in a poor condition, which the
    Council maintains is as a result of a lack of regular and appropriate maintenance.
    Whilst their replacement would undoubtedly improve the appearance of the
    building, this is not a factor which has attracted anything more than limited weight in
    my overall assessment.

15. I acknowledge that there may be alternative means of improving the energy
    efficiency of the property, including the installation of softwood double glazed
    timber windows. However, the appeal does not seek permission for such a scheme,
    and the possibility of an alternative option does not mean as a prerequisite that the
    proposal before me, which achieves these improvements, is unacceptable. I have
    assessed the appeal on its own merits, and for the reasons given above, the
    possibility or availability of alternative solutions does not alter my conclusions.

16. The Council contends that the policy context has changed since 2009, with the
    introduction of the Framework and the adoption of a revised Local Plan containing
    stronger policies for the protection of heritage assets. Nevertheless, in this case, I
    have assessed the proposal against the current development plan and the
    Framework. Given the limited visibility of the replacement windows and their effect
    on the character and appearance of the building and CA, I find that, subject to the
    agreement of suitable architectural detailing, the proposal would preserve the
    character and appearance of the CA. Accordingly, it would accord with Policy HB1
    of the adopted Places and Policies Local Plan (2020) (LP), which seeks
    development that integrates within places of heritage, and Policy HB8 of the LP
    which seeks to ensure that proposals do not result in unacceptable harm to
    heritage assets.

17. For the reasons set out above, I have found that the proposal would have a neutral
    effect on the significance of the CA, preserving the character and appearance of
    both the host building and the CA. Accordingly, the proposal therefore accords with
    the statutory duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009762


     Conservation Areas) Act 1990. As I have found that the proposal would cause no
     substantial harm to the significance of the designated heritage asset, there is no
     requirement to consider whether public benefits outweigh any such harm.
     Consequently, I find no conflict with the decision-making policies of Chapter 20 of
     the Framework: Conserving and enhancing the historic environment, or with the
     relevant policies of the LP.
Conditions
18. Standard conditions relating to the commencement of development and requiring
    the development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans is
    necessary as this provides clarity.
19. A condition is required to provide the precise details of the windows prior to
    installation for the avoidance of doubt, and in the interests of preserving the
    character and appearance of the CA.
Conclusion and Recommendation
20. For the reasons given above, I recommend that the appeal should be allowed. The
    proposal would accord with the development plan. Material considerations,
    including the Framework do not indicate that a decision should be made other than
    in accordance with the development plan.

J Kirkaldy
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
21. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

Martin Seaton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
