Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009818
Street Record, Mill Road, Whitfield, West Northamptonshire, NN13 5TE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Michael Adamberry against West Northamptonshire Council.
•   The application Ref is 2026/0210/FULL.
•   The development proposed is agricultural timber store (retrospective).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application the Government issued the new revised
   version of the National Planning Policy Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not
   consider there any need to revert to the main parties regarding this. The new
   policies for decision making do not substantially alter matters relating to the main
   issues which are the subject of this appeal.
3. The application is noted to have been made on a retrospective basis though this
   does not alter the basis for determination.
4. The appeal is subject to an application for costs. This is subject to a separate
   decision.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether the proposal is required for the purposes of agriculture
   with regard to the Local Plan policies relating to the principle of development.
Reasons
6. The appeal site in terms of general context stands within the village of Whitfield
   albeit it is, by definition, within the open countryside due to falling outside of the
   village boundary. The appellant’s planning statement (January 2026) states that the
   site forms a small part of a larger parcel of open grassland (denotated by the blue
   lines on the submitted plans). Both parties agree that it is common ground that the
   appeal site benefits from lawful agricultural use, however, the refusal reason is
   based upon the Council’s opinion as to the use of the buildings for the storage of
   domestic paraphernalia in connection with the caravan as opposed to for purposes
   that are solely agricultural.
7. I acknowledge that there is significant planning history, including a previous
   enforcement appeal, however, the case falls to be considered on its own merits
   within the context of this appeal which seeks a grant of planning permission (as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009818


     opposed to an appeal which was previously determined on the basis of whether a
     breach of planning control had occurred). The proposal relates to a timber store
     which is described, by the appellant, as being required for agricultural purposes.
     The building is single storey with horizontal feathered edge cladding and a metal
     roof with UPVC windows and doors. On the southern elevation there is an
     attached, covered, store.
8. The appellant outlines that the building is used in connection with agricultural use of
   the land – for the storage of animal feed, chick incubation housing a dog(s) and
   land-maintenance machinery and agricultural tools. It is also stated to house the
   electrical mains board, water pumps and electric fencing for livestock and
   vegetable production. The appellant’s planning statement, paragraph 63, also
   outlines the use of the site against the definition of agriculture as defined in Section
   336 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended). It is also stated,
   with reference to another assessment, that the land was utilised for cropping in
   2021 (which was prior to the applicant’s purchase of the land in 2022). I also note
   that reference is made to the site having a County Parish Holding (CPH) number –
   the latter simply being a legal registration for land/buildings where livestock is kept.
9. The commentary as to the agricultural activities and the need for the building are, to
   some extent, potentially inconsistent between the planning statement and the
   appellant’s statement of case as well as being limited to a list of headline activities
   and uses with no real detail or evidence as to those activities and uses.
   Furthermore, at the time of my site visit, there appeared to be limited evidence of
   what the appellant refers to, within their statement, as intense agricultural
   activity/operational reality of the land. Consequently, whilst the stated agricultural
   use is noted, the information and observations available do not provide a
   particularly clear or comprehensive indication of the scale, nature or extent of the
   agricultural activities being undertaken which warrant or justify the building in
   question. The Council’s determination, regardless of their stance as to the use of
   the building stated within the refusal reason is, in part, based upon a lack of a clear
   justification and clarification as to the agricultural activity on site.
10. The appellant’s submission states that the timber store has been constructed with
    dimensions and a design that suit its intended agricultural function. It is stated that
    its appearance, resembling a timber shed, and its placement within the site is
    consistent with the character of similar structures commonly found within the local
    area, such as garden sheds in the rear gardens. Overall, based on the evidence
    before me, I have concern as to the evidence as the agricultural activity taking
    place and, in turn, the functional need for the building in question. At the time of my
    site visit I did look into the building and see evidence of some agricultural storage
    (for example dustbins labelled as containing animal feed) but I do not find that the
    design of the building would be typical to suit an agricultural function.
11. In particular, the choice of materials, internal layout and overall form do not readily
    reflect those typically associated with a functional agricultural building even for a
    small-scale agricultural holding. The incorporation of UPVC fenestration is also of
    note, as this is more characteristic of non-agricultural development than a building
    required solely for agricultural purposes. Taken collectively, these features raise
    doubt as to whether the building has been designed primarily to meet a genuine
    agricultural need due to incorporating characteristics more commonly associated
    with other alternative uses. The design of the proposal does not present as one, as


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision 6009818


     stated within the appellant’s statement, suitable for a variety of stated uses within
     the planning statement and appellant’s statement, including, as a notable example,
     for use as land-maintenance machinery store.
12. I note that the Council have regard for the nominal size and siting and stated that
    they would consider the proposal not to have a detrimental effect on the character
    of the area in isolation and that it could be identified as an agricultural store given
    the traditional feel and appearance, however, I find the proposal in terms of design
    and appearance (aside from its arguably dilapidated state) to not present as a
    proposal reasonably designed to be an agricultural building. I therefore find that
    the proposal does not represent high-quality design. This finding is based upon the
    appeal building in isolation, the condition of the wider site is not for consideration.
13. I have considered the appellant’s suggestion regarding a condition restricting the
    building’s use. Whilst use of such a condition could, potentially, create an
    enforceable position for the Council going forward with regard to ongoing use of the
    building (and any concerns in that regard) use of such a condition would not
    overcome my concern identified above with regard to the design of the building and
    its claimed agricultural requirements. I acknowledge that the absence of a
    permitted residential dwelling on sites does not remove the potential requirements
    of agricultural holdings, however, based upon the evidence before me I have
    significant concern that the submissions do not provide a particularly clear or
    comprehensive indication of the nature, scale or extent of the agricultural activities
    nor that it is appropriately designed for its purported agricultural purpose.
14. The Council have refused the proposal with regard to South Northamptonshire Part
    2 Local Plan Policy SS1 which relates to the settlement hierarchy and is primarily
    concerned with residential development with this proposal seeking planning
    permission for an agricultural building. I do not find, therefore, that Policy SS1 is of
    direct relevance to the proposal when assessed as an agricultural building.
15. Despite this, the Council have provided copies of West Northamptonshire Joint
    Core Strategy Local Plan (Part 1) 2014 Policy S10 which relates to sustainable
    development principles. The policy requires development to achieve the highest
    standards of sustainable design and to protect, conserve and enhance the built
    environment. For the reasons outlined above I find that the proposal is poorly
    designed for its intended use. Whether or not there had been sufficient information
    to justify or provide a clear and comprehensive indication of the agricultural
    activities being undertaken on site, I remain unconvinced as to the proposal’s
    design for its intended purpose and the quality of the design. The proposal would,
    therefore, be contrary to the overarching objectives and principles of Policy S10.
16. National Policy S5 does allow development for agriculture outside settlements in
    principle and states that such forms of development should be approved, unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Without a clear or comprehensive indication of the nature, scale or extent of
    agricultural activities being undertaken, in terms of the agricultural holding, it is not
    realistically possible to quantity the benefits of the proposal.
17. The benefits of approving the proposal would, based on the evidence before me,
    be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects identified in terms of failing to
    result in appropriate design. National Policy D3 also requires development


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision 6009818


     proposals to respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their
     surroundings and development proposals should be refused if they conflict with
     paragraph 1 of that policy.
Other Matters
18. I note responses to the proposal in support (at application and appeal stage) as
    well an objection. I have discussed the consideration of conditions above along
    with the requirements for the building, based on the evidence before me, in the
    main issue above.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
