Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 July 2026 by Lucy Cuthbertson BSc
Decision by T Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009381
23 Cyprus Road, Finchley, Barnet, London, N3 3SD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mr Xi Chen against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Barnet.
•   The application Ref is 26/1222/PNH.
•   The development proposed is Single storey rear extension with depth of 4.38m.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Single storey rear
   extension with a maximum depth of 4.38m, eaves height of 3.0m and a maximum
   height of 3.2m at 23 Cyprus Road, London, N33SD in accordance with the terms of
   the application, Ref 26/1222/PNH, and the details and plans submitted with it,
   pursuant to Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph A. 4(2).
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
   amended) (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a
   dwellinghouse, subject to limitations, conditions and restrictions.
4. Where an application is made for prior approval for development, paragraph
   A.4(3) of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO provides that the local
   planning authority may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
   development does not comply (or that the developer has provided insufficient
   information to enable the authority to establish whether the proposed development
   complies) with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such
   permitted development.
5. There is no dispute between the parties that the proposal would comply with the
   limitations in paragraphs A.1 and A.2 and the conditions in paragraph A.3
   of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO. From the evidence before me, I see
   no reason to disagree.
6. The provisions of the GPDO under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class
   A, paragraph A.4 (7) require the local planning authority to assess the effect of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
APO 6009381


     proposed development on the amenity of any adjoining premises, where any owner
     or occupier of any adjoining premises objects to the proposed development. In this
     case, there has been an objection to the proposed development from a neighbour,
     therefore prior approval is required.
Main Issue
7. The effect of the proposed development on the amenity of the occupiers of No 25
   Cyprus Road.
Reason for the Recommendation
8. The appeal property forms part of a terrace of three-storey townhouses within an
   established suburban residential area. The dwellings have narrow plots and are in
   close proximity to neighbouring properties. The appeal property occupies a mid-
   terrace position and is bound by adjoining residential properties on either side.
   Rear gardens are generally long and enclosed by boundary fencing and planting,
   creating a relatively contained environment when viewed from ground-floor level.
9. The surrounding terrace exhibits a varied pattern of rear projections and
   extensions. In particular, No. 21 benefits from an existing rear extension. The site
   therefore exists within a context where rear additions form part of the established
   character and where a degree of enclosure and mutual overlooking between
   neighbouring properties is inherent to the built form.
10. The shared boundary between the appeal property and No. 25 Cyprus Road is
    currently defined by substantial close-boarded fencing together with mature
    vegetation. These features provide an effective visual barrier between the
    properties and already limit intervisibility and outward views at ground-floor level.
    As such, the existing experience from the rear garden of No. 25 is one of a
    contained and enclosed environment with limited outlook.
11. It is also noted that a pergola structure presently occupies the area where the
    extension is proposed. Although temporary in nature, the pergola contributes to the
    existing built form within the rear garden and reinforces the established perception
    of enclosure along this part of the property. Consequently, the proposal would not
    introduce built development into an otherwise open area but would instead occupy
    a location where a structure already exists and is experienced by neighbouring
    occupiers.
12. Taking all of these matters together, I conclude that the proposal would not result in
    an overbearing relationship or an unacceptable sense of enclosure. The resulting
    effects would not amount to undue harm to the amenity of adjoining occupiers for
    the purposes of paragraph A.4 of Schedule 2, Part 1 of the GPDO.
13. The Council has assessed the proposed development with reference to local
    development plan policies and associated guidance documents. However, prior
    approval is a different procedure to a planning application, and the GPDO does
    not require decision-makers to have regard to, or make decisions in accordance
    with, the development plan. The development plan policies and associated
    guidance are therefore relevant material considerations insofar as they seek to
    protect amenity but are not determinative.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
APO 6009381


Conditions
14. The GPDO grants planning permission subject to several conditions including a
    condition relating to the materials to be used and a condition requiring that the
    development be carried out in accordance with the approved details. The GPDO
    also allows for prior approval to be granted subject to conditions reasonably related
    to the subject matter of the prior approval. In this case, there are no additional
    conditions necessary in relation to neighbour amenity.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

Lucy Cuthbertson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

T Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
