 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 22 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:30 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009869
 33 Sherwood Road, Seaford, EAST SUSSEX BN25 3EH
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Mike Langley against the decision of Lewes District Council.
 •   The application Ref is LW/26/0064.
 •   The development proposed is the change of use from single family dwelling to two self-contained
     flats.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use
   from single family dwelling to two self-contained flats at 33 Sherwood Road,
   Seaford, East Sussex BN25 3EH in accordance with the terms of the application,
   Ref LW/26/0064, subject to the following conditions: -
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans and documents: 04-0126-010 Location Plan; 4-
             0126-02 Block Plan; 04-0126-04 Proposed Block Plan and 04-0126-04
             Proposed Layouts.
     3)      The development shall be carried out to provide no more than two self-
             contained residential units, and no further subdivision or intensification of the
             property shall take place.
     4)      Details of secure and covered cycle storage shall be submitted to and
             approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The secure and covered
             cycle storage shall be installed as approved prior to first occupation of the
             development hereby permitted and thereafter shall be retained for such
             purposes for the lifetime of the development.
     5)      Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby permitted the vehicle
             parking spaces as shown on the approved plans shall be implemented and
             retained for vehicle parking purposes for the lifetime of the development.
     6)      Details of refuse and recycling storage shall be submitted to and approved in
             writing by the Local Planning Authority. The refuse and recycling storage
             shall be installed prior to first occupation of the development hereby
             permitted and thereafter shall be retained for such purposes for the lifetime of
             the development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009869


Preliminary Matter
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue raised by this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   the living conditions of future occupiers.
Reasons
4. The Technical housing standards – nationally described space standards (NDSS)
   set out minimum space standards to ensure that development is not cramped
   internally and the room sizes would ensure convenient and efficient room layouts
   can be achieved. The Council does not have its own adopted local requirement
   standards in place. Nevertheless, in the absence of such local standards the
   NDSS set the appropriate thresholds to which new development should adhere.
5. The bedroom within Unit 1 would be of a size that could be considered to be a
   double bedroom. Nonetheless, the overall size of the flat would meet the NDSS for
   a one-person unit. The local planning authority contends that given the size of the
   bedroom the unit would represent a one bed, two person dwelling. As such, the
   unit would be significantly undersized when applying the NDSS requirement for a
   two person dwelling. Whilst the dwelling could be occupied by a couple rather than
   a single person, I have no substantive evidence before me that would indicate this
   would be the case. As a result, I cannot conclude that the internal space within
   Unit 1 would fall short of the NDSS for a one bed, one person dwelling.
6. The plans relating to Unit 2 illustrate two living rooms associated with this unit, one
   at ground level and one at lower ground level. The local planning authority is
   concerned that one of the living rooms could be used as a second double bedroom,
   therefore creating a two bed, four person dwelling. The overall size of the unit
   would be undersized in respect of the NDSS requirement for a four person
   dwelling. However, the plans clearly indicate that this unit would have two living
   room spaces within the unit. Whilst Unit 2 may have an unconventional layout it
   would not be constrained as it would satisfy the standards for a one bed, two
   person dwelling.
7. There is a small enclosed garden to the front of the property and some limited
   outdoor space to the side and rear. The land to the side is narrow and has a
   sloping gradient. This would not facilitate much in the way of useable outdoor
   space. Nonetheless, the proposal is for one person and two person units. The
   front garden is the outdoor space for the existing family home. The NDSS does not
   set out size standards in relation to outdoor living spaces and I have not been
   directed to any other standards that might apply. In my judgement the garden
   space could accommodate the outdoor living requirements of the occupiers of the
   two units.
8. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would not be harmful
   to the living conditions of future occupiers. The proposal would, therefore, comply
   with Policies CP11 and DM20 of the Lewes Local Plan Part 1. These policies seek,
   amongst other matters, development to be of high quality design that provides a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6009869


     satisfactory environment for existing and future occupants including, in relation to
     housing development, adequate provision for daylight, sunlight, privacy, private
     outdoor space and/or communal amenity areas. This accords with the revised
     Framework that seeks to achieve well-designed places.
Other Matters
9. Some local concern has been raised over the proposal. It has been highlighted
   that works have taken place to the property to divide it into three units. However,
   that is not what is before me for consideration and is separate to this appeal.
10. Concern has been raised over congested parking on Sherwood Rise and
    Sherwood Road. The local planning authority note that the two flats would require
    a maximum of 1.65 car parking spaces each to accord with parking standards and
    has commented that the plans illustrate there to be sufficient space for at least two
    vehicles to park in front of the garage with potential parking within the garage. On
    this basis the local planning authority considers the parking provision to be
    acceptable. On the evidence that is before me I have am not led to come to a
    different view on this matter.
11. It has been commented that flats would be out of character with area. However,
    the area is residential in character, as are flats. As such, there would be no
    significant change to the character of the area.
12. Some concern has been raised to the upkeep of garden areas as vegetation has
    overhung the public highway. However, this is not a planning matter and should be
    taken up with the owner separate to this appeal.
13. It has been highlighted that the proposal could potentially impact surrounding
    property values. Nonetheless, planning is concerned with land use in the public
    interest so the protection of private interests, such as, the impact of a development
    on the value of a neighbouring property is not a material consideration.
Conditions
14. I have considered the planning conditions put forward by the Council in light of
    Policy DM6 of the revised Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. In
    addition to the standard time limit condition and in the interests of certainty it is
    appropriate that there is a condition requiring the development be carried out in
    accordance with the approved plans.
15. To prevent an over intensive use of the site and to safeguard the living conditions
    of future occupiers a condition is necessary to ensure that no more than two
    dwelling units are created. To encourage sustainable transport a cycle storage
    condition is necessary. In the interests of highway safety, the vehicle parking
    spaces should be provided to ensure adequate parking provision at the site. In the
    interests of amenity refuse and recycling storage should be required by way of
    condition.
16. The local planning authority seeks other conditions to control the use of rooms
    within the units and the outdoor private amenity space. However, condition 2
    requires the development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans
    and those plans set out the use of each room. The proposal does not indicate that
    the front garden would be utilised for any other purpose than outdoor private


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision 6009869


     amenity space. Conditions relating to these matters would be overly onerous in
     this case.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons set out above, and subject to the conditions listed, this appeal
    should be allowed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
