Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by David Cross BA(Hons) PgDip(Dist) TechIOA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009328
184-186 Gipsy Lane, Leicester, LE4 6RG
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
    the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
    amended) (the GPDO).
•   The appeal is made by M Patel against the decision of Leicester City Council.
•   The application Ref is 20260349.
•   The development proposed is notification of proposed change of use of first floor from Commercial,
    Business and Service use (Class E) to 1 flat (1x 1-bed) (Class C3).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of the development provided on the application form has been
   replaced by an amended version on the decision notice and subsequent appeal
   documents. I consider that subsequent description to succinctly and accurately
   represent the proposal and I have therefore used it within this decision.
3. Subsequent to determining the application, the Council has adopted the Leicester
   Local Plan 2026 (the Local Plan). The policies of the new Local Plan supersede the
   policies referred to in the Council’s reasons for refusal. The Council has specified
   which policies it considers to be relevant to the appeal and the appellant has had
   the opportunity to comment on these. I have therefore had regard to the policies of
   the recently adopted Local Plan in reaching my decision.
4. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the appeal was lodged. Both main parties have had the
   opportunity to comment on any relevant implications for the appeal. I have had
   regard to the Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
       •   Whether the proposal complies with the GPDO in respect of the details
           accompanying the application; and
       •   The impacts of noise from commercial premises on the intended occupiers of
           the development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009328


Reasons
Accompanying Details
6. Paragraph W(2)(bc) of Part 3 of Schedule 2 of the GPDO requires that an
   application under Class MA must be accompanied by a floor plan indicating the
   total floor space in square metres of each dwellinghouse, the dimensions and
   proposed use of each room, the position and dimensions of windows, doors and
   walls, and the elevations of the dwellinghouses.
7. The plans originally submitted with the application did not include this information.
   However, the appellant has subsequently submitted amended plans which show
   these details. On that basis the proposal complies with the GPDO in respect of the
   accompanying details for the appeal before me.
Noise
8. The appeal proposal is located on the upper floor of a building which is part of a
   parade which contains commercial premises on the ground floor and a mix of uses
   (including residential) on the upper floor. The appellant sets out that the appeal site
   was previously used as a flat although permission was given in 2021 for its use as
   a restaurant/Class E use.
9. The ground floor use of the premises is proposed to remain as a commercial
   Class E use, and the adjoining premises are also in commercial uses at ground
   floor level. There is therefore significant potential that activities associated with
   these uses could lead to noise disturbance for residents of the proposal. This would
   include noise from activities within the ground floor units as well as the comings
   and goings of customers and deliveries.
10. The submitted plans also show ventilation flues located to the rear of the site. In
    that respect, I am mindful of noise (including structure borne noise) associated with
    the flues.
11. Furthermore, the existing and proposed plans do not reflect the number of
    ventilation flues that I observed on the site, which included a flue directly to the rear
    of the premises as well as ducting on the roof. There are also a number of what
    appeared to be air conditioning units on the rear elevation. These add to my
    concerns relating to the effect of noise on residents of the proposal.
12. Although the Council’s concerns on noise are set out in general terms, given the
    circumstances of the site it is reasonable that a detailed Noise Impact Assessment
    (NIA) is submitted to assess the impact of noise from commercial premises on
    residents of the proposal. The appellant emphasises that the Council has not
    identified any measured noise exceedance, specific noise complaints, abnormal
    industrial processes or night-time plant issues. But given the commercial nature of
    the ground floor uses and their relationship with the appeal site, I consider that an
    NIA is appropriate to determine the effect of nearby commercial uses on future
    residents.
13. The appellant refers to potential noise mitigation measures applied to the building
    fabric, and that non-habitable ancillary space would be located to the rear of the
    proposal closest to the flues. However, in the absence of an NIA, it has not been
    demonstrated that these measures, or measures which could be secured by


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009328


     condition, would be sufficient to address the potential noise impacts on future
     residents.
14. I am mindful that the appeal site has previously been in use as a flat and that there
    are flats on the upper floors elsewhere in this parade. I also acknowledge that
    residential accommodation is not uncommon in local centres such as this.
    However, the building may not meet modern standards in respect of noise
    mitigation. Furthermore, the proposal has to be assessed within the terms of the
    GPDO, which includes a clear requirement that the impacts of noise from
    commercial premises on future occupiers should be assessed.
15. On the basis of what I have seen and read, insufficient information has been
    submitted to demonstrate that the impacts of noise from commercial premises on
    the intended occupiers of the development would not be harmful to the living
    conditions of residents. The proposal would therefore not accord with condition
    MA.2(2)(d) of Class MA of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO. The proposal would
    not comply with the Framework which seeks to avoid exposure to levels of noise
    which could have an unacceptable adverse effect on health and the quality of life.
    Insofar as it is relevant to this appeal, the proposal would also conflict with Policy
    DQP06 of the Local Plan regarding the consideration of residential amenity and
    noise.
Other Matter
16. I note the frustrations expressed by the appellant in relation to the decision process
    leading up to this appeal. However, this is not a matter for this appeal which I have
    determined on its planning merits.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

David Cross
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
