Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by Thomas Courtney BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009677
Black Cottage, Henley Down, Catsfield, TN33 9BN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs A Ashworth against the decision of Rother District Council.
•    The application Ref RR/2025/2135/FULL was approved on 21 April 2026 and planning permission
     was granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is the proposed conversion of existing carport/garage building with
     alterations to form self-contained holiday let.
•    The condition in dispute is No 4 which states that: The glazing for roof lights on the rear elevation
     hereby permitted shall not be installed until details of the glazing, which shall include information on
     the glass technology to be utilised to prevent or significantly reduce light transmission through the
     glazing at night, which could be in the form of electrochromatic glass or 'smart glazing', has been
     submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The glazing shall be installed
     and thereafter retained/maintained in accordance with the approved details.
•    The reason given for the condition is: To prevent light pollution and to protect the dark night skies
     and local ecology of the surrounding countryside and the High Weald National Landscape, in
     accordance with Policies EN1 and EN5 of the Rother Local Plan Core Strategy and Policies DEN1,
     DEN2 and DEN7 of the Development and Site Allocations (DaSA) Local Plan and Objectives DS1
     and DS2 of the High Weald AONB Management Plan.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref RR/2025/2135/FULL for
       the proposed conversion of existing carport/garage building with alterations to form
       self-contained holiday let at Black Cottage, Henley Down, Catsfield, TN33 9BN
       granted on 21 April 2026 by Rother District Council, is varied by deleting Condition
       4 and substituting it for the following condition:
       4 The glazing for rooflights on the rear elevation hereby permitted shall not be
         installed until details of the measures to be incorporated into the rooflights to
         prevent or significantly reduce light transmission through the glazing at night
         have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
         The approved measures shall be installed before the rooflights are first brought
         into use and shall thereafter be retained and maintained in accordance with the
         approved details.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Since the appeal was submitted, a new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the
       Framework’) was published in August 2026. As the Framework is a material
       consideration in the determination of planning appeals, both main parties were
       given the opportunity to comment on the implications of the updated national
       policy. I have taken their responses into account in reaching my decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009677


Background and Main Issue
3.     Policy DM6 of the newly adopted Framework outlines that planning conditions
       should be kept to a minimum and only imposed where they are necessary,
       relevant to planning and to the development to be permitted, enforceable, precise
       and reasonable in all other respects.
4.     Planning permission ref RR/2025/2135/FULL (‘the permission’) was granted
       subject to conditions. The appeal relates to the appellant's request to remove
       Condition 4 which seeks use of technology to prevent or significantly reduce night-
       time light transmission from the glazing to the rear elevation of the self-contained
       holiday let. The Council considers that Condition 4 is necessary to protect dark
       skies and local ecology.
5.     The main issue is whether or not Condition 4 is necessary in the interests of
       biodiversity and the landscape and scenic beauty of the High Weald National
       Landscape (‘the HWNL’) having regard to light pollution.
Reasons
6.     The site lies within the countryside and the HWNL, where the protection of dark
       skies forms an important component of landscape character and tranquillity. The
       development plan and the High Weald Management Plan seek to minimise light
       pollution and light spill in order to conserve the natural beauty of the area and
       protect wildlife. Furthermore, Policy N4 of the Framework requires substantial
       weight to be afforded to conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of protected
       landscapes, whilst Policy P3 seeks to maintain the character of tranquil areas and
       limit adverse impacts from artificial light on intrinsically dark landscapes and
       nature.
7.     The rooflights would face an undeveloped orchard-like parcel of land rather than
       an established built-up area. The evidence before me indicates that this outlook
       comprises largely lightly managed vegetation including trees, grassed areas and
       boundary shrubs with no significant existing light sources or residential properties
       beyond. In such circumstances, any light emitted through the rooflights would be
       experienced against a notably dark backdrop and would be more perceptible than
       in a built-up setting. Any night-time light spill would introduce an additional artificial
       light source into an otherwise largely unlit area and would erode the sense of
       darkness and tranquillity that contributes to the landscape character and scenic
       beauty of this part of the HWNL.
8.     The vegetation immediately beyond the rooflights also forms part of a largely
       undeveloped environment where nocturnal species may be present. Additional
       artificial lighting has the potential to alter the behaviour and movement of light-
       sensitive species and increase disturbance within that habitat.
9.     The limited size of the openings does not of itself demonstrate that controls are
       unnecessary. The concern relates not simply to the quantity of glazing but to the
       direction and visibility of light spill from rooflights within an intrinsically dark rural
       landscape. The Council has referred to technical guidance indicating that rooflights
       can have a greater effect on upward light spill than vertical glazing.
10. I acknowledge that the host dwelling benefits from no equivalent planning
    restrictions on windows, rooflights or internal lighting. Nevertheless, the absence of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009677


        restrictions on the main dwelling does not render a condition unnecessary in
        relation to the approved holiday let. Planning conditions must be assessed having
        regard to the particular impacts of the development permitted. In this regard, the
        disputed rooflights would be positioned close to the boundary with the adjoining
        undeveloped parcel of land and directed towards that unlit area. By contrast, the
        principal glazing associated with the main dwelling is set further back within the
        site. Whilst the main dwelling may also contribute to existing levels of night-time
        lighting, the rooflights would represent an additional source of light transmission
        facing the adjoining undeveloped land. The existence of other light sources does
        not negate the need to consider whether light spill arising from the development
        permitted should be controlled.
11. The appellant further relies on the possibility that blinds, curtains or blackout blinds
    could be installed. Whilst such measures may reduce light transmission, their
    effectiveness would depend upon the actions of future occupants. Given that the
    accommodation would operate as a holiday let, such measures would not provide
    a sufficiently reliable or enduring means of controlling light spill. By contrast, a
    permanently installed solution would provide certainty that the mitigation would
    remain effective irrespective of occupier behaviour.
12. I have also considered the appeal decision relating to Paygate, Whatlington Road,
    Battle1. However, that case turned on its own facts. There, the Inspector attached
    significance to the relationship of the property to neighbouring buildings and
    concluded that the development would not result in a tangible increase in overall
    light spill. The Inspector also attached particular importance to the presence of a
    substantial overhang above the bifold doors and roof sections projecting from the
    building, which acted as physical barriers limiting outward and upward light spill.
    By contrast, the rooflights in the appeal before me would be installed flush within
    the roof slope and would face open, undeveloped land and trees with no
    comparable screening features, buildings or existing light sources beyond.
    Consequently, I do not find the circumstances directly comparable, and I afford
    that decision limited weight.
13. However, whilst I find that a condition controlling light transmission is justified, I am
    not persuaded that the wording of the existing condition is sufficiently
    proportionate. The requirement refers specifically to electrochromic glass or smart
    glazing. The evidence before me does not demonstrate that those technologies
    are uniquely capable of achieving the objective sought. The Council accepts that
    alternative permanent measures, including films or similar treatments applied to
    the glazing, may achieve comparable reductions in night-time light transmission.
14. In these circumstances, I find that a condition requiring details of a permanent
    means of reducing light transmission through the rooflights remains necessary.
    However, that objective can be achieved through a broader range of permanently
    installed measures than those specified by the appeal condition. I therefore find
    that Condition 4 in its current form is overly prescriptive and more restrictive than is
    necessary to achieve the intended planning objective. It should thus be deleted
    and replaced by a condition which would allow flexibility as to the type of
    permanently installed light-reduction measure employed, whilst continuing to
    secure the objective of reducing night-time light spill. Such a condition would
    satisfy the requirements of Policy DM6 of the Framework.

1
    Appeal Ref: APP/U1430/W/23/3314102


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009677


15. Accordingly, I conclude that the deletion of Condition 4 and its replacement with
    the revised condition would minimise light pollution and therefore protect
    biodiversity and the landscape and scenic beauty of the HWNL. As such, it would
    not conflict with Policy EN1 of the Rother Local Plan Core Strategy 2014 (‘the CS’)
    or Policies DEN1 or DEN2 of the Development and Site Allocations Local Plan
    2019 (‘the DASA’) insofar as they include requirements broadly for development
    that is sympathetic to landscape character, that maintains dark skies and the
    tranquillity of more remote areas and that conserves and enhances the landscape
    and scenic beauty of the National Landscape. Nor would there be conflict with
    Policy EN5 of the CS or Policy DEN7 of the DASA which require protection for
    biodiversity and habitats, including in respect of lighting, and minimisation of light
    pollution.
16. Furthermore, the replacement condition would support Objectives DS1 and DS2 of
    the High Weald Management Plan, which seek to preserve the dark skies of the
    High Weald by minimising light pollution and internal light spill, and to protect
    wildlife and habitats from light pollution.
17. The deletion of Condition 4 and its replacement with the revised condition would
    also remain consistent with Policies N4 and P3 of the Framework, insofar as they
    seek to conserve and enhance the natural beauty of protected landscapes and
    limit adverse impacts from artificial light on intrinsically dark landscapes and
    nature.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed and the
    planning permission should be varied by deleting the disputed Condition 4 and
    substituting it for a new condition.



Thomas Courtney
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
