Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 July 2026
by E Everitt BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009718
Vyners Estate, Mill Lane, Tidmarsh, Reading RG8 8EB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs D Lusted of DW Lusted Ltd against the decision of West Berkshire
     District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02270/OUT.
•    The development proposed is residential development for 3 dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal scheme is for outline planning permission, with access to be
       considered at this stage, and appearance, layout, scale and landscaping reserved
       for future consideration. I have considered the appeal accordingly.
3.     The appeal site is located within the North Wessex Downs National Landscape
       (NWDNL). The Levelling-Up and Regeneration Act 2023 amends the duty on
       relevant authorities in respect of their functions to now ‘seek to further’ the
       statutory purposes of National Landscapes.
4.     The proposed development relates to the setting of a listed building. Accordingly, I
       have had regard to the statutory duties set out in section 66(1) of the Planning
       (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
5.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       during the consideration of the appeal. The main parties were provided with the
       opportunity to comment on the relevance of the Framework, and I have taken
       account of the comments received, and the Framework, in making my decision.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would be suitably located having regard to relevant
                development plan policies concerning the countryside;
           •    whether the proposed development would be suitably located having regard
                to the accessibility of services and facilities;
           •    whether the proposed development would preserve the setting of the Grade
                II listed building known as Barn at Keepers Cottage;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009718


          •    the effect of the proposed development on highway safety;
          •    the effect of the proposed development on flood risk;
          •    whether the proposed development makes adequate provision for drainage;
          •    whether the proposed development makes adequate provision for climate
               change mitigation and adaptation and energy efficiency;
          •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
               the surrounding area, including whether the development would conserve
               and enhance the natural beauty of the North Wessex Downs National
               Landscape; and
          •    whether the proposed development makes adequate provision regarding
               land contamination.
Reasons
Suitability of location
7.    Policies SP1 and SP3 of the West Berkshire Local Plan Review 2023-2041
      (adopted 2025) (the LPR) set out the spatial strategy for development, directing
      growth towards settlements identified in the settlement hierarchy outlined in Policy
      SP3. The appeal site is not located within a settlement identified in the settlement
      hierarchy.
8.    Policy SP3 specifies that outside of the identified settlements development will be
      restricted to that which is appropriate in a rural area as set out in Policy DM1.
      Policy DM1 outlines that new residential development outside of adopted
      settlement boundaries will be permitted where it satisfies one or more of the
      identified criteria. It has not been put to me that the proposed development would
      accord with any of the criteria specified in Policy DM1 of the LPR. Accordingly, it
      would be contrary to Policy DM1, and as a consequence, Policies SP1 and SP3 of
      the LPR.
9.    The appellant refers to a proposal for the conversion of a barn close to the appeal
      site to residential use. However, the appeal decision provided by the Council in
      relation to this case confirms that planning permission was refused, with the site
      found not to constitute an appropriate location for residential development having
      regard to local and national planning policy. As such, this matter does not lead me
      an alternative conclusion on this main issue.
10. For these reasons, the proposed development would not be suitably located
    having regard to Policies SP1, SP3 and DM1 of the LPR, the relevant provisions of
    which I have set out above.
Accessibility of services and facilities
11. Policy SP19 of the LPR requires that development that generates a transport
    impact, among other things, promotes opportunities for active travel, facilitates
    sustainable travel and demonstrates good access to key services and facilities.
12. The appeal site is located close to some existing residential dwellings.
    Nevertheless, the site is undisputably located within the open countryside.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6009718


13. The nearest settlement is Tidmarsh, which provides some limited services and
    facilities such as village hall, public house and church. I noted during my site visit
    that to reach Tidmarsh on foot or by bicycle, individuals would need to proceed
    along Mill Lane which is narrow, has no street lighting and limited footpaths, and
    includes sharp bends. This route may be regarded as inconvenient and lack
    appeal for many, particularly in winter months, after dusk or during poor weather,
    irrespective of the distance to Tidmarsh.
14. Moreover, access to many services and facilities that future occupiers would likely
    require for their day-to-day needs would necessitate onward travel to other
    locations and higher order settlements. I observed that the nearest bus stops are
    located within Tidmarsh. Access to these bus stops would rely on the route
    described above which is unlikely to be attractive to many future occupiers. Access
    to train stations would require use of the same route or travel by private vehicle.
15. The appellant highlights that Tilehurst is also readily accessible from the site.
    However, even if the services and facilities provided therein are a relatively short
    distance from the site, access on foot or by bicycle would require individuals to
    proceed along Mill Lane and, beyond this, Sulham Hill. As with access to
    Tidmarsh, this would involve a route along a narrow road with sharp bends, no
    street lighting and limited footpaths. I observed during my site visit that the route
    also includes sections with reasonably steep inclines. Access to Tilehurst is,
    therefore, also unlikely to be desirable for pedestrians and cyclists.
16. In the context of the above, occupiers of the proposed development would be
    highly reliant on the use of private vehicles to access most services and facilities
    and to meet their day-to-day needs due to a lack of satisfactory walking and
    cycling routes.
17. I acknowledge that there are existing dwellings in the surrounding area which may
    be reliant on the use of private vehicles and that such circumstances may be a
    common characteristic of countryside settlements, However, this does not mitigate
    or outweigh my findings in respect of accessibility set out above.
18. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would not be
    suitably located having regard to the accessibility of services and facilities. As
    such, the proposal is contrary to the relevant provisions of Policy SP19 of the LPR,
    which I have outlined above.
Setting of Barn at Keepers Cottage
19. The appeal site is located close to, and within the setting of, a Grade II listed
    building known as Barn at Keepers Cottage1. It is a timber framed and
    weatherboarded barn with hipped thatched roof which dates from the late 16th
    century.
20. The special interest and significance of the listed building is largely derived from its
    historic and architectural interests, including its age. Pertinent to this appeal, the
    building’s special interest and significance are also derived, in part, from its setting.
    The immediate setting of the asset comprises a limited quantum of built
    development set within predominantly open, verdant grounds. Even though parts
    of the appeal site used for storage and parking for commercial vehicles and trailers

1
    List entry number 1215632


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6009718


      are reasonably close to the listed building, these areas are largely screened by
      established vegetation, thereby not detracting from the setting of the building.
      Beyond the immediate surroundings, the wider setting predominantly comprises
      open countryside. This setting contributes positively to the asset’s special interest
      and significance.
21. The appeal proposal would introduce additional built form into the setting of the
    listed building. Whilst the siting and design of the proposed dwellings is reserved
    for future consideration, it is likely that, given the scale of the site, at least some
    built development would be located on land which is currently open and verdant.
    Consequently, the proposal would be likely to have a harmful urbanising effect on
    the setting of the listed building, reducing the extent of its open, verdant
    surroundings. In this regard, the proposal would harmfully erode the setting of the
    listed building, weakening the contribution the setting makes to the significance of
    the asset. In doing so, it would be contrary to the requirements of section 66(1) of
    the Act.
22. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would fail to
    preserve the setting of the Grade II listed building known as Barn at Keepers
    Cottage. As such, the proposal would conflict with the relevant provisions of
    Policies SP9 and DM10 of the LPR which seek to conserve and, where
    appropriate, enhance those aspects of the historic environment which are
    recognised as being of archaeological, architectural, artistic or historic interest and
    maximise opportunities to preserve, enhance, or better reveal the asset’s
    significance.
23. Policy HE6 of the Framework states that where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and
    its significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. I will return to this balance subsequently.
Highway safety
24. Policy SP19 of the LPR requires that development which generates a transport
    impact, among other things, mitigates any adverse impact on local transport
    networks.
25. The appellant has put to me that the proposal would not increase the number of
    vehicle movements to and from the site and would diminish the size of vehicles
    and slowness of exit to Mill Lane. However, the limited information before me
    regarding the number and type of vehicles entering and leaving the site relates to
    a single date in 2024. As such, I am not satisfied that it provides a robust basis
    upon which to ascertain the level of use of the existing access. Moreover, I have
    no substantive evidence before me relating to the likely traffic generation of the
    proposed development which could be compared to the traffic associated with the
    existing use.
26. The appellant suggests vehicle speeds are low in proximity to the site, due to a
    nearby sharp bend in the road with associated 20mph advisory signs as well as
    proximity to a 30mph speed limit. Nonetheless, there is no substantive evidence
    before me relating to the speed of vehicles using this section of Mill Lane, which I
    note the Local Highway Authority requested on the basis that it would be used to
    calculate appropriate visibility splays for the access.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
Appeal Decision 6009718


27. In the absence of the above information, and noting the lack of information before
    me regarding the design of the existing access, the effect of the proposal on
    highway safety cannot be ascertained. As such, even though the proposed
    development would use an existing access and there is no evidence of accidents
    close to the site, I am not satisfied that the access has been demonstrated to
    comply with current highway standards or be acceptable for the proposed use.
28. Consequently, in taking a precautionary approach, I conclude that the proposed
    development would have a harmful effect on highway safety. It would, therefore,
    be contrary to the relevant provisions of Policy SP19 of the LPR which are outlined
    above.
Flood risk
29. The appeal site includes land within Flood Zones 2 and 3. In this context, the
    appellant has provided a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) which assesses the likely
    flood risk at the site. However, the Environment Agency (EA) has raised concerns
    regarding the design flood event used in the FRA. Specifically, the EA highlights
    that the 1% annual exceedance probability (AEP) plus 31% climate change flood
    level should be used instead of the 0.1% AEP used in the FRA as a proxy for the
    design flood event. Even if the data obtained by the appellant from the EA did not
    include a 31% climate change allowance, I am not satisfied that this justifies the
    use of an alternative design flood event. Indeed, even if the 0.1% AEP is the
    largest flood extent provided, the EA outline that, in certain circumstances, the
    design flood event can exceed the 0.1% AEP.
30. In the absence of an assessment of the flood risk based on the appropriate design
    flood event, the extent to which the appeal site may be subject to flooding, the
    adequacy of flood risk mitigation measures and the impact of the proposal on flood
    storage compensation is unknown. Consequently, although the FRA concludes
    that there would be an acceptable level of flood risk if the recommended mitigation
    strategies are implemented and that the development would not increase flood risk
    off-site or to the wider area, this has not been demonstrated by robust evidence.
    This is irrespective of whether the Lead Local Flood Authority and Sustainable
    Drainage Systems team (LLFA/SuDS team) commented that the level of detail
    provided in the FRA is appropriate.
31. Policy F5 of the Framework sets out that the sequential test should be used in
    areas known to be at risk now or in the future from any form of flooding, other than
    in specific situations. This includes sites where a site-specific flood risk
    assessment demonstrates clearly that no built development within the site
    boundary, including access or escape routes, land raising or other potentially
    vulnerable elements, would be located on an area that would be at risk of flooding
    from any source, now and in the future.
32. The appellant asserts that the sequential test is not applicable here as the
    proposed dwellings would be located outside of the land subject to flooding.
    However, the information before me indicates that the site access would be at risk
    of flooding. In accordance with Policy F5 of the Framework, there is, therefore, a
    need for the sequential test to be undertaken. Moreover, the extent of flood risk
    may also increase were the 1% AEP plus 31% climate change allowance
    assessed. As such, in the absence of a sequential test having been undertaken, I



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009718


      cannot be certain that the proposal would steer new development to areas with the
      lowest risk of flooding.
33. Taking account of the above, in taking a precautionary approach due to the lack of
    appropriate evidence, I conclude that the proposed development would have a
    harmful effect on flood risk. In this regard, it would be contrary to the relevant
    provisions of Policy SP6 of the LPR which seeks, among other things,
    development which is located and designed to ensure that flood risk from all
    sources of flooding is acceptable in planning terms, and there are no suitable and
    available sites at a lower flood risk. For the same reasons, the proposal is contrary
    to Policies F5 and F7 of the Framework, which state that development proposals
    should not present a risk of flooding to potential occupiers and should not increase
    flood risk elsewhere, and that where it is in a location known to be at risk of any
    form of flooding, now or in the future, it should be refused unless, among other
    things, the development will be safe throughout its lifetime.
Drainage
34. Policy F8 of the Framework requires that development proposals which could
    affect drainage on or around the development site incorporate sustainable
    drainage systems to control flow rates and reduce volumes of runoff, in ways
    which are proportionate to the nature and scale of the proposal. There is no
    drainage strategy before me. As such, it is unclear how flows arising from the
    appeal site would be addressed. Indeed, commentary provided as part of the
    appellant’s appeal submission indicates that infiltration and groundwater
    monitoring would be needed to establish whether infiltration is viable and that until
    a drainage strategy is produced it is not known whether drainage to either a
    watercourse or surface water/combined sewer could be viable solutions.
35. Policy DM7 of the LPR requires that proposals satisfactorily demonstrate that foul
    water flows produced by the development will be drained separately from surface
    water run off to a suitable point of connection to a public foul sewer or, for non
    mains drainage proposals, where there would be no detrimental impact on the
    environment. There are no details of a proposed approach to dealing with foul
    drainage flows before me. Moreover, it is evident from the information before me
    that there is a need for additional surveys and ground investigations to explore
    potential solutions.
36. I acknowledge that there are existing houses close to the appeal site and that
    similar surface water and foul water drainage strategies to those used by these
    houses may be possible. I also acknowledge that there may be technological
    solutions available. Nevertheless, without any evidence to demonstrate the
    potential for appropriate surface water and foul drainage, I cannot be certain that
    there are viable solutions in this case.
37. The appellant asserts that such matters could be addressed at a future stage.
    However, the FRA recommends that a surface water drainage strategy is prepared
    to reduce the impact of surface water runoff generated by the proposed
    development. In this context, it is clear that there is a need for an appropriate
    solution if increased flood risk elsewhere is to be avoided. Furthermore, without
    any evidence to suggest that there are viable solutions available in this case, there
    is no certainty that any planning permission would be implementable.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009718


38. Accordingly, in taking a precautionary approach, I conclude that the proposed
    development would not make adequate provision for drainage. As such, the
    proposal is contrary to the relevant provisions of Policies SP6 and DM7 of the
    LPR. Among other things, these policies seek the management of surface water in
    a sustainable manner through the implementation of Sustainable Drainage
    Methods and drainage of foul water flows separate to surface water run-off. For
    the same reasons, the proposal would fail to comply with Policy F8 of the
    Framework, which is summarised above.
Climate change mitigation and adaptation and energy efficiency
39. Policy SP5 of the LPR requires the submission of a Sustainability Statement
    demonstrating how the principles of climate change mitigation and adaptation
    identified within the policy have been embedded into the development, with the
    level of information provided proportionate to the scale and nature of the
    development proposed.
40. Policy DM4 of the LPR outlines that development should achieve net zero
    operational carbon emissions (regulated and unregulated energy) by implementing
    the energy hierarchy and the application of the energy hierarchy should be
    demonstrated through the submission of an Energy Statement or a detailed energy
    section within a Sustainability Statement.
41. There is no substantive evidence before me relating to climate change mitigation
    and adaptation or the energy hierarchy. Such matters could be addressed in detail
    at the reserved matters stage based on the detailed design for the site or secured
    by conditions. However, in the absence of any substantive evidence, I have
    insufficient information before me to conclude that the proposal could, even
    in-principle, make adequate provision in relation to climate change mitigation and
    adaptation and energy efficiency. I cannot, therefore, be certain that the proposed
    development would be acceptable in the context of the Council’s strategy for
    development set out in the LPR, including, as stated in Policy SP5, that all
    development should contribute to West Berkshire becoming and staying carbon
    neutral by 2030.
42. Consequently, in taking a precautionary approach, I conclude that the proposed
    development does not make adequate provision regarding climate change
    mitigation and adaptation and energy efficiency. As such, the proposal is contrary
    to the relevant provisions of Policies SP5 and DM4 of the LPR which I have
    outlined above.
Character and appearance
43. As noted above, the appeal site is currently partly in use for the storage parking for
    commercial vehicles and trailers. I observed during my site visit that the existing
    structures and areas used for storage and the parking of vehicles distinguish the
    appeal site from the surrounding area. This includes the character of this part of
    the NWDNL which the North Wessex Downs Landscape Character Assessment
    (2025) identifies remains a deeply rural landscape, with a strong sense of
    peacefulness and tranquillity.
44. The appeal proposal would introduce additional built form onto the site. In doing
    so, it could, subject to its detailed design, have an urbanising influence on the site
    and surrounding NWDNL.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009718


45. However, by reason of the established vegetation at the boundaries of the site,
    there is limited visibility of the appeal site from the surrounding countryside and
    wider NWDNL. Moreover, given that the existing use results in a character and
    appearance distinct from the surrounding area, a residential use may appear,
    where visible, more in-keeping with the sporadic residential development along
    this part of Mill Lane and the character of this part of the NWDNL. This is
    irrespective of whether the buildings in the vicinity of the appeal site identified in
    the Planning Statement for demolition were removed and even though the
    residential use of the site would be intensified. Indeed, the proposed development
    would not necessarily be out of character with the local rural context, which the
    West Berkshire Landscape Character Assessment (2019) identifies as a detractor
    of the area.
46. Accordingly, notwithstanding my findings above in respect of heritage, I conclude
    that, subject to a sensitive design and the appropriate use of landscaping, the
    proposed development would not have a harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area, and would conserve and enhance the natural
    beauty of the NWDNL. Therefore, the proposal would not conflict with the relevant
    provisions of Policies SP2, SP7 and SP8 of the LPR. In summary, these policies
    seek development which conserves and enhances the character and appearance
    and quality of an area and the local distinctiveness of the landscape character.
Land contamination
47. The Council’s Officer Report refers to Policy DM5 of the LPR. Policy DM5
    identifies that where there is a likelihood that contamination is present or known to
    be present, as a minimum a desk-based assessment detailing the likelihood and
    extent of land contamination should be undertaken.
48. Although the appellant indicates that there is no significant contamination on the
    site, there is no substantive evidence before me regarding land contamination.
    Given the existing use of the site, there is potential for contamination which would
    need to be identified and addressed prior to any residential use on the site.
    However, there is no evidence before me to suggest that any potential
    contamination would render a permission unimplementable. As such, in this
    particular case, I am satisfied that a suitably worded planning condition could be
    used to secure appropriate investigation and, if necessary, remediation works.
49. For these reasons, I conclude that, subject to a suitably worded condition, the
    proposed development would make adequate provision regarding land
    contamination. As such, the proposal would not conflict with the relevant
    provisions of Policy DM5 which I have outlined above.
50. Refusal reason 8 on the Council’s decision notice refers to Policy SP5 of the LPR.
    However, this policy relates to climate change matters which are not relevant to
    this main issue. Accordingly, I find no conflict with Policy SP5 in relation to this
    main issue.
Other Considerations
51. As noted above, Policy HE6 of the Framework sets out that where a development
    proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on
    the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits
    resulting from the proposal.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6009718


52. Policy HE6 states that when considering the impact of a proposed development on
    the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given
    to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE4 of the Framework states that any harm to,
    or loss of, the significance of a designated heritage asset should have a clear and
    convincing justification.
53. The Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance require the category of harm
    to be explicitly identified, and the extent of harm within that category to be clearly
    articulated. Given the scale of the proposed development, I find that the harm to
    the significance of Barn at Keepers Cottage would be at the lower end of the
    spectrum of harm. Nonetheless, in accordance with Policy HE6 of the Framework,
    the harm is of considerable importance and weight.
54. The appeal proposal would contribute towards the supply of housing in the local
    area, in doing so contributing to increasing the number of homes built nationwide.
    Nonetheless, by reason of the scale of the proposed development, the contribution
    towards housing supply would, inevitably, be limited. Consequently, although the
    benefits of housing delivery attract substantial weight in favour of the proposed
    development, the limited scale of the development tempers the weight I can attach
    to these benefits.
55. The existing commercial storage use of the site is established through a Certificate
    of Lawful Development2. This use has the potential to generate vehicle, including
    Heavy Goods Vehicle, movements and associated noise and disturbance at all
    times of the day and night as well as impacts on the highway and the surrounding
    environment. In this context, the appellant has put to me that the residential use of
    the site would better serve the community and benefit the surrounding homes. I
    afford moderate weight to these benefits associated with the proposal.
56. Collectively, these public benefits are of moderate weight. In this case, I conclude
    that the public benefits of the proposal would not outweigh the harm to the setting
    of Barn at Keepers Cottage that I have identified above. Accordingly, they do not
    provide a clear and convincing justification for the harm to the listed building. The
    proposal would, therefore, be contrary to the heritage-related provisions of the
    Framework.
57. I appreciate the frustrations of the appellant regarding the extent of detailed
    evidence requested by the Council at this outline application stage, the costs
    associated with obtaining such evidence and the Council’s approach to the
    application in the absence of the requested evidence. Nevertheless, I have
    assessed the proposal on the basis of the information before me and, as outlined
    above, it does not provide certainty that the site could be developed without
    causing harm in relation to a number of matters, even if some matters could be
    appropriately dealt with at a future stage.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
58. The proposed development would fail to preserve the setting of the nearby
    heritage asset, would not be suitably located in relation to the accessibility of
    services and facilities and would fail to comply with development plan policies
    concerning development in the countryside. I also have insufficient information
    before to demonstrate that the development would not have a harmful effect on

2
    21/01688/CERTE


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6009718


      flood risk and highway safety and that it would make adequate provision in respect
      of drainage, climate change adaptation and mitigation and energy efficiency. As
      such, the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole.
59. However, Policy S3 of the Framework establishes that decisions on development
    proposals should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy
    S5 of the Framework states that only certain forms of development should be
    approved outside settlements, as specified in the policy.
60. Part 3 of Policy S5 specifies that development proposals comprising isolated
    homes, which are those lying outside settlements or groups of houses, should not
    be approved other than in accordance with Policy HO11. As noted above, the
    appeal site is located close to some existing residential dwellings. However, its
    siting is such that it is close to, rather than within, the group of houses.
    Consequently, I consider that the proposal would comprise isolated homes. It has
    not been put to me that the proposal would accord with any of the criteria set out in
    Policy HO11. As such, the development would be contrary to Policy HO11, and as
    a result Policy S5, of the Framework.
61. Accordingly, in this case, irrespective of whether the proposal would involve the
    redevelopment of previously developed land, the application of the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development does not indicate that permission should be
    granted.
62. In conclusion, therefore, for the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with
    the development plan and the material considerations do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. As such, the appeal
    should be dismissed.

E Everitt
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
