 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 25 July 2026
 by A. J. Boughton MA (IPSD) Dip.Arch. Dip.(Conservation) RIBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 2 September 2026

 Appeal Ref: 6009972
 1 & 1A Lytton Avenue, Enfield EN3 6EL.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Lakh Dollay against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Enfield.
 •   The application Ref is 25/03478/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is Change of use from Use Class C3 (dwelling houses) to two 5-
     bedroom Houses in Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis) involving changes to fenestration (part
     retrospective).


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters

2. Plans submitted with the appeal clearly show the two properties which are the
   subject of this appeal, 1 & 1A Lytton Avenue, although conjoined, would be
   physically separate with no interconnecting doors or shared facilities. This means an
   occupier of one of the two houses would have to leave that property in order to gain
   access to the interior of the other, I therefore consider it would not be reasonable to
   determine the matter other than on the basis that the result of the development
   would be two separate HMOs. Following consultation with the appellant the
   description has been amended to accord with the plans that are sought to be
   approved. I have determined the appeal on that basis.

3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026. I
   have taken this into account in the consideration of the matters raised.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the occupiers of the development would enjoy
   acceptable living conditions having regard to the size and availability of the
   communal facilities provided.

Reasons

5. The appeal site comprises two adjoining residential buildings (No.1 and No.1A)
   which were originally erected, and until recently used, as two separate
   dwellinghouses in a well-established residential area. The application seeks
   planning permission for development which has already been largely undertaken,
https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6009972


      namely the conversion of these buildings to HMO use (sui generis). The proposal
      does not integrate the two former dwellinghouses into a single unit, as each half
      retains independent access and broadly similar accommodation, each containing
      five bedrooms, one communal kitchen (containing a small surface for eating1)
      together with two shared and one ensuite bath/shower rooms.

6. The Council refer to the Mayor of London’s Housing SPG however, as with other
   policy references in the Decision Notice, this has limited relevance to the reasoning
   of the Council’s refusal. The appropriate starting point in this matter is Policy DMD5
   of the Enfield Development Management Document (November 2014) (DMD 2014).
   This policy directly addresses residential conversions to Houses in Multiple
   Occupation (HMO) with restrictions to prevent clustering, disturbance, also requiring
   adequate parking. The Council do not express concerns as to these matters but
   refer to the inadequate size of communal space.

7. The Nationally Described Space Standards (NDSS) do not directly apply to HMO
   premises, however, the gross internal area of each building appears to achieve the
   minimum area specified by the NDSS for a 5-bed three storey house (6-person),
   allowing for some discrepancy in the method of calculation used by the Council. I
   therefore conclude that Nos.1 &1A each provide an adequate total internal floor
   area for the use described and thereby meet the requirements of Policy DMD5(a)
   with particular regard to the suitability of each building, as a whole, for the intended
   use.

8. The Enfield HMO Standards document (March 2021) has been partly superseded
   by online advice primarily directed at the standards appropriate to licencing of HMO2
   but those standards also provide some guidance relevant to design and internal
   layout, matters which affect the living conditions of occupiers and therefore material
   to this appeal. These include the need for ready access to the kitchen from
   bedrooms and the availability of somewhere to sit and eat. The document includes a
   stipulation that kitchen facilities should ‘preferably be sited no more than one floor
   distant from the bedroom’. It is also indicated that where no separate dining room is
   available, a ‘dining kitchen’ of a specific size should be provided. The relevant area
   being 8.5m2 for up to 5 persons, as a habitable room with space for eating.

9. Although the plan identifies an area of 13.85m2 for the dining kitchen of No.1, this
   appears to be incorrect. Nevertheless, although the effective area of the dining-
   kitchen in No.1 exceeds, by a small margin, the minimum area stipulated in the
   HMO Standards (2026) of 8.5m2, the effective area of the Kitchen in No.1A plainly
   falls below that standard such that the provision in that regard, there being no other
   communal room, is insufficient.

10. Although the space provision for communal rooms is partly met, it is material that
    Policy DMD5 (a) of the DMD 2014 requires a high-quality form of accommodation,
    thereby indicating that the development plan requires an assessment as to the
    quality of accommodation and that the suitability of the accommodation does not
    rest solely on the amount of internal floor area.



1
    According to the submitted plans
2
     Enfield HMO Standards 2026 https://www.hmokit.co.uk/hmo-standards/enfield


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
    Appeal Decision 6009972


11. According to the layout submitted, each kitchen-dining room is required to be
    suitable for the preparation and consumption of meals by up to five unrelated
    people3. The conditions of multiple occupation are unlike a related family occupation
    in that several meal preparations may be occurring at the same time with a
    likelihood of unhealthy concentrations of steam and moisture.

12. The quality of an essential facility such as a kitchen is material to the living
    conditions for occupiers and this is not determinable solely on the basis of floor area
    and equipment. Significantly, the plans do not indicate any means of natural
    ventilation to the dining-kitchens, providing only an external access door with
    corridor access for ventilation. In such circumstances, whilst there is no requirement
    to have a view from a kitchen, the lack of an openable window for additional
    ventilation in a habitable room has a number of implications for living conditions.
    Users would also be located remotely from its only source of daylight and
    ventilation, a door.

13. Furthermore, it is unlikely that occupiers of either house would consider it safe to
    leave the external door open for ventilation, except when the kitchen is actually in
    use, thereby limiting the opportunity for necessary air changes to take place. Even if
    mechanical ventilation were introduced by condition I have nothing before me to
    indicate the adequacy of such an arrangement or that it would address concerns as
    to air quality or odour. Whilst there is no requirement to have a view from a kitchen,
    I consider the lack of an openable window for ventilation4 at times when the kitchen
    is intensively used or when it is not appropriate to have an open rear door, presents
    unacceptable risk of unhealthy condensation and the accumulation of mould in what
    will likely be an intensively used kitchen at certain times.

14. As the kitchen-dining rooms are the only shared habitable rooms in either house I
    attach significant weight to these deficiencies being matters of great importance to
    the living standards of occupiers. Overall, and notwithstanding the adequacy of
    bedroom sizes, I conclude that the internal layouts of the ground floor fail to attain
    either the high-quality form of accommodation required by Policy DMD5(a) of DMD
    2014 or the well-designed functional layouts required by Policy DMD8(e). The
    National Planning Policy Framework (August 2026) indicates that the effective use
    of land 5 should not diminish healthy living conditions. Consequently, taking all
    matters raised into account my reasoning directs that the development does not
    accord with the development plan as a whole and that, in consequence, the appeal
    cannot succeed.



Andrew Boughton
INSPECTOR




3
  Images from the appellant indicate that Bedroom 5 of No.1 incorporates a kitchenette
4
  As the submitted plans show, in addition to the mechanical extract provided
5
  Heading to Section 12: Including the intensification of residential occupation such as the use as HMO


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                     3
