Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026 by E Clifford BA (Hons) MA
Decision by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6009469
7 Market Street, Stourbridge, Dudley DY8 1AB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr G Gora against the decision of Dudley Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is P25/1190.
•   The development proposed is ground floor shop alterations & conversion of first and second floors to
    4-bedroom class c4 (house in multiple occupation).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for ground floor shop
   alterations & conversion of first and second floors to 4-bedroom class c4 (house in
   multiple occupation) at 7 Market Street, Stourbridge, Dudley DY8 1AB in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref P25/1190, subject to the following
   conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing no’s: 4716-02C (proposed elevations and floor plans), 4716-03
              (window details), 4716-04 (shopfront door and window details)
     3)       The House in Multiple Occupation hereby approved shall not be occupied
              until details of secure and covered cycle storage have been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. These facilities shall be
              provided in accordance with the approved details prior to the first occupation
              of the House in Multiple Occupation and shall thereafter be retained and
              maintained for no other purpose, for the life of the development.
     4)       The House in Multiple Occupation shall not be first occupied until details of
              the bin stores have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The bin stores shall be provided in accordance with the
              approved details prior to the first occupation of the development and shall
              thereafter be retained and maintained for no other purpose for the life of the
              development.
     5)       The upper floors of the development hereby approved shall be occupied by
              no more than four permanent occupants at any one time.
     6)       The roller shutter shown on the approved plan shall be permanently fixed in
              the open position for the lifetime of the development in accordance with
              4716-02C. It shall not be closed or altered in any way that would prevent it



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009469


              from remaining open unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of
   the main issue in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have
   proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
4. Prior to the consideration of this appeal, the Council adopted the Dudley Local Plan
   (2026) (LP). The main parties have been invited to comment on the new policies
   considered relevant to this appeal and as such I have had regard to the most up to
   date development plan.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the risk of crime and
   disorder, and the fear of crime, to the quality of life and community cohesion of the
   surrounding area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal property is a three-storey building and currently occupied by a retail unit
   on the ground floor and for storage on the first and second floors. The mid-C19
   property has a traditional appearance, with stucco rendering and timber framed
   windows at first floor level with unusual glazing detail. The ground floor shop front is
   a mid-C20 alteration, as is the window to the top floor on the principal elevation.
   The building forms part of a continuous row of commercial premises, with active
   shop fronts at ground floor level.
7. It is located in a densely urban location in the town centre which has a
   predominantly commercial character. It also falls within the Stourbridge High Street
   Conservation Area and is located on the opposite side of the street from the Grade
   II listed Stourbridge Town Hall. The CA derives much of its significance from the
   survival of numerous C18 buildings of high architectural and historic value. Other
   listed buildings within the setting of the appeal site are 4 and 6 Market Street1 and
   the Clock Tower2 which is located at the junction of Market Street and High Street.
8. The Dudley Council Residential Design Guide (2023) (RDG) advises that the
   potential impact of crime, disorder, fear of crime and community cohesion will be
   taken into account when considering Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO’s), and
   that evidence from neighbours and the police will be taken into account.
9. I note that representation has been made by the Designing Out Crime Officer in
   reference to the crime statistics for the local area from the past 12 months and I
   note that the level of crime is higher than the national average. I have not however,

1
    NHLE 1076042
2
    1106310


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009469


     been presented with any compelling evidence that the crime level is related to the
     presence of HMO’s in the area, nor is there any evidence before me to lead me to
     conclude that the introduction of an HMO at this location would result in any
     increase in crime.
10. I accept that HMO’s can represent a transient nature of occupation. However, this
    is not always the case and, in any event, does not suggest that such transience
    would directly lead to criminality. The town centre nature of the location is
    characteristic of this type of mixed-use occupation and HMO’s are an important part
    of the make-up of housing. The appellant has provided data indicating that average
    current tenancies are just shy of under three years.
11. There have been concerns raised that the lack of parking provision at the appeal
    site would mean occupiers would be required to park in an alternative location. It
    has been suggested that this would result in a lack of natural surveillance, thereby
    increasing the potential risk of crime. However, it has not been indicated where
    future occupiers may choose to park their cars and the extent of natural
    surveillance in that location, or indeed, given the town centre location and proximity
    to public transport, if they would own personal vehicles.
12. There have been a number of third-party representations, which I note do not
    include any immediate neighbours or from properties elsewhere within the town
    centre, made regarding a perceived increase in fear of crime as a result of the
    proposed development. Again, there is little evidential basis for this, and
    assumptions cannot be made as to the character or nature of the future occupiers.
    It appears to be subjective conjecture that occupiers of a modest HMO would be
    associated with crime.
13. Overall, no evidence has been provided that demonstrates that the proposed
    development would result in an increase in local crime levels or provides a sound
    basis that the proposal would cause a material fear of crime. Accordingly, the
    evidence does not demonstrate that the proposal would erode the quality of life or
    community cohesion of the surrounding area. It therefore complies with Policy
    ENV3 of the Black Country Joint Core Strategy (2011) requiring high-quality design
    which has considered crime prevention measures. The proposal would also comply
    with LP Policies DLP39 and DLP17 which require all new development to
    functionally integrate with existing urban areas and to cause no detrimental impact
    on the living environment of occupiers within existing residential properties
Other Matters
14. The Council has not identified any concerns regarding the setting of any of the
    listed buildings mentioned above nor on the CA. However, under Section 66 and 72
    of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have a
    statutory duty to have special regard to the desirability of preserving the setting of
    the listed buildings and to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of conservation areas.
15. The Historic Environment Officer was satisfied that the external alterations
    proposed as part of the scheme would preserve the character and appearance of
    the CA; I have no reason to disagree with this conclusion. The proposed alterations
    are minimal, and the reinstatement of historic openings at the second floor would
    enhance the legibility of the building as a positive contribution to the CA.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009469


16. Likewise, the alterations not only preserve but enhance the setting of the
    surrounding listed buildings by improving the legibility of the historic core of
    Stourbridge.
17. There have been third party representations made regarding the following issues:
    noise pollution, parking, and character and appearance. However, the Council
    raised has not raised concerns on any of these matters and I have not been
    provided with any evidence which would direct me to a different conclusion.
Conditions
18. Other than the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to ensure that the
    development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans for the reason of
    certainty.
19. In the interests of ensuring that the future occupiers of the dwelling have suitable
    amenity space, I have added a condition relating to occupancy. I have similarly
    added conditions relating to the provision of cycle storage and bin storage in the
    interests of highway safety.
20. The Council have suggested a condition relating to the permanent fixing of the
    roller shutter. In order to maintain accessibility for future occupiers and to maintain
    the intended design, I agree that such a condition is necessary. However, the
    Council’s suggested condition that the scheme is built using only those materials
    proposed would be superfluous as this is adequately covered by the approved
    plans condition.
Planning Balance, Conclusion and Recommendation
21. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

E Clifford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
22. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
