Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 July 2026 by A Conteh
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009581
306A Harrow View, Harrow HA2 6QQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Ahmed Bachoo against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Harrow.
•   The application Ref is PL/0611/26.
•   The development proposed is described as installation of 1.8m high gate in rear boundary wall, hard
    standing to rear.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for installation of 1.8m
   high gate in rear boundary wall, hard standing to rear at 306A Harrow View,
   Harrow, HA2 6QQ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref PL/0611/26,
   and the plans submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: TQRQM26065174707117, DWG-001 Rev P02,
              DWG-002 Rev P02
     3)       The external surfaces of the gate hereby permitted shall be constructed of
              powder-coated metal in a dark grey or black finish.
     4)       Any alterations to, or making good of, brickwork shall be made using bricks
              matching the existing wall in colour, texture and bond.
     5)       The hard standing hereby permitted shall be constructed from porous or
              permeable material or provision shall be made to direct run-off from the hard
              surface to a permeable or porous area or surface within the curtilage of the
              dwellinghouse.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Applications for costs
3. An application for costs was made by Mr Ahmed Bachoo against Council of the
   London Borough of Harrow. This application is the subject of a separate decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009581


Preliminary Matters
4. In the header and decision above I have used the description from the Council’s
   decision notice as it describes the development more concisely.
5.     The most recent iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published in August 2026. With regard to the main issues of this
       appeal, the relevant policies are not materially different from the previous iteration
       of the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further
       consultation with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective
       cases would not be prejudiced.
Main Issues
6. The effect of the proposal on highway safety; the character and appearance of the
   terrace; and the living conditions for current and future occupants, with regard to
   the provision of private amenity space.
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal property is situated at the end of a short terrace comprising five units.
   Its partially paved rear garden is moderately-sized but the largest among the
   properties which make up the terrace. The site benefits from a slightly extended
   rear boundary wall compared with the others in the terrace. Additionally, a walkway
   is present along the side of the dwelling, providing additional outside space.
8. Maier Avenue is a two-way access road, directly bordering the rear of the terrace
   and containing ten marked residential parking spaces. Three of these are
   designated for visitors, and the remainder are allocated to specific properties.
   Although a multidirectional road, the width of Maier Avenue suggests that a vehicle
   would likely require both lanes when manoeuvring and parking.
9. A small grass verge lies perpendicular to the rear boundary wall of the appeal site,
   alongside the appeal property’s allocated parking space. In the area surrounding
   the site, traffic restrictions are noticeably in place in the form of controlled parking
   zones and bollards barring vehicular access between Duffy Avenue and Harrow
   View.
Highway safety
10. The proposed development would see the creation of an additional parking space
    in the rear garden of No 306A, with a gate opposite the row of existing parking
    spaces.
11. During my visit to the site, I observed good visibility from the rear boundary of the
    appeal property due to its end-terrace position. Therefore, vehicles exiting from the
    proposed parking space would have a clear view along Maier Avenue towards
    Duffy Avenue. Vehicles entering Maier Avenue would be able to see vehicles
    entering or exiting the proposed parking space at the far end of the terrace, and
    would have sufficient room to wait for the vehicle to finish manoeuvring. This is no
    different to waiting for cars to reverse out from the other existing parking spaces
    and is a normal situation in a shared parking area. Therefore, some negotiation
    would be needed but no more than already required between cars passing in this
    two-way street.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009581


12. The proposed parking space would be parallel to the boundary fence, requiring
    some manoeuvring to get into from the relatively narrow gateway proposed. The
    submitted swept path analysis is of little help to show how this would be achieved,
    as it shows the gate in different locations to what is proposed and does not show
    how a car would travel through the gateway. Given the limited width of the
    proposed gate and the acute angle of entry/exit proposed, this is likely to require
    some manoeuvring within the garden, however the garden is large enough to
    accommodate this to allow a vehicle to enter or exit safely.
13. There are two parking spaces directly opposite the location of the proposed
    development, one allocated to the appeal property and a visitor space. If the
    parking bays closest to the appeal site were empty, a vehicle would be able to
    enter and exit the proposed parking space in either forward gear or reverse gear by
    performing a turn manoeuvre using these spaces. If the parking bays closest to the
    appeal property were occupied, a vehicle would still be able to enter and exit in
    both forward and reverse gear, as the double width of Maier Avenue would
    accommodate a vehicle exiting and a turn manoeuvre. Consequently, in this
    situation, exiting is unlikely to require a vehicle to reverse the length of Maier
    Avenue.
14. The Council has raised concerns about potential for creating on-street parking if the
    proposal is not accessible. However, the appellant already has a second vehicle
    and parks on street, therefore even if the proposed parking space was not used, it
    would not change the existing situation.
15. As a result, the proposal would not prejudice highway safety and would therefore
    accord with Policy T4 of the London Plan 2021 and Policy M2 of the London
    Borough of Harrow Local Plan 2021 – 2041. There would be no conflict with
    Framework Policy TR6 which seeks to avoid unacceptable impacts on highway
    safety.
Character and appearance
16. The rear façade of the terrace is consistent in appearance and form, with brick wall
    boundaries and dark coloured single pedestrian doors onto Maier Avenue. The
    appeal property differs slightly from other units within the terrace as a result of its
    extended wall and corner position. The development proposes use of brick to
    match the existing when making good around the new opening.
17. While the proposed sliding gate would be the first of its nature within the terrace
    and immediate area, its lateral direction means the development would not extend
    past its existing rear building line. The height and footprint of the gate would create
    a similar visual impact to that of the existing brick wall boundary. The proposed
    dark coloured powder coated metal gate design would complement the appearance
    of pedestrian doors throughout the terrace and not cause the appeal property to
    stand out in the terrace any more than it already does. It would therefore respond
    appropriately to local context.
18. The Council notes the possibility of establishing an undesirable precedent.
    Planning appeals are assessed on their merits and seeing as the specific facts of
    this case do not apply to adjoining properties, this proposal does not justify similar
    alterations within the terrace.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009581


19. In this case, the proposed development would be a sympathetic and harmonious
    addition to the existing street scene, and would not detract from the appearance of
    the host dwelling and wider terrace. As a result, the proposal would not harm the
    character and appearance of the terrace.
20. Therefore, the proposal would comply with Policy D3 of the London Plan 2021 and
    Policy GR1 of the Local Plan which support proposals that respond appropriately to
    the local context of existing design characteristics. There would be no conflict with
    the design policies of the Framework.
Amenity space
21. The proposed introduction of hardstanding in the rear garden will mean an increase
    of the paved surface area and replacement of the existing astroturf material. On
    site, I observed the garden area in use and functioning as an outdoor amenity area.
    Like the existing paving, the proposed permeable paving would not hinder the use
    of the garden but allow the space to function both as a parking space and amenity
    area.
22. Amenity space would be significantly reduced during the hours that a vehicle is
    parked within the proposed area. However, there would be sufficient external space
    for day-to-day activities and garden storage, particularly given the availability of the
    walkway to the side. The nature of the development also affords occupiers the
    ability to reverse it and cease to use the garden for parking if necessary in the
    future. Consequently, the proposed development would not harm the living
    conditions of current and future occupants, with regard to the provision of private
    amenity space.
23. Therefore, the proposal would accord with Policy D3 of the London Plan 2021 and
    Policy GR1 of the Local Plan which safeguard the residential amenity for existing
    and future occupiers.
Conditions
24. Conditions relating to time limits on commencement and carrying out development
    in accordance with plans are necessary in the interest of certainty.
25. The appeal site is in a location potentially at risk of surface water flooding, therefore
    it is important that the hard surface provided for parking is permeable or drains
    within the site. Given the small scale of this development the level of detail required
    in the Council’s suggested condition is unduly onerous and not necessary or
    reasonable. Nor has it been demonstrated why such details would be needed prior
    to commencement, given that the need for appropriate drainage derives only from
    the hard surface, not the proposed gate. Therefore, I have reworded the condition
    to meet the relevant tests for conditions.
26. The appellant has made mention of materials that will be used in the proposed
    development, however these are not explicitly stated on the plans submitted. As a
    result, conditions regarding the materials used in development are necessary in the
    interest of safeguarding the character and appearance of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009581


Conclusion and Recommendation
27. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed subject to conditions

A Conteh
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
28. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed subject to the conditions listed above.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
