Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 July 2026
by D Marley BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009011
The Geldings, Bouts Lane, Holberrow Green, Inkberrow, Worcestershire B96 6JX
          The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
          The appeal is made by Matt Pendleton against the decision of Wychavon District Council.
          The application Ref is W/26/00048/FUL.
          The development proposed is development of a live/work unit.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    At appeal stage, a revised block plan was submitted showing altered visibility
      splays. This did not result in a substantive change to the proposals considered at
      application stage and the Council and interested parties have had the opportunity
      to comment on the revised plan during the course of the appeal. No injustice would
      be caused by my having regard to this revised plan as part of the appeal, and I
      have done so in my decision.
3.    On the evidence before me, planning permission was previously granted on
      appeal for a live/work unit at the site, under a previous version of the development
      plan (the previous appeal proposal). There is no dispute between the main parties
      that this comprises a genuine fallback position with a real prospect of being carried
      out, and I have no reason to disagree. I shall return to this matter in my decision.
4.    Following submission of the appeal, a new National Planning Policy Framework
      (the ‘Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given
      an opportunity to comment on any implications for the appeal, and I have taken
      their responses into account in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
5.    The main issues are:
               the effect of the proposal on highway safety;
               whether the proposal would be suitably located, with particular regard to
                relevant development plan policies concerning the location of development;
               whether future occupiers of the proposed development would have
                reasonable access to facilities and services;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009011


               whether the proposal would make adequate provision for Biodiversity Net
                Gain; and
               whether the proposal would be acceptable in terms of drainage.
Reasons
Highway safety
6.    The site is adjacent to the B4092. The speed limit in proximity to the site is 40mph,
      although changes to 60mph nearby. There are some curves in the road along the
      B4092, particularly when looking in the direction of Mile Post Lane. At my site visit,
      there was regular vehicular traffic on the road.
7.    A new access would be formed from the site to serve the proposed live/work unit,
      and the proposal would also include a new agricultural access. The submitted
      plans identify that a minimum visibility of 60m could be achieved in both directions
      at both agricultural and live/work accesses. The submitted plans include 4 parking
      spaces, for which dimensions are identified.
8.    Given the well-used nature of the road and speed limit both at the proposed
      access points and nearby, it would be necessary to secure the provision of a
      visibility splay such that adequate visibility is provided both for approaching
      vehicles and vehicles seeking to exit the site. However, whilst it may be possible to
      achieve a visibility splay of 60m from the site, no substantive assessment is before
      me to show whether this distance is suitable for the speed limit of the road or the
      recorded speeds of approaching traffic. Nor is there evidence to show whether the
      nearby change in speed limit affects the speed of approaching traffic and therefore
      the length of visibility splays required. I am not therefore satisfied that the distance
      identified by the appellant would be safe nor, given the road layout, is evidence
      before me to demonstrate that additional visibility distances could be achieved in
      any event.
9.    In the absence of adequate visibility splays, vehicles on the B4092 would have
      insufficient time to react to vehicles seeking to exit the appeal site, as would
      vehicles leaving the site have for approaching vehicles. This would increase the
      potential for conflict between exiting and approaching vehicles, which would be
      harmful to highway safety.
10. A condition has been suggested, which would require details of the visibility splays
    to be provided at the site access to be submitted to and approved prior to the
    commencement of development, in the interests of highway safety. However, as I
    have not concluded that adequate visibility could be achieved at the site, imposing
    a condition that could not be satisfied would not be reasonable, nor would this
    mitigate the harm identified.
11. Whilst the site has existing planning permission for a live/work unit, on the
    evidence before me this permitted scheme would not include direct access to the
    B4092. As such, the previous appeal proposal was assessed against materially
    different highway circumstances and as such does not alter my conclusions on this
    main issue.
12. An altered access may reduce disturbance for surrounding dwellings, and there
    may be space for cycle storage onsite. As dimensions have been identified for the
    parking spaces, I have no reason to conclude that the site could not provide the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009011


       number of spaces proposed, and no specific harm to highway safety has been
       identified from providing four spaces. In addition, no specific evidence has been
       submitted to show that the access would be of insufficient width. However, these
       points do not mitigate the harm identified.
13. Although the appellant states that a revised paddock access could reduce the
    potential for conflict, there is no substantive evidence before me to suggest the
    current or previously permitted arrangements are inadequate. This matter does not
    lead me to an alternative conclusion on this issue.
14. I am not satisfied that a safe and suitable means of access to the site can be
    achieved, and a condition would not mitigate this harm. Given this, alongside my
    reasoning above, the proposal would have a harmful effect on highway safety. The
    proposal would conflict with Policy SWDPR 06 of the South Worcestershire
    Development Plan Review (2026) (the ‘Local Plan’). Amongst other matters, this
    requires proposals to avoid unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Whether a suitable location
15. The site is, on the evidence before me, located some distance from a settlement
    defined in the Local Plan. The proposal would introduce a live/work unit at the site.
16. Policy SWDPR 15 of the Local Plan identifies that proposals for live/work
    accommodation can be permitted subject to certain criteria which, of relevance to
    the appeal, include being located within or adjacent to a Category 1, 2 or 3 village
    as defined within the Local Plan, and for the work element of the proposal to relate
    to an existing, established or economically viable business that has been trading
    for at least 3 years.
17. The site is not located within or adjacent to a Category 1, 2 or 3 village as defined
    within the Local Plan, and in policy terms is located in the open countryside. Whilst
    the Council has sought financial information such as a forward business plan and
    trading details for the preceding three years or more, no substantive evidence has
    been presented to suggest that the work element of the proposal relates to an
    existing, established or economically viable business that has been trading for at
    least 3 years.
18. The Inspector considering the previous appeal proposal at the site did not find
    conflict with the relevant criterion for live/work units. However, that appeal was
    considered under the previous development plan. On the evidence before me, the
    relevant policy wording of that plan was materially different to the current adopted
    plan. As such, this matter does not lead me to an alternative conclusion on this
    main issue.
19. Therefore, there would be a conflict between the proposal and the identified
    criterion in Policy SWDPR 15 of the Local Plan. Policy SWDPR 03 of the Local
    Plan identifies that development in the open countryside will be strictly controlled
    subject to other policies in the plan, and as I have been directed to no alternative
    policy with which the proposal would comply, the proposal would also conflict with
    this policy.
20. Whilst the ridge height of the residential element is higher than that of the work
    element, and the residential element has a different footprint, the proposal is
    nevertheless for a single building whose physical scale and form would be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009011


       comparable with its rural surroundings. In this regard, it is noteworthy that Part Ciii
       to Local Plan Policy SWDPR 15 does not require the proposal to be contained
       within a single ‘cohesive’ building.
21. Equally, whilst reference is made to a lack of separate kitchen facilities, the plans
    show a kitchen/diner being provided for the live element of the proposal and a
    canteen for the work element. In addition, matters related to the specific use class
    and provision of internet could be satisfactorily managed by condition.
    Nevertheless, this does not result in the proposal complying with Policy SWDPR
    15 of the Local Plan, read as a whole.
22. Therefore, the proposal would not be suitably located, with particular regard to
    relevant development plan policies concerning the location of development. The
    proposal would conflict with Policies SWDPR 03 and SWDPR 15 of the Local Plan.
    Amongst other matters, these policies require proposals for live/work units to be
    located within or adjacent to identified settlements, for the proposal to relate to an
    existing, established or economically viable business that has been trading for at
    least 3 years, and that otherwise development in the open countryside should be
    strictly controlled subject to other policies in the plan.
Access to facilities and services
23. The appeal site is some distance from a nearby settlement, and my attention has
    not been directed to facilities and services in immediate proximity to the site. There
    is also limited footway and streetlight provision nearby.
24. The proposal would entail the erection of a live/work unit at the site, and the
    appellant’s submission identifies that there is sufficient space onsite to provide
    cycle storage. The submitted plans show that one bedroom would be provided.
25. Policy SWDPR 06 of the Local Plan identifies that proposal should, taking account
    their nature and location, demonstrate that the proposed layout and design will
    minimise the need to travel by car, and that proposals should provide infrastructure
    to facilitate active travel.
26. Given the distance from the site to nearby settlements of any significant size and
    lack of footway and streetlights, future users of the site would be likely to be reliant
    to some degree on the private car to access retail and social opportunities.
    However, by its nature the proposal is for a live/work unit, and given that only one-
    bedroom would be provided within the residential element of the proposal it is
    likely that future occupiers of the site would predominantly live and work in the
    same space, which would significantly limit trips for employment purposes.
27. Equally, given the previous appeal proposal for a live/work unit of similar scale to
    the appeal proposal, the current proposal would not be likely to result in additional
    vehicular trips to access nearby facilities and services when compared to the
    permitted situation. In addition, whilst a new development plan has been adopted,
    no specific evidence has been submitted to demonstrate that the revised policy
    wording is materially different on this matter to that considered by an Inspector
    when a previous appeal at the site was allowed.
28. In the specific circumstances of this case, and acknowledging that detailed
    information about the type of work to be undertaken at the site has not been



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009011


       submitted, I am satisfied that, taking into account both the nature and location of
       the proposal, it would minimise the need to travel by car.
29. Given the potential for cycle infrastructure to be provided, which could be secured
    by condition, I am also satisfied that the proposal would provide infrastructure to
    facilitate active travel, were this to be desired by future occupiers.
30. Therefore, the proposal would have reasonable access to facilities and services.
    The proposal would comply with the relevant provisions of Policy SWDPR 06 of
    the Local Plan, insofar as this requires proposals to, taking account of their nature
    and location, minimise the need to travel by car, and provide infrastructure to
    facilitate active travel.
Biodiversity net gain
31. Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the ‘Act’) identifies that,
    subject to some exceptions, every grant of planning permission is deemed to have
    been granted subject to the condition that the biodiversity gain objective is met (the
    ‘biodiversity gain condition’). This objective is for development to deliver at least a
    10% increase in biodiversity value relative to the pre-development biodiversity
    value of the onsite habitat. The statutory framework involves the discharge of the
    biodiversity gain condition following the grant of planning permission, and the
    determination of the Biodiversity Gain Plan (‘BGP’) under this condition is the
    mechanism to confirm whether the development meets the biodiversity gain
    objective.
32. The site is a paddock identified as being comprised of modified grassland and
    hedgerow. The appeal proposal would result in the erection of a building and
    sealed surfaces. The submitted Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (2026) (the
    ‘PEA’) and the Small Sites Metric (2026) identify that the proposal would result in a
    net loss to biodiversity. This would amount to -15.81% in area habitat units and -
    11.55% in hedgerow units. The PEA identifies that plans would need to be
    modified to do all that is possible to achieve biodiversity improvements onsite, and
    if it was not possible to reach the statutory requirement this would require offsite
    units to be purchased via a third-party. The PEA does not identify nearby third-
    party providers, nor how such units would be secured.
33. Planning Practice Guidance (the ‘PPG’) indicates that except in certain
    circumstances it would generally be inappropriate to refuse an application on the
    grounds that the biodiversity gain objective would not be met. Planning permission
    cannot begin until a BGP has been approved and the BGP should include the pre-
    and post-development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat, any registered
    offsite biodiversity gain and any biodiversity credits purchased for the
    development, as per paragraph 14 of Schedule 7A of the Act. Matters related to
    the extent and location of offsite biodiversity gains are therefore to be resolved
    through the discharge of the biodiversity gain condition.
34. Given this, whilst it is likely that off-site units would be required, and the submitted
    information does not include details as to nearby providers, these are matters to
    be resolved by submission of a BGP following any grant of planning permission.
    There is no substantive evidence before me that the proposal could not achieve an
    appropriate balance in terms of onsite gains, offsite gains and statutory credits
    where applicable, and given the nature and extent of the proposal the extent of
    biodiversity gains would not be significant in the context of the PPG.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009011


35. Consequently, I have no reason to doubt that matters related to biodiversity net
    gain could not be satisfactorily managed by condition. Therefore, the proposal
    would make adequate provision for biodiversity net gain and would comply with
    Policies SWDPR 29 and SWDPR 30 of the Local Plan. Amongst other matters,
    these policies require proposals to deliver compensatory provision through
    biodiversity net gain mechanisms where appropriate, in accordance with the
    statutory minimum.
Drainage
36. The site is a paddock, and the proposal would result in the erection of a live/work
    unit and hardstanding. A Water Management Proposal (the ‘WMP’) was submitted
    which identifies that surface water run-off would be directed to a nearby stream,
    though limited other details have been provided. I have not been directed to any
    evidence to suggest that the site is at risk of flooding from any source.
37. Policy SWDPR 38 of the Local Plan identifies that development proposals should
    provide a surface water drainage strategy, and incorporate a sustainable drainage
    system. Policy SWDPR 39 of the Local Plan identifies that proposals should
    demonstrate that site drainage and run off will be managed in a sustainable and
    co-ordinated way, that surface water run-off should be managed through a
    sustainable drainage system and considered at the earliest stage.
38. Whilst limited information has been submitted with regards surface water
    management, the submitted WMP nevertheless identifies a drainage solution,
    which has been considered at application stage. Whilst concerns have been raised
    as to the extent of details submitted, no specific concerns have been raised that
    surface water drainage in the manner proposed in the WMP would not be viable.
    Nor has it been suggested that such an approach would result in an increase in
    flood risk elsewhere.
39. Therefore, whilst the proposal would result in the insertion of hardstanding and
    built development, which would be likely to influence surface water run-off, given
    the limited scale and nature of the scheme alongside the absence of identified
    flood risk at the site itself, the evidence before me does not indicate that the site
    could not be adequately drained. As such, this matter could have been
    satisfactorily dealt with by condition requiring full details of a surface water
    drainage strategy to be submitted in line with the requirements of the development
    plan. In the absence of harm being identified that would result from the proposal,
    such a condition could also have secured further details with regards the four
    pillars of sustainable drainage systems, which was not set out in substantive detail
    in the WMP.
40. Therefore, subject to conditions, the proposal would be acceptable in terms of
    drainage. The proposal would therefore comply with Policies SWDPR 38 and
    SWDPR 39 of the Local Plan, which require proposals to provide a surface water
    drainage strategy, and manage run-off through a sustainable drainage system. For
    the same reasons, and subject to conditions, I find no conflict with Policies CC3,
    F7, F8 or Annex C of the Framework.
Other Considerations and Planning Balance
41. Whilst the proposal would have reasonable access to facilities and services, would
    make adequate provision for biodiversity net gain, and would be acceptable in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009011


       terms of drainage, I have found that it would have a harmful effect on highway
       safety and would not be suitably located with regard to development plan policies
       relating to the location of live/work development. Consequently, the proposal
       conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole.
42. Policy S3 of the Framework requires decision-makers to apply a presumption in
    favour of sustainable development. As the site lies outside a settlement, the
    relevant policy is Policy S5, which sets out the approach to determining
    development outside settlements. Policy S5 identifies the forms of development
    outside settlements that should be approved in principle. These include
    development for rural businesses and services where a location outside a
    settlement is shown to be necessary.
43. The proposal would include provision for a rural business or service. However, no
    substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that the countryside
    location is necessary for its operation. Consequently, and even acknowledging the
    presence of the fallback position, I am not satisfied that the proposal falls within
    any of the categories identified by Policy S5. In these circumstances, Policy S5
    indicates that permission should only be granted in exceptional circumstances
    where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse
    effects.
44. The existing planning permission is a material consideration that attracts
    significant weight in favour of the proposal with regard to the location of the
    development. The proposal would also provide a live/work unit and would generate
    economic activity during construction and occupation and additional planting. It
    could also include biodiversity enhancement in accordance with Policy N2 of the
    Framework. These matters weigh in favour of the proposal. However, having
    regard to the modest scale of the development, and given that similar benefits
    could arise from the implementation of the fallback permission, overall, I afford
    these benefits limited weight.
45. I have also taken account of the fact that the proposal would not be expected to
    generate significant vehicular movements, would retain some existing planting,
    would be well designed, would not materially harm the wider landscape, would
    provide cycle storage, and that matters relating to drainage can be made
    acceptable. These matters indicate that the proposal would be acceptable in those
    respects. However, they represent compliance with planning policy requirements
    rather than benefits of the scheme and therefore attract neutral weight.
46. Reference has been made to permission in principle granted on a nearby site.
    However, very limited information has been provided regarding the circumstances
    of that decision and, in any event, the nature of development permitted differs from
    that proposed here. Consequently, I afford that decision very little weight.
47. Reference has also been made to Policy E1. However, this is a plan-making
    policy, and the Framework directs that plan-making policies should not be used in
    the determination of development proposals. It has therefore not been
    determinative in my decision.
48. Turning to the adverse effects of the proposal, I have found that it would result in
    an unacceptable impact on highway safety. Policy TR6 of the Framework states
    that development proposals should be refused where they would have such an
    impact. I therefore afford this harm very substantial weight in the planning balance.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009011


       In addition, the proposal would not be suitably located outside a settlement having
       regard to the local plan strategy for the location of development and objectives of
       Policy S5 of the Framework. However, given the fallback permission, I attach only
       limited weight to that particular harm.
49. The existing planning permission is a material consideration that attracts
    significant weight in favour of the proposal, particularly in relation to the principle of
    development at the site and its location. Nevertheless, even taking account of the
    fallback position which may allow for a live/work unit to be constructed under a
    previous planning permission, I find that the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects identified, most notably the
    unacceptable impact on highway safety. Consequently, exceptional circumstances
    under Policy S5 of the Framework do not apply, the proposal would conflict with
    the development plan and relevant national policy, and the material considerations
    before me do not indicate that planning permission should be granted.
Conclusion
50. The proposal would conflict with the development plan when read as a whole and
    the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that a
    decision should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, for the
    reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.

D Marley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
