Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by A Knight BA PG Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009588
Ashbridge House, 47 Necton Road, Little Dunham, Norfolk PE32 2DN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Tilbrook against the decision of Breckland Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/2026/0265/FMIN.
•    The development proposed is new dwelling and associated garage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. The main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
       any implications for the appeal, and I have taken their responses into account in
       reaching my decision.
3.     The site address and description of proposed development in the banner heading
       above are taken from the planning application form. I note that the site address on
       the appeal form is given as “Land at 47 Ashbridge House, Necton Road…” and on
       the Planning, Design, and Access Statement as “Land to the South of 47 Necton
       Road...”. The location and extent of the site is clear on the submitted drawings.
4.     I also note that the proposal is described as “1No dwelling with rear first floor Juliet
       balcony & associated garage” on the decision notice and appeal form. Again, the
       precise nature of the proposal is clear from the submitted plans.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
          •    whether the appeal site would be a suitable location for the proposed
               development having regard to the Breckland Local Plan (2023) (the Local
               Plan);
          •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
               the area; and
          •    the effect of the proposed development on habitats sites.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009588


Reasons
Location
6.     The appeal site is a portion of open land immediately south of 47 Necton Road
       (No47), which is the southernmost dwelling on the eastern side of the road.
       Beyond the site to the south and east are open fields. The Council defines Little
       Dunham as a village without a settlement boundary, which places the site in the
       countryside for planning policy purposes.
7.     The effect of Local Plan Policies GEN 01, GEN 03, and GEN 05 is that the district
       has a defined settlement hierarchy, and that new housing outside of settlement
       boundaries is restricted to proposals which comply with relevant development plan
       policies. These include Policy HOU 05 which addresses development in smaller
       villages and hamlets outside of defined settlement boundaries and, as such, is
       applicable to the appeal site.
8.     Compliance with Policy HOU 05 requires, amongst other things, the proposal to
       comprise the sensitive infilling and rounding off of a cluster of dwellings. The
       operative terms are defined in the supporting text which, in using the word ‘or’
       rather than ‘and’ suggests that a proposal may be acceptable if it satisfies one of
       the two terms. The appeal proposal cannot be an “infill” given the position of the
       site as described above. I must therefore consider whether it amounts to “rounding
       off”.
9.     With further reference to the supporting text, the perimeter of the site is not built up
       already but, rather, is enclosed by a hedge. Furthermore, the proposal would
       represent an outward expansion of the village in that it would introduce built form
       beyond the southern edge of No47.
10. Whilst referring to the proposal as “a logical rounding off” for character and
    appearance purposes, the appellant makes no argument that the proposal
    complies with Policy HOU 05 in that respect, and does not directly counter the
    assessment provided by the Council on this point.
11. Based on all of these factors I see no reason to find that the proposal amounts to
    “rounding off” for the purposes of Policy HOU 05. It therefore does not have the
    support of that policy nor, by extension, of the other strategic, spatial policies listed
    above. The appeal site would not be a suitable location for the proposed
    development having regard to the Local Plan.
Character and appearance
12. In design terms, the proposed dwelling would be directly comparable to the two
    existing houses found just north of the site. Both are fairly typical of surrounding
    development, particularly the houses directly opposite the site on the western side
    of the road. The proposed dwelling would not in itself, therefore, be out of keeping
    with those of the surrounding settlement.
13. I do not find the site to have any significant role as a visual buffer or transitional
    feature between No47 to the north and the agricultural fields to the south; The site
    has no particular qualities in that respect save for its openness and, from the road,
    it is difficult to make out any distinction between the site and the fields. Rather, one
    can simply see that No47 is the last house on that side of the street.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009588


14. Given the above, I do not find that the erection of the proposed dwelling would
    result in a harmfully abrupt or incongruous termination of built form; Rather, the
    new dwelling would come to mark the edge of built development in much the same
    way as No47 does at present, albeit that edge would move further south.
15. However, notwithstanding its being enclosed and in non-agricultural use, the site is
    nevertheless open, green, and undeveloped. Those are its fundamental
    characteristics and, as such, it has far more in common with the fields beyond it
    than with the residential plots alongside it. As a result, it is the dwelling at No47
    that serves to mark the established edge of the settlement in that direction, and
    unmistakably so.
16. The creation of the proposed dwelling, which would be directly visible from the
    road and from neighbouring land, would comprise a prominent expansion to the
    built form of the settlement, harmfully eroding the openness of the countryside
    which both surrounds it and provides its beneficial rural setting. Indeed, the
    development would be readily perceived as an intrusion into that open countryside.
17. The proposed development would harm the character and appearance of the area,
    contrary to Local Plan Policies GEN 02, COM 01 and ENV 05 where they require
    development to contribute to the distinctive character and amenity of a local area
    and enhance the local environment by recognising the intrinsic character and
    beauty of the countryside.
Habitats sites
18. The Norfolk Green Infrastructure and Recreational impact Avoidance and
    Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS) has identified that increased levels of residential
    development would have a Likely Significant Effect (LSE) on Habitats sites
    (European designated sites) across the County.
19. As the proposed development would lead to an increase in residential units, it is
    subject to a per-dwelling tariff to fund mitigation measures for additional
    recreational impacts on the pertinent Habitats sites. This, as per the GIRAMS,
    amounts to a payment of some £304. Whilst the appellant does not contest this, he
    argues that it could be secured as a post-permission matter.
20. The planning appeals procedural guide states that the appellant must ensure an
    executed and certified copy of any pertinent planning obligation is supplied at the
    time of making their appeal. There is, however, no legal agreement in place to
    secure the payment.
21. I have considered whether a negatively worded condition could be used. However,
    Policy DM6 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) states
    that conditions should not be used to require payments of money.
22. In the absence of certainty that the payment would be secured, and in adopting a
    precautionary approach, I am unable to rule out significant harm to the integrity of
    the Habitats sites. The appeal scheme would conflict with the Habitats Regulations
    and with Policy N6 of the Framework, which requires that development proposals
    affecting Habitats sites should be refused unless an appropriate assessment has
    concluded that the proposal will not adversely affect the integrity of the site (either
    individually or in combination with other developments). For the same reasons it
    also conflicts with Local Plan Policy ENV02.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009588


Planning Balance
23. I am required to apply either Framework Policy S4 or S5, depending on whether
    the development proposal is within or outside of a settlement. The term
    ‘settlement’ is defined as including villages. As such, I take Little Dunham to be a
    settlement for the purposes of the Framework. That said, and as I have described
    above, the appeal site is beyond the edge of the existing built form of the village.
    For that reason, I find the site to be outside of a settlement.
24. The appellant contends that the appeal scheme benefits from the support of
    Framework Policy S5(1)(j). The Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of
    housing land; the submissions indicate the most recent figure to be 2.82 years.
    This constitutes an evidenced unmet need.
25. The proposed dwelling would broadly continue the existing, established pattern of
    development. It would share the existing access to No47 in a straightforward
    arrangement to which neither the Highway Authority nor the Council object, subject
    to conditions. Overall, I see no reason to find that the appeal scheme would be
    anything other than physically well-related to Little Dunham. I have no argument
    before me that the appeal scheme is of a scale which could not be accommodated
    taking into account the existing or proposed availability of infrastructure.
26. The above leads me to conclude that the scheme has the support of Framework
    Policy S5(1)(j) and so the appeal should be allowed unless, as set out in S5(1), the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
27. The scheme would result in one new dwelling towards the significant shortfall
    identified above. Framework Policy HO7 requires me to give substantial weight to
    such a benefit.
28. However, as I have set out above, Framework Policy N6 requires that
    development proposals affecting Habitats sites should be refused unless an
    appropriate assessment has concluded that the proposal will not adversely affect
    their integrity, which is not the case in this instance.
29. Furthermore, Framework Policy DP3 requires proposals to respond to their context
    (the history, character and features of their site and its setting) so that they
    integrate with and enhance their surroundings. It also states that proposals should
    be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with that requirement.
30. I have found the appeal scheme would not integrate with and enhance its
    surroundings. Whilst I note the appellant’s argument that “the degree of landscape
    and visual harm is very limited” he provides no clear justification for that harm.
31. Framework Policies N6 and DP3 both give a clear directive to refuse the proposal.
    To my mind this indicates that the benefits of allowing the scheme, even once I
    attribute substantial weight to them, would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009588


Conclusion
32. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it.
33. The appeal is dismissed.

A Knight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
