Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009909
Bouldershaw Cottage, Sallyfield Lane, Stanton, Staffordshire DE6 2DD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. Terry Lister against the decision of East Staffordshire Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is P/2025/01134.
•   The development proposed is for the raising of the ridge height of the existing roof, erection of a two
    storey rear extension (principal elevation), single storey front infill extension and first floor front
    extension and the installation of solar panels and roof lights.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Applications for Costs
3. An application for an award of costs was made by Mr. Terry Lister against the
   decision of East Staffordshire Borough Council. This application is the subject of a
   separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
4. A Revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. There have been some layout and subsequent paragraph
   numbering changes, as well as minor relevant alterations to the ways in which
   heritage matters are considered. I am however satisfied that, having reviewed the
   relevant changes, they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main
   issue or indeed the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since they would not
   therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
5. An attached greenhouse is present at the rear but is not shown on the existing
   plan. On which, for the avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeal.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve or enhance the character
   or appearance of the Stanton Conservation Area (CA).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009909


Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal relates to a two storey detached dwelling, with existing single storey
   front and rear projections. The appellant’s Heritage Statement indicates that it
   existed by 1879 and had likely housed agricultural labourers or workers involved in
   the various trades and industries recorded in the village during the 19th century. It
   therefore has historic significance through its long established presence and former
   function. Whilst the building may have originated as four cottages and has
   undergone alterations and extensions, its 19th century origins remain readily
   discernible. This is in its original L-shaped plan, its robust vernacular design,
   modestly sized openings, locally sourced stone finish and simple pitched roof.
   These characteristics contribute positively to its historic and architectural interest
   which clearly reflect its agrarian origins.
8. The appeal site is located on Sallyfield Lane at the edge of the CA and forms part
   of a small, but notable cluster of historic cottage and farm buildings. This group
   displays a strong degree of coherence through their similar architecture, functional
   forms, consistent use of traditional materials and their haphazard building lines
   close to the lane's edge. The surrounding open fields further reinforce that
   functional relationship between these former agricultural structures and the wider
   rural landscape.
9. Together, they create a sense of arrival into the CA, before entering the heart of
   Stanton and their group value is crucial to establishing the developing character of
   the village historically. Therefore, both individually and as part of this group, the
   appeal property makes a positive contribution to the rural character and
   appearance of the area and to the historic and architectural significance of the CA,
   having regard to Policy HE9 of the Framework.
10. The Stanton Conservation Area Character Appraisal 2007 (SCACA) also explains
    that farms, such as the Grade II listed Boldershaw Farmhouse within the centre,
    are linked to fields and orchards further out at the village’s eastern edge. This
    “scatternet” of ownership is common to a number of holdings in Stanton, where
    some two storey older buildings appear to radiate informally from the centre. As
    such, the Council’s Conservation Officer suggests the appeal property is likely to
    have originated as a building associated with the land ownership of Boldershaw
    Farmhouse.
11. The main parties dispute as to whether the appeal property constitutes a Non-
    Designated Heritage Asset (NDHA), as it is not recorded on any local list, nor is it
    identified as a notable building in the SCACA. Planning Practice Guidance details
    that NDHAs are buildings that have a degree of heritage significance meriting
    consideration in planning decisions, but which do not meet the criteria for
    designated heritage assets. Irrespective of how they are identified, it is important
    that the decisions to identify NDHAs are based on sound evidence.
12. The appeal property has significance through its historic interest, its aesthetic merit
    and its group value associated with the adjacent agricultural structures. Policy HE7
    of the Framework explains that, amongst other things, where a development
    proposal would harm the significance of a NDHA, this should be weighed against
    the benefits of the proposal and a balanced judgement made, having regard to the
    scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the NDHA. A balanced judgement



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009909


     on any harm or loss of anything of specific, characterful or of value in some way is
     arguably part of a planning decision in any event.
13. The proposed rear extension would be two storeys, spanning across the full width
    of the rear elevation and almost doubling the footprint of the existing cottage. It
    would therefore result in a bulky, excessively large and dominant addition that
    would be disproportionate to the host dwelling. Its massing would be broken up by
    three gables, each with its own pitched roof, with the central gable projecting further
    forward. Such gabled two storey projections are present within the CA. However,
    their side by side arrangement across the full rear elevation and matching ridge
    heights would nevertheless read as a substantial and conspicuous structure.
14. The ridge height increase would be modest, matching that of the adjacent property.
    The proposed front extensions would also, when viewed individually, appear
    subordinate to the host dwelling. However, when considered cumulatively, the
    whole appeal scheme would significantly increase the overall size, scale and
    massing of the host dwelling, to such an extent that it would appear as an entirely
    new and noticeably larger building.
15. The porch would also introduce modern, glazed front openings that would contrast
    unacceptably with the traditional qualities of the cottage. The same can be said of
    the solar panels and rooflights, albeit to a lesser degree due to their placement at
    roof level and flat profile. Moreover, the works to the front would be clearly visible
    from Sallyfield Lane, where side views of the proposed rear extension would be
    possible, due to the wide side access and the appeal property’s prominent siting.
    The use of matching finishes to the wall and roof would respond to the host
    dwelling and surrounding area’s material palette, but these design details would not
    override the identified harm.
16. As a result, the scale and design of the extensions would largely conceal and
    transform the modest and unassuming cottage into a grand and imposing building.
    It would, therefore, fundamentally erode the historic character of the host dwelling
    and detract from the ability to appreciate its significance as part of a cohesive rural
    and agrarian group. Consequently, the proposal would unacceptably undermine the
    host dwelling’s architectural and historic interest and reduce the valuable
    contribution it makes to the character and appearance of the CA.
17. A Certificate of Lawfulness (Ref. P/2024/00761) was granted in January 2025. No
    detailed plans have been submitted, but indicative outlines are shown on the
    existing drawings, and their descriptions provided. They include a single storey
    extension and a central glazed porch to the front elevation, the addition of multiple
    rooflights and new openings, and the erection of a pitched roof over the existing
    front lean-tos. The appellant states that the development for these has commenced
    through the digging of foundations and preparatory works, which I saw on my site
    visit. Therefore, they appear to have more than a theoretical prospect of coming
    forwards as an intention to implement a fallback scheme.
18. However, the appeal proposal is of a fundamentally different development of a
    larger scale, involving both front and rear extensions and a far greater alteration to
    its character and appearance. By contrast, the fallback scheme contains fewer
    works. It relates to extensions and roof alterations below the eaves line, together
    with the insertion of new windows and rooflights, which would still retain legibility of
    the host dwelling’s form. Even if the fallback scheme were to be implemented,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009909


     though it would result in some design harm, it would fall considerably short of that
     which would arise as a result of the appeal scheme. Consequently, the existence of
     the fallback position does not justify the proposed development, and I therefore
     attach only limited weight to it.
19. I have taken into account the appellant’s Heritage Statement submitted with the
    application. However, for the above reasons, I find that its assessment does not
    fully justify the harmful impacts of the proposed development. I have not been
    provided with full details of the other cited approvals within the CA. As such, I
    cannot be sure that they represent a sufficiently compelling comparison to the
    appeal scheme, such that I would change my findings.
20. Nevertheless, they appear to relate to new build dwellings, a holiday let, barn
    conversions, a garage, were for extensions of a different design, scale, and
    appearance, related to a different host dwelling architecture, or are located within a
    different site context.
21. The cited Buildings 11, 12 and 13 are in close proximity and form part of the same
    group with the appeal site. However, Building 11 (Spring Fields) does not appear to
    have been substantially extended and retains a linear form consistent with the
    historic OS maps. Building 12 (Boldershaw) has been altered, but any side
    extension appears to be proportionate. A large rear extension has been added, but
    this is single storey. Building 13 (Boldershaw Cottages) has undergone extensive
    alterations and extensions. Even so, these works do not go on to justify extensions
    of the scale and design proposed for the reasons I have set out.
22. Whilst change is not entirely prohibited within the CA, Section 72(1) of the Planning
    (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 states special attention shall
    be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance
    of that area. For the above reasons, the proposal would do neither and therefore
    result in harm to the significance of the CA. Policy HE6 of the Framework sets out,
    amongst other things, that where this occurs, it should be weighed against any
    public benefits resulting from the proposal. Bearing in mind that any harm to a
    designated heritage asset, the CA in this case, is a matter of considerable
    importance and weight.
23. No clear public benefits have been put forward by the appellant. The primary
    outcome of the development to provide increased and improved internal
    accommodation space, would be a private benefit. There would be some benefit in
    generating local employment, but this would be time limited and is therefore of
    moderate weight. Whilst the proposal would remove the existing modern additions
    and would result in the investment of the current deteriorating property, in doing so,
    it would be harmful for the above reasons. As such, there are insufficient public
    benefits to which one can ascribe sufficient weight to outweigh the harm I have
    identified.
24. Therefore, the proposal would conflict with Strategic Policy 1, Strategic Policy 24,
    Strategic Policy 25, Detailed Policy 1, Detailed Policy 3, Detailed Policy 5, and
    Detailed Policy 6 of the Local Plan 2015. Together, and amongst other things,
    these policies seek to ensure development proposals are of a high quality design
    that responds positively to their context. Development should build on rural local
    character, respect the historic environment, and protect, conserve and enhance
    designated and non-designated heritage assets.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009909


Other Matters
25. The proposal would have an acceptable impact in regard to the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers, on parking and highway safety and has received a
    representation of support from a neighbour and the Parish Council. However, these
    do not make up for the shortcomings of the scheme in regard to the main issue.
    The adequacy of both the Council’s and their heritage consultee’s assessment of
    the appeal scheme, their alleged inconsistent decision making and inaccurate and
    conflicting interpretation of policies, are matters that should be taken up with them
    directly and are not for me to resolve here.
Conclusion and Recommendation
26. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    and material considerations do not indicate a decision should be made other than
    in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend the appeal is dismissed.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
27. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
