Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Andrew Owen MA BA(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009181
Bracken Ley, London Lane, Houghton Conquest MK45 3LP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Simmons Ltd against the decision of Central Bedfordshire Council.
•   The application Ref is CB/25/03478/FULL.
•   The development proposed was originally described as redevelopment of the site for the 6x
    residential dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Amended plans were submitted with the appeal which showed two drainage basins
   at the front of the site. These correlate with drainage details provided during the
   determination of the application. As these basins are relatively minor alterations
   and no other interested parties who might not have had the opportunity to view and
   comment on the plans would be prejudiced by them, I have accepted them. On that
   basis, the Council advised they no longer wished to defend the fourth reason for
   refusal as the basins would ensure that surface water from the site could be
   managed appropriately without resulting in an increased risk of off-site flooding. As
   such my decision is focussed on the remaining reasons for refusal.
3. During the determination of the appeal, the government published a revised version
   of the National Planning Policy Framework. The main parties were given the
   opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework on the
   proposal, and I have taken their comments into account in my decision.
Main Issues
4. In light of the above, the remaining main issues are:
          i)     the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
          ii) the effect on highway safety; and
          iii) whether the development would provide satisfactory living conditions for
                 its future occupiers with respect to their outdoor amenity space.
Reasons
       Character and appearance
5. The appeal site accommodates a number of agricultural barns and a detached
   residential bungalow. The barns are roughly aligned in two rows along the north

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009181


     and south boundaries of the site with the dwelling at the back of the site. The
     central area forms the driveway to the bungalow. Some of the agricultural buildings
     in the north row are attached to similar agricultural buildings at the neighbouring
     property at Bury Lees Farm.
6. There are a few properties on the opposite side of London Lane which, together
   with Bury Lees Farm and the appeal site, make a small cluster of development.
   Surrounding this, there are open fields. I understand the nearest settlement of
   Houghton Conquest is around 400-500 metres to the north and it is not disputed by
   the parties that the site is outside any settlement envelope and is within the open
   countryside for planning policy purposes.
7. The site is within the North Marston Clay Vale character area as set out in the
   Central Bedfordshire Landscape Character Assessment (2024). This is defined as
   a large scale, flat and open clay vale with distant views to the contrasting
   landscapes of the Mid Greensand Ridge which forms a prominent backdrop to the
   south. The character of the area at the appeal site is reflective of this as it
   comprises an open and generally flat landscape with large fields and some trees
   and hedgerows along roadsides. This character is particularly apparent when
   walking along the public footpath to the south west of the site which crosses a large
   open field allowing uninterrupted views to the southern edge of Houghton Conquest
   and the Mid Greensand Ridge to the south. Due to this openness, any development
   at the site would be prominent in the landscape.
8. The existing barns along the southern boundary have a distinctly agricultural
   appearance and are seen in the context of similarly agricultural buildings on the
   opposite side of the road, on the ridge to the south and at Bury Lees Farm. They
   are typical of this rural landscape. Housing in the area is limited to that in Houghton
   Conquest and the few scattered houses near the site. In contrast, the proposal
   would result in a dense enclave of seven houses in plots substantially smaller than
   the other dwellings nearby, including the existing domestic curtilage on site. Indeed,
   the curtilage of the retained dwelling on site would be reduced, with the parts of its
   current garden to either side of the house being lost to the proposed dwellings on
   plots 3 and 4.
9. The row of dwellings proposed for the southern part of the site would be roughly
   consistent in their height, width and scale, and there would be only minimal gaps
   between them. This would provide a suburban character contrasting with the more
   scattered and varied form of the other residential development nearby. They would
   be shorter than the tallest of the existing barns along the southern boundary, but
   would be taller than most of the others. This adds to their prominence. Although
   some planting could be provided along the southern and western boundaries to
   assist in softening the visual impact of the development, it is likely that the scale of
   the proposal and its contrast with the rural character of the wider area, would still
   be apparent when seen from the footpath, and from a few positions along London
   Lane south of the site.
10. The same effect would prevail when seen through the entrance to the site where,
    due to the need to provide surface water drainage basins, a wider gap between
    existing frontage vegetation would be necessary. Indeed, the reduction in frontage
    vegetation combined with the dwellings being positioned closer to the road than the
    existing barns, would result in the development being more prominent in the street


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009181


       scene than the other surrounding dwellings which are generally set further back
       from the road and behind more extensive boundary planting.
11. Both parties agree that it is unlikely that the development would be able to provide
    the 30% tree cover required by Central Bedfordshire Local Plan (2021) (CBLP)
    policy EE9. In that eventuality, the policy states that alternative delivery
    mechanisms could be used, and the Forest of Marston Vale Design Guidance
    Supplementary Planning Document (2022) advises that this could be a s106
    agreement to secure tree planting elsewhere in the forest. No such mechanism is
    before me. Moreover, although the proposal would most likely lead to an increase
    in space for landscaping on site, space for new trees in the public realm would be
    limited, given the small size of the front gardens and the limited space at the front
    of the site.
12. An important consideration is the planning permission already granted at the site
    for the conversion of the barns to eight residential units1 under Class Q of the Town
    and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015. By
    virtue of involving a greater number of units, that scheme would be at a greater
    density than the current proposal. Nonetheless, the agricultural appearance of the
    site would generally be retained by the reuse of the existing buildings, and this
    would be reflective of its rural location, whereas the appeal scheme would have a
    wholly suburban appearance. In addition, as the existing barns are, in the most
    part, shorter than the proposed houses, they have a more modest appearance. The
    appeal proposal would therefore be distinctly different from the development
    already granted permission for the site.
13. In summary, the proposal would represent a suburban form of development that
    would contrast with its rural setting and be prominent in the landscape. It would
    therefore significantly harm the character and appearance of the area and would
    conflict with CBLP policies; HQ1, which seeks to ensure that development is of the
    highest quality and responds positively to its context; EE5, which, among other
    things, requires development to have regard to the key characteristics of the site
    and its setting including the pattern of the surrounding landscape; and EE8 which
    seeks to ensure that development minimises visual impacts and respects the
    landscape of the Greensand Ridge Nature Improvement Area, within which the site
    is located.
14. The proposal would also be contrary to policy EE9, as set out above, and EE4
    which aims to ensure that schemes include significant tree features with sufficient
    space to enable them to thrive.
        Highway safety
15. With the appeal, a swept path analysis has been provided showing how a delivery
    van and a fire engine could enter and leave the site in a forward gear. However the
    Council advise that the fire appliance shown is smaller than those used locally. As
    such, I could not be confident that a full-sized fire engine could enter and leave the
    site in a forward gear which would not involve unsafe reversing onto London Lane.
    None of the suggested conditions would resolve this.
16. The plans show two spaces would be provided for the existing dwelling; one in a
    new garage and one in front. The Council’s Parking Standards for New

1
    Ref no CB/25/00256/PAAD


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009181


     Developments Supplementary Planning Document (2023) sets out that single
     garages do not contribute to parking provision, and hence, in this case, only one
     space would effectively be provided. This would be insufficient for the existing
     dwelling and it is not clear from the plans where further parking space could be
     provided without impeding vehicular routes through the development.
17. The Council also state that it has not been shown how a waste collection vehicle
    could service the site. The amended plans provided with the appeal show an area
    for bin collection towards the front of the site. Waste vehicles may have to briefly
    stop in the road to collect the bins, but this would be the same situation for the
    other properties along this part of London Lane.
18. The visibility splays indicated on the submitted plans are less than that which would
    normally be required for a road with a 60mph speed limit, such as London Lane.
    However, if vegetation within the site, and other vegetation on the highway verge,
    were trimmed back, longer splays would be achievable. Indeed, due to the
    narrowness of the road, it is unlikely that traffic would be travelling at high speed.
    Overall, it is likely that sufficient visibility could be achieved. In any event, the
    current proposal for six units would likely result in less traffic using the access than
    could be generated by the scheme subject of the extant planning permission.
    Therefore, any risks of using the access would be less in the appeal scheme.
19. The Council state some of the parking spaces to be provided in front of the houses
    are of an insufficient length. However, they do not advise which spaces in particular
    they are concerned about. From my reading of the drawings, if any of the spaces
    are substandard, it is only by a small amount and there would be sufficient space
    for them to be provided at the correct size without affecting the operation of the
    development. Similarly, although the Council advise that the position of the parking
    spaces at some of the dwellings do not allow for clear pedestrian access into the
    dwellings, they do not state which dwellings that is. Again, from my reading of the
    plans, all houses would have sufficiently clear access to the front doors
    unobstructed by parking spaces.
20. Overall, the failure to demonstrate that sufficient parking would be provided, in
    respect of the existing dwelling, and that a full-sized fire engine could enter and
    leave the site in a forward gear, leads me to consider that the development could
    have a harmful effect on highway safety. It would therefore fail to accord with CBLP
    policy T2, which aims to ensure that development does not have an adverse effect
    on highway safety and in particular, does not impede the free flow of traffic on the
    existing network, and makes adequate provision for servicing and vehicle turning. It
    would also be contrary to CBLP policy T3 which states that development must have
    regard to the parking standards set out in the Design Guide which is now replaced
    by the Parking Standards for New Developments SPD.
     Living conditions
21. It is understood that the gardens serving the six new dwellings would be above the
    minimum size required by the Central Bedfordshire Design Guide (2023). However,
    the Design Guide also requires rear gardens to have a minimum depth of 12
    metres. The Council advise that none of the rear gardens meet this standard and
    the shallowest, at plots 5 and 6, are a little over 5 metres deep.
22. The Design Guide explains that the distances stem partly from the need to provide
    sufficient privacy in the gardens. Overlooking from neighbouring properties is not a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009181


     concern at this site as the neighbouring house at Bury Lees Farm is a substantial
     distance away. The other justification for the 12 metre depth is so that reasonably
     sized gardens are created. The gardens meet the minimum area requirements and
     the depth, whilst limited, is such that they could practicably be used.
23. The rear gardens serving plots 5 and 6 would be north facing and it seems that
    there would be a barn in the adjacent property that would abut the rear boundary of
    plot 6. However this building is fairly short, would abut only a part of the common
    boundary, and as such would not be likely to lead to an excessively enclosed
    feeling when in the rear garden. In addition, there are no other tall buildings or trees
    in this direction that would contribute to a feeling of enclosure or of being
    overshadowed.
24. As such, the proposal would provide its future occupiers with satisfactory living
    conditions. It would therefore, in this respect, accord with policy HQ1 which seeks
    to ensure development does not have an unacceptable adverse impact upon
    permitted users including in terms of amenity.
Other Matters
25. The appellant refers to pre-application discussions with the Council. However I can
    only base my decision on the development before me and can have little regard to
    its evolution. Similarly, although reference is made to a scheme at Witts End Farm,
    Eversholt, I have been provided with no details of that so can have little regard to it.
26. The site is outside the settlement of Houghton Conquest and as such policy S5 of
    the Framework is applicable. This lists a limited number of forms of development
    which should be approved, unless the adverse effects of doing so would
    substantially outweigh the benefits. Paragraph 1, part j. identifies that housing,
    where there is a lack of a five year supply, is one such form of development. The
    Council state they can only demonstrate a 3.93 year supply of housing, which is a
    modest shortfall. However, part j. adds that, to meet this criterion, development
    must also be physically well-related to an existing settlement. In my view the
    distance between the site and Houghton Conquest means the site is not physically
    well-related to that settlement. As such the proposal would not fall into part j. of
    paragraph 1, and it has not been suggested to me that the proposal could
    constitute any of the other exceptions in paragraph 1.
27. I recognise that the extant permission for the site would result in units also not
    being well related to Houghton Conquest. But this does not mitigate the appeal
    scheme’s conflict with the Framework as it is a very different form of development.
    Indeed, the reuse of buildings is specifically allowed for in part c. of paragraph 1.
28. Paragraph 4 of policy S05 sets out that development that does not fall into the
    categories in paragraph 1 should only be approved where the benefits substantially
    outweigh the adverse effects. The benefits of an additional six units at a time when
    the Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply attracts substantial weight, as
    set out in policy HO7 of the Framework. The benefits of the scheme in terms of
    biodiversity net gain, to the local economy, and of the sustainable design of the
    homes are of modest weight given the small scale of the proposal. Conversely the
    harm to the character and appearance of the area and to highway safety both carry
    considerable weight. As such, the benefits do not substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009181


Conclusion
29. The development would provide its future residents with acceptable living
    conditions. However it would significantly harm the character and appearance of
    the area and would compromise highway safety. As such, the proposal would fail to
    accord with the development plan taken as a whole. The other material
    considerations, including the application of the Framework, do not indicate a
    decision other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, the appeal
    is dismissed.

Andrew Owen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
