Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by K Allen MEng (Hons) MArch PGCert ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009545
Land at 38 Ackerman Street, Eaton Socon, St Neots PE19 8HR
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by AWJ Usher & Sons Ltd against the decision of Huntingdonshire District
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/01894/FUL.
•      The development proposed is the erection of three-bedroom bungalow with garage & associated
       works (inc new planting and creation of off-street parking & turning to both existing and proposed
       properties).

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters

2. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties have had the
         opportunity to comment on the implications of these changes for the appeal, and I
         have taken it into account in coming to my decision.
Main Issue
3.       The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
         the area, with particular regard to whether the proposal would preserve the setting
         of the nearby listed building and whether it would preserve or enhance the
         character or appearance of the St Neots Conservation Area.
Reasons
4.       Despite the variation in age and architectural design, the area is predominantly
         characterised by buff brick or rendered properties fronting the roads. The appeal
         site comprises an open area of land in a backland position, predominantly bound
         by high level fencing, formerly used as a pub garden. There is a modern housing
         estate with a rear garden and large parking court directly adjacent the boundary in
         the south, while a group of predominantly historic properties with modest rear
         gardens lies to the north, including the Grade II listed building, No 36 Ackerman
         Street1. Although, the appeal site has already been subdivided from No 38, it
         positively contributes to the open, rear garden environment.
5.       No 36 is an 18th Century two-storey timber framed cottage with roughcast plaster
         façades. From the information before me, No 36’s special interest and significance

1
    Heritage List for England, List Entry Number: 1127987

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009545


       stems from its archaeological, historic and architectural interests. Its surviving
       historic fabric; traditional construction and detailing; contribution to the wider street
       scene and connection with the village’s historic development, are all important
       contributors in these regards.
6.     In so far as is relevant to the appeal, part of No 36 special interest and significance
       is also drawn from its setting. The extent and openness of the Village Green and
       landscape setting of the village have diminished overtime. Moreover, the curtilage
       of No 36 has been greatly reduced by the construction of No 34 Ackerman Street
       and the appeal site has never formed part of the land associated with No 36.
       Nevertheless, when viewed in combination the openness persisting around No 36
       maintains its rural character.
7.     Whilst I acknowledge the recent physical alterations made to the appeal site as
       part of the residential conversion of No 38, including changes to public viewpoints,
       the setting of No 36, including the appeal site and the Ackerman Street recreation
       ground, contributes considerably to both its significance as an asset, as well as the
       ability to appreciate that significance from within the asset as well as surrounding
       public and private viewpoints.
8.     In addition, the site lies within the St Neots Conservation Area, which incorporates
       a large area including St Neots town centre and the surrounding residential areas.
       The village of Eaton Socon is a gateway heading towards St Neots and offers a
       gentle approach into the town. Whilst the village is an integral part of the town, it
       retains its own identity, with the village’s parish church, village green and
       associated open spaces and historic buildings all contributing to its rural character.
       In so far as is relevant to this appeal the CA derives significance from its complex
       grain of development, open spaces, clear hierarchy of buildings and variety of
       building types and materials.
9.     The proposal would utilise materials sympathetic to the locality and would be
       adaptable with easy access via a private drive with parking provided. Nonetheless,
       the proposal would introduce a substantial dwelling in a backland position at odds
       with the existing road fronting pattern of development and historic grain of the CA.
       Moreover, it would greatly reduce the openness to the rear of No 36, harmfully
       diminishing the contribution that the site makes to its significance.
10. There are numerous surrounding outbuildings, including the garages to the south
    and the newly built car barn at No 38, however they are subordinate, in scale and
    function, to other road fronting buildings. In contrast, the proposal would be clearly
    identifiable as an independent dwelling and would appear incongruous within the
    immediate garden context. Whilst the proposal would be minimally visible from
    public viewpoints, due to its large footprint, it would appear unduly dominant in
    relation to the historic group of buildings on Ackerman Street, when viewed from
    the surrounding properties and entrance to Simpkin Close.
11. Drawing the above together, I find that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area, it would not preserve the setting of the nearby listed
    building, nor would it preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the St
    Neots Conservation Area. On this basis, it would cause harm to the significance of
    these designated heritage assets. This would be contrary to the requirements of
    section 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas)
    Act 1990.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009545


12. Similarly, it would conflict with Policies LP11, LP12 and LP34 of the
    Huntingdonshire Local Plan to 2036 (May 2019) and Policy A3 of the St Neots
    Neighbourhood Plan 2014-2029 (February 2016) where amongst other things they
    require that development is of a high-quality, responds positively to its context,
    successfully integrates with adjoining buildings and the routes and spaces
    between buildings and does not detract from the significance of heritage assets. It
    would also fail to accord with the Framework with reference to sustaining and
    enhancing the significance of heritage assets.
13. The Framework requires that where proposals would harm the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be
    weighed against the public benefits of the proposal. This will be undertaken below.
Other Matters
14. The appellant suggests that the proposal would make effective and efficient use of
    land. However, as set out above, the proposal would be visible from the street
    frontage and would be at odds with the pattern and grain of the area. As such,
    whilst the proposal would create an additional home and contribute to an increase
    in density in the area, for the reasons given above, the proposal would fail to
    accord with Framework Policies LP2 and LP3 where they seek to make effective
    and efficient use of land.
15. I note that no concerns were raised by the Town Council, Highway Authority,
    Archaeological Consultee nor the Environmental Health Consultee. However, this
    does not alter my findings as set out above.
Heritage and Planning Balance
16. The Framework sets out that heritage assets, as an irreplaceable resource, should
    be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance and that any harm to, or
    loss of, the significance of a designated heritage asset should have a clear and
    convincing justification. When considering the potential effect of a development on
    the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given
    to their conservation.
17. Given the localised nature of the works relative to the listed building as a whole
    and the wider CA, I find that the harm to the significance of the heritage assets
    assessed above would, individually and cumulatively, be of a low level. In such
    circumstances the Framework states that the effects on designated assets and
    their significance should be weighed against any public benefits.
18. The Council can only demonstrate a 3.68 year housing land supply, this
    demonstrates a significant shortfall in deliverable housing. The Framework seeks
    to boost the supply of housing. The proposal would provide an additional dwelling
    in an accessible location, making an important contribution to the local housing
    supply.
19. Short term employment would be provided during the construction and in the long
    term the future occupiers would benefit the local economy and community through
    additional local spending and support for local services and facilities. However,
    due to the limited scale of the proposal, these benefits would be modest.
20. The proposal would utilise energy and resource efficient technology and be free
    from flood risk. A biodiversity net gain would be achieved. While this is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009545


       commendable and would accord with the provisions of the Framework, this would
       be expected of any well-designed development. Overall, I attach substantial weight
       to the benefits of the proposal.
21. Weighed against this, the Framework requires that development responds to its
    context, so that it integrates with and enhances its surroundings; such as through
    the arrangement of development plots and buildings and the integration of heritage
    assets. Whilst this should not preclude innovation or change, I have concluded that
    the proposal would appear as an incongruous addition to the grain of the CA.
    Further, due to the reduction in openness and competition for dominance, the
    proposal would harm the significance of No 36, a matter to which I attach
    considerable importance and weight.
22. The proposal would not harm highway safety, nor the living conditions of
    neighbouring residents. It would provide safe access and sufficient car parking.
    Further, there are no concerns with regards to flooding or drainage. Nevertheless,
    these are neutral matters which neither weigh in favour of or against the proposal.
23. Consequently, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework, the benefits of the proposal are substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects.
Conclusion
24. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the development
    plan as a whole and there are no material considerations, including the provisions
    of the Framework and the benefits of the proposal, that would outweigh that
    conflict. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



K Allen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
