Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 July 2026 by E Clifford BA (Hons) MA
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009564
6 Linden Terrace, Newton Abbot, Devon TQ12 1LL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Luke Davey against the decision of Teignbridge District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00005/HOU.
•   The development proposed is described as “retention of timber shed in front garden.”

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for development
   described as “retention of timber shed in front garden” at 6 Linden Terrace, Newton
   Abbot, Devon TQ12 1LL in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   26/00005/HOU, subject to the following condition:
    1) The development hereby permitted is as shown on the following approved plans:
       BLOCK/SITE PLAN and Side, Front & Rear Elevations Floor Plan Drawing No.
       LT-EL-01 dated 28 January 2026.
Appeal Procedure and Preliminary Matters
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
3. The most recent National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) includes
   changes with respect to heritage matters with specific regard to the degrees of
   harm. That said, the actions of finding harm to a designated heritage asset is not
   materially different from the previous iteration of the Framework. I am therefore
   satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation with the main parties since,
   with the above in mind, their respective cases would not be prejudiced.
4. The delegated report and decision notice refer to the Wolborough Street
   Conservation Area. However, the evidence before me indicates that the
   conservation area adjacent the site is the Newton Abbott Town Centre, Courtenay
   Park and Devon Square Conservation Area (hereafter referred to as the CA) and
   that Wolborough Street is a character area within the CA. I have therefore made my
   recommendation on this basis.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance of
   the area with specific regard to the setting of the setting of the CA and the
   significance of the host dwelling as a Non-Designated Heritage Asset (NDHA).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009564


Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal site forms part of Linden Terrace, a mid-C19 Italianate terrace of
   properties situated just outside the boundary of the CA. Linden Terrace has an
   overall pleasing level of symmetry. This is predominantly derived from the
   alternating bracketed gables, arched windows and alternating attic level oculus, and
   brightly coloured render which all contribute to the Italianate style. The houses are
   set back from the highway behind long, narrow front gardens with low retaining
   walls. Nearly all of the properties also have hedges at the front boundary, of varying
   heights and density, as does the appeal site. The Council has confirmed that it
   considers the terrace, and consequently the appeal site, to be a NDHA and to make
   a positive contribution to the setting of the CA. I agree with this assessment.
7. This part of the CA is the medieval core of the town, and the character and
   appearance of Wolborough Street has evolved from the historic pattern of the
   settlement. Some of the narrow burgage plots survive and can be read in the
   regular arrangement of buildings along parts of the street. The Mackrell’s
   Almshouses and forecourt walls and gate piers to the houses, Grade II listed
   buildings, are located along this section of Wolborough Street, facing Linden
   Terrace and the appeal site and forming the boundary of the CA. The Almshouses
   have a strong sense of symmetry and homogeny which, despite the clear stylistic
   differences, is repeated along Linden Terrace to create a sense of harmony.
8. Within the front gardens of Linden Terrace, a number of the properties have sheds
   of varying scale. The properties on the other side of Linden Terrace are of a notably
   different appearance, with more open boundaries defined by hedges. One of the
   facing properties also has a shed positioned against the front boundary which is
   clearly visible in the street scene.
9. On my site visit, I observed that hedging had been planted and provided some
   diffusion of views of the development. I note the Council’s concern that the planting
   of a hedge would not be sufficient to mitigate the effect of the development and that
   it would take a long time to become established. However, the narrowness of the
   plots mean that even without the new hedge being well established, the pre-existing
   surrounding hedging and other planting significantly limits the intervisibility of the
   development and the designated heritage assets.
10. When appreciating the NDHA from within the public realm, the characterful
    appearance of the terrace draws the eye above the level of the existing and
    prevalent boundary treatment. Whilst the development is positioned in the front
    garden of the appeal site, it is of a broadly comparable mass and bulk to the other
    examples present along both sides of Linden Terrace. It therefore sits comfortably
    within the established pattern of development within front gardens along this road,
    and there is no sense of incongruity.
11. The Council has stated that only one of the sheds also present along Linden
    Terrace benefits from planning permission. Whilst this may be the case, it does not
    alter the fact that there is an established presence of sheds, as well as some other
    close boarded timber fencing, within front gardens in this area and that this now
    forms part of the character and appearance of the area and, by association, the
    setting of the CA.
12. Policy HE6 of the Framework explains that, when considering the potential effect of
    a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009564


    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation (and the more
    important the asset, the greater the weight should be). Where a development
    proposal would harm the significance of a heritage asset, the effect thereon and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. This is irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive
    effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. HE7 sets out similar,
    in that any harm to the significance of a NDHA should be weighed against the
    benefits of the proposal and a balanced judgement made, having regard to the
    scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the non-designated heritage asset.
13. Overall, and for the reasons I have explained, the development does not harm the
    setting of the CA or the significance of the NDHA. In that regard, it complies with
    Policy EN5 of the Teignbridge Local Plan (2014) requiring development proposals to
    take account of the significance, heritage, character, setting and local
    distinctiveness of any affected heritage asset.
Other Matters
14. The Council has not identified any issues relating to the setting of Mackrell’s
    Almshouses or the forecourt walls and gate piers to the houses. The Almshouses
    and associated structures are located along Wolborough Street and form part of the
    boundary of the CA. The appeal site is therefore considered to be part of the setting
    of the listed buildings and Linden Terrace as an NDHA is considered to positively
    contribute towards the setting of the designated heritage assets.
15. Given the limited intervisibility of the development and the listed buildings, as well
    as the established presence of sheds within the front gardens along Linden Terrace,
    the development does not introduce anything new or incongruous into the setting. It
    does not detract from the appreciation of the assets and, as above, sits comfortably
    within the street scene. The setting of the listed buildings is thus preserved.
Conditions
16. As the development is substantially complete, it is only necessary to identify the
    approved plans for enforcement purposes.
Conclusion and Recommendation
17. For the reasons given above, I recommend that the appeal should be allowed since
    it would comply with the development plan.

E Clifford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
18. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed. Planning permission is therefore granted, subject
    to the condition set out.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
