Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by Mr R Walker BA HONS DIPTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009669
10 Broadgate, Preston PR1 8DX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Adam Graham (Property Hub NW Ltd) against the decision of Preston City
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 06/2026/0279.
•    The development proposed is Change of Use from a 5 Bedroom Dwelling class use C3 to a
     6 Bedroom HMO class C4.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal premises is part of a grade II listed building known as 9-18 Broadgate.
       The Council have granted listed building consent (Ref: 06/2026/0280) for internal
       works associated with the proposed layout. Nonetheless, as the scheme relates to
       a listed building, I still have a statutory duty to consider this matter in my decision
       having special regard to section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
3.     Since the appeal was submitted, the Government has published a revised version
       of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The main parties
       were invited to comment on any implications for the appeal of this change, and I
       am therefore satisfied that no prejudice would be caused by my consideration of
       the appeal in light of the revised Framework (2026).
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effects of the proposal on the character of, and the living
       conditions within, the street and surrounding area, with particular regard to the
       balance and mix of housing.
Reasons
5.     The appeal property is a mid-terrace house facing toward the River Ribble in a
       predominantly residential area including, amongst other things, other rows of
       terraced houses. The property is typical of family accommodation at the time of its
       construction, and the layout and room sizes remain capable of serving that original
       function. As such, the existing building contributes to the existing local housing
       stock as a potential family home.
6.     The more transient nature of occupiers of Houses of Multiple Occupation (HMOs)
       mean that occupiers do not contribute to the same community cohesion that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009669


       permanent residents do. Moreover, the Council have identified additional
       cumulative effects from noise and disturbance, waste infrastructure and parking
       pressures from a high concentration of HMOs in the area. As such, the Council is
       taking a series of measures to try and tackle this through a further Article 4
       Direction and its emerging local plan. Whilst the appellant questions the weight
       given to these measures, there is no substantive evidence before me to
       demonstrate that the situation has significantly changed since the evidence base
       that is driving these measures was published.
7.     In this regard, whilst I accept that the General Permitted Development Order is an
       indicator that HMOs can be compatible in a residential area in principle that does
       not mean that they always will be. There is no defined threshold for when a local
       over concentration of HMOs occurs in the Council’s Local Plan or elsewhere. A
       planning judgement is therefore required, and I have therefore assessed the
       scheme on its own merits based on the evidence before me.
8.     The Council indicate that within the terrace of Nos 1-18 Broadgate, five properties
       are operating as a HMO. Pertinently, these are clustered near the appeal site at
       Nos 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8. In this regard, notwithstanding the appellant’s records that
       there are 16 HMOs within a radius of 250m, the number within what is a very short
       section of Broadgate indicates a particularly high concentration of HMOs in this
       area.
9.     The proposed HMO would incrementally increase the number of HMOs in the area
       and more specifically within this part of Broadgate, at the expense of a potential
       family home. This exacerbates the existing over concentration of such properties
       and the imbalance in the mix of housing in the area. The Officer Report and
       objections from local residents highlights some of the conflicts in lifestyles between
       residents of HMOs and other residents, including from an increased noise and
       disturbance. These effects locally reflect those identified more broadly in the
       Council’s evidence base to support the emerging HMO policy and its Article 4
       Direction.
10. Whether it is occupied by a large family or as a HMO the potential for noise and
    disturbance exists. However, a property occupied in a C3 use would, in my view,
    have a greater unity in the activities within, and from its comings and goings. This
    is because members of the same household have a greater level of shared
    activities and visitors than would be associated with the number of unrelated adults
    in the appeal proposals. In this regard, whilst there are no controls on the number
    of occupiers within the existing dwelling house, the nature of unrelated occupiers is
    such that the appeal scheme would, in my view, generate a greater level of activity
    from its occupiers and visitors.
11. Such sources could be, for example, from people conversing inside and outside
    the property, increased comings and goings of occupants and visitors, multiple
    sources of music and doors frequently closing. These could be readily discernible
    from the neighbouring dwellings due to the close relationship between the terraced
    properties.
12. In combination with the existing localised concentration of HMOs within this part of
    Broadgate, the cumulative effects would likely lead to a discernible conflict with
    and harm to the living conditions of local residents. The proposal would not
    therefore amount to an effective reuse of the existing building.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009669


13. I therefore conclude that the proposal would have an unacceptably harmful effect
    on the character of, and the living conditions within, the street and surrounding
    area, with particular regard to the balance and mix of housing. As such, I find
    conflict with the requirements of Policies HS7 and AD1 of the Preston Local Plan,
    when taken together and in so far as they relate to this main issue. These say,
    amongst other things, that the Council will allow proposals for the conversion of
    buildings into multiple occupancy units, provided that the proposal does not erode
    the amenity of neighbouring properties and the character and appearance of the
    surrounding area. These policies are consistent with Policy DP3 of the Framework,
    which seeks, amongst other things, to create well designed places which achieve
    liveability, support healthy, mixed, vibrant and integrated communities and function
    well over time.
14. I have also been referred to Chapter 6, and Policies HO5 and HO6 of the
    Framework. These policies are plan making policies rather than decision making
    policies and so not determinate. Nonetheless, by exacerbating an existing over
    concentration of HMOs in this locality, the proposal would be at odds with the
    objectives of Chapter 6 of the Framework in planning for an appropriate mix of
    accommodation for the local community.
15. I have also been referred to Policy HS10 of the emerging Central Lancashire Local
    Plan, which says amongst other things, that within Preston’s Article 4 Direction
    area, proposals to convert properties into HMO’s or expand existing HMO’s will not
    be permitted. However, this Local Plan is not adopted, and the new Article 4
    Direction Area has not come into force yet as such the policy carries diminished
    weight and has not been determinative in my assessment. This does not alter or
    outweigh my findings of harm and the conflict I have identified in relation to the
    adopted plan and the Framework.
Other Matters
16. The appeal premises is part of a Grade II listed building comprising of 10 town
    houses. In so far as it is relevant to this appeal, I consider the special interest and
    significance of the listed building to be largely derived from its historic and
    architectural interest as a mid-19th century terrace, which forms part of the
    planned layout of other terraces. The building’s age, surviving uniformity, pleasing
    Georgian architectural form and use of traditional materials all contribute positively
    to these heritage interests and the value of this designated heritage asset. These
    elements would all be preserved by the appeal given the minor nature and extent
    of the alterations proposed. As such, I agree with the Council’s findings that there
    would be no harm to the significance and special interest of the Grade II listed
    building.
17. Whilst I do not doubt the appellant’s intentions regarding the upkeep of the appeal
    premises this would not be enforceable as part of any planning permission.
    Moreover, whilst the appellant is an experienced HMO landlord, my concerns
    relate to the cumulative effects from an over concentration of HMOs in this locality
    and the appellant’s experience and management approach would not overcome
    my concerns and I give this limited weight.
18. There is no firm evidence that there is an unmet need for this type of
    accommodation. Whether the building is occupied as a family house or a HMO, it



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009669


       is in a sustainable location, and so the accessibility of the site’s location is a matter
       of limited weight.
19. It is put to me that the building could be used lawfully for six adults living together
    and receiving care. However, I have no firm evidence that this would realistically
    be undertaken if the appeal proposal were not allowed, limiting the weight I afford
    this matter.
20. The absence of harm in relation to other matters including, amongst other things,
    the living conditions of future occupiers, and the significance of the listed building
    weighs neither for nor against the proposal.
21. Policy S3 of the Framework establishes the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development and, in so far as it relates to this appeal, this means that the scheme
    should be considered against Policy S4 of the Framework. This states, amongst
    other things, that development proposals within settlements should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework.
22. In this instance, the benefits carry limited weight and the adverse effects of the
    proposal on the character of, and the living conditions within, the street and
    surrounding area, with particular regard to the balance and mix of housing are of
    such magnitude that, in accordance with Policy S4 of the Framework, the failure to
    comply with a relevant national decision-making policy (DP3) means that the
    proposal should be refused.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan when it is read as a whole, and material considerations do not
    indicate that a decision contrary to the development plan should be reached. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Mr R Walker
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
