Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009807
11 Windermere Drive, Goole DN14 6JW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, Paragraph A.4 of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mrs Megan Gardiner against the decision of East Riding of Yorkshire Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/10325/HHNOT.
•   The development proposed is a flat roof (maximum 3m in height), single story extension, 6m x 5.8m,
    constructed from masonry in the same style and similar colour as the existing dwelling house.
    Extension to rear of the property to provide family amenity space.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters and Main Issue
3. The decision notice includes references to the development plan and a
   Supplementary Planning Document (SPD). The principle of development is
   established through the grant of permission by the Town and Country Planning
   (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, as amended (the GPDO),
   and I am required to assess the proposal as one seeking prior approval as set out
   within the parameters of the aforementioned parts of the GPDO. Regard can be
   given to development plan policies and the SPD insofar as they are material
   considerations; however, they are not in themselves determinative.
4. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO, planning
   permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse subject to limitations
   and conditions. Where an application is made for a determination as to whether
   prior approval is required for development which exceeds the limits in paragraph
   A.1(f) but is allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph A.4(3) provides that
   an application can be refused where the proposed development does not comply
   with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such permitted
   development.
5. Paragraph A.4(7) to Part 1 requires the local planning authority to assess the
   impact of the proposed development on the amenity of all adjoining premises,
   taking into account any representations received. This is the specifics of the main


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009807


     issue of the appeal, with particular regard to the living conditions of the occupiers of
     Number 9 Windermere Drive (No 9), with particular reference to outlook.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The extension would be positioned close to the boundary with No 9 and a small
   gap would remain. Whilst the extension would be visible from the garden of No 9,
   the garden is of a generous size and occupiers would continue to benefit from an
   acceptable outlook when using their private outdoor amenity space. However, No 9
   benefits from a single window serving the living room which provides the primary
   external outlook, as the other opening leads into the conservatory.
7. The scheme would run along much of the shared boundary and, by reason of its
   height, depth and flat-roofed design, would appear as a prominent feature,
   especially above the existing boundary treatment. Consequently, it would result in a
   strong sense of enclosure. This would be exacerbated by the siting and projection
   of the existing conservatory structure to No 9. Therefore, whilst extensions can
   reasonably be expected to have a close relationship with neighbouring properties,
   this does not preclude harm arising in site-specific circumstances. In this case,
   given the proximity and size of the extension relative to a primary habitable room
   window, it would result in an unacceptable effect on outlook for users of the room,
   to the detriment of the quality of their living conditions. Whilst not determinative, this
   would not sit squarely with the aims of Policy EN1 of the East Riding Local Plan.
Other Matters
8. The East Riding Design Code indicates that single-storey extensions adjoining a
   boundary are usually acceptable where they project no more than 3.5 metres
   beyond the neighbouring rear wall. Whilst the appeal proposal would exceed this
   depth, I have reached my conclusions based on my own assessment of the
   proposal's relationship with No 9 and the specifics of its context.
9. Whilst permitted development rights under other provisions in the same class as
   the proposal may allow an extension to the rear, the effects thereof would be
   materially different owing to allowances being for something of significantly lesser
   projection from the rear elevation. I am satisfied that by virtue of the affected room’s
   connection to the conservatory along with the orientation of properties relevant to
   each other, there would not be an unacceptable loss of light. This would not
   however lessen the harm that would arise to outlook in the manner I have
   explained. The appearance and design of the extension is not a contentious matter
   and would be a lack of harm in any case.
10. There is clearly a need for the appellant to extend the dwelling to suit the current
    and future family. The evidence on this matter however, putting aside the scope of
    submissions for prior approval, strikes me as more personal which, in regard to the
    specifics of the case, would not lead me to allowing the appeal.
Conclusion and Recommendation
11. The appeal proposal would fail an assessment for prior approval for the reasons set
    out. I therefore recommend the appeal should be dismissed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009807


Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
