Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026
by Billy Pattison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009849
 Adj Grassmere, Horseman Side, Navestock, Essex CM14 5SU
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Tylor & Kathryn Enkel against the decision of Brentwood
      Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25/01260/OUT.
 •    The development proposed is Outline application for construction of a single self-build family
      dwelling.

 Decision
 1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for outline application for
        construction of a single self-build family dwelling at Adj Grassmere, Horseman
        Side, Navestock, Essex CM14 5SU in accordance with the terms of the application
        Ref: 25/01260/OUT, and the plans submitted with it subject to the conditions in the
        attached schedule.
 Preliminary Matters
 2.     On 17 August 2026, Government published a revised National Planning Policy
        Framework (the Framework). This included revisions to policies that are pertinent
        to the appeal, such as those relating to development in the Green Belt. During the
        appeal the main parties were invited to comment on the relevance of the revised
        Framework to the appeal proposal. In my decision, I have had regard to the
        parties’ written responses.
 3.     The application was made in outline with all matters except the means of access,
        layout and scale reserved for subsequent approval. I have therefore dealt with the
        appeal on this basis.
 Main Issues
 4.     The main issues are:
            •    Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green
                 Belt having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan
                 policies; and
            •    Whether the site is a suitable location for the proposal having regard to local
                 and national planning policy, and the accessibility of the site to services,
                 employment opportunities and facilities.




 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009849


Reasons
Whether or not inappropriate development within the Green Belt
5.       The appeal site comprises a substantial plot, containing a large, detached, two-
         storey dwelling, outbuilding, mobile home and generously sized garden. The site is
         outside any settlement boundary and is within the Green Belt.
6.       Chapter 13 of the Framework outlines that the objective of Green Belt policy is to
         prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The government
         attaches great importance to Green Belts, the essential features of which are their
         openness and permanence.
7.       Policy MG02 of the Brentwood Local Plan (2022) (LP) broadly reflects the
         approach of the Framework in that it requires the Green Belt to be protected from
         inappropriate development and outlines that development proposals within the
         Green Belt will be considered and assessed in accordance with the provisions of
         national planning policy. The Framework sets out certain exceptions where
         development in the Green Belt is not inappropriate development.
8.       Of relevance to the appeal proposal, Policy GB7.1.e. of the Framework identifies
         the redevelopment of previously developed land (including a material change of
         use to residential or mixed-use including residential), which would not cause
         substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt, as an exception which would
         not be inappropriate development.
9.       The Framework identifies previously developed land as that which has been
         lawfully developed and is or was occupied by a permanent structure and any fixed
         surface infrastructure associated with it, including the curtilage of the developed
         land (although it should not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage should be
         developed). It excludes land in built-up areas such as residential gardens. In this
         respect, a court judgement1 found that residential gardens that are not in built-up
         areas are not excluded from the general definition of previously developed land.
10. The land closely associated with Grassmere comprises the residential driveway,
    outbuilding, lawn, and wider garden area, including the appeal site. Although the
    appeal site forms the part of the garden furthest from the dwelling and adjoins the
    boundary with the neighbouring property, Chafford, there are no internal
    boundaries separating it from the remainder of the garden. Furthermore, the only
    access to the appeal site is via Grassmere. Consequently, the appeal site is part of
    the garden serving Grassmere and, in my planning judgement, there is nothing to
    indicate that it falls outside the residential curtilage of the dwelling.
11. Although the appeal site is within a small cluster of dwellings and buildings, it does
    not form part of a built-up area. Consequently, based on the evidence before me
    and my own observations of the site, I consider that the appeal site is not in a built-
    up area and therefore represents previously developed land.
12. The current version of the Framework requires that under policy GB7.1.e. the harm
    to openness must be substantial for the development to be considered
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt. This will necessarily entail a planning
    judgement but not one that simply identifies harm, as not all harm to openness will
    necessarily be substantial.
1
    Dartford BC v SSCLG [2017] EWCA Civ 141


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6009849


13. Openness is an essential characteristic of the Green Belt and is capable of having
    both spatial and visual aspects. The application scale plans show that the proposal
    would result in the addition of a two storey dwelling with a pitched roof, a garage,
    and a new vehicular access onto Horseman Side. The dwelling would slot into the
    existing building line of dwellings fronting Horseman Side. This would introduce
    new built form into an area that is currently undeveloped, thereby reducing the
    openness of the site. As such, the proposal would have a harmful effect on spatial
    openness.
14. The proposed built form would be accommodated within a plot located between
    three existing dwellings and their gardens, which extend from the relatively large-
    scale light industrial operations at Wattons Works upto the boundary with
    Goatswood Lane. The residential curtilages of these dwellings are clearly distinct
    from the open field patterns to their rear and on the opposite side of Horseman
    Side. Consequently, the proposed development would be viewed in the context of
    the existing ribbon development within which the site is situated, as well as the
    more substantial urbanising development associated with Wattons Works. The
    adjoining dwellings also provide a degree of visual screening, and the proposal
    would not visually or spatially encroach into the open countryside to the rear of the
    appeal site. Whilst landscaping is a reserved matter, the submitted evidence
    indicates that, with the exception of the new vehicular access, the dense hedgerow
    along the frontage would be retained. These combined factors would reduce the
    visual impact on the Green Belt, particularly when viewed from the open
    countryside to the rear and from Horseman Side. Overall, the dwelling would sit
    alongside existing dwellings, and would not appear especially prominent within the
    surrounding landscape.
15. The proposal is also likely to result in the introduction of a limited amount of
    residential paraphernalia onto the appeal site. However, as the site already forms
    part of a residential garden, there is already potential for features such as washing
    lines, outdoor furniture, and children's play equipment to be distributed throughout
    the site. Consequently, any additional domestic paraphernalia arising from the
    proposal would have a limited effect on openness.
16. Taking all factors into account, including the position and footprint of the proposed
    building, I find that the development would cause a moderate degree of harm to
    the openness of the Green Belt when compared with the existing situation, but not
    substantial harm. Consequently, the development would not constitute
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt as defined by the Framework.
    Therefore, it would accord with the approach to development in the Green Belt as
    set out in the Framework and Policy MG02 of the LP insofar as it seeks to
    safeguard the Green Belt from inappropriate development.
17. As I have found that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt by virtue of policy GB7.1.e. of the Framework, it is not necessary for
    me to consider whether it would accord with policy GB7.1.g of the Framework as
    this would not alter my findings. As a further consequence, I also do not need to
    consider whether there are other considerations and whether they amount to very
    special circumstances to justify the development.
Suitable location




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009849


18. The appeal site lies within a small cluster of houses in a rural area accessed via
    quiet, rural roads. Policy MG03 of the LP sets out a settlement hierarchy for the
    borough. The main parties agree that the appeal site does not fall within any of the
    identified settlements within the hierarchy. Policy BE09 of the LP seeks to
    encourage sustainable modes of transport within new developments, focussing in
    particular on cycle and pedestrian movements and access to public transport.
19. Given the site’s location, in order to access a larger settlement the occupants of
    the proposed dwelling would have to walk or cycle along the remote, narrow rural
    lanes, which are unlit and would be a less attractive route outside daylight hours. It
    seems to me that there would be no dedicated cycle lanes or pavements for much
    of the route. Therefore, the route is unlikely to be an attractive option for walking
    and cycling outside of daylight hours or during inclement weather. The submitted
    evidence also indicates that the appeal site is poorly served by public transport.
20. Consequently, essential services, facilities and employment opportunities would
    not be readily accessible from the appeal site. Therefore, the occupants would be
    largely reliant on private vehicles to access these, due to the lack of safe
    pedestrian and cycle routes and having limited options for alternative modes of
    transport.
21. The submitted evidence refers to the specific circumstances of the appellants, who
    intend to self-build on the appeal site. Their family lives nearby, and the family
    businesses have always been located in the immediate area. The appellants also
    own the adjoining field to the rear of the site, which they intend to use as a
    smallholding. It has been put to me that this arrangement would reduce the need
    to travel when compared with the current situation, whereby the appellants
    commute from rented accommodation located further away from the appeal site.
22. I have given the appellants’ personal circumstances careful consideration.
    However, I am mindful of the advice contained in Planning Practice Guidance that,
    in general, planning is concerned with land use in the public interest. It is probable
    that the proposed dwelling would remain long after the appellants’ personal
    circumstances cease to be material. Future use of the dwelling would also not
    necessarily entail a similar situation.
23. As such, the appeal site would not be a suitable location for the proposal when
    applying the spatial strategy in the LP, and having regard to the accessibility of the
    site to services, facilities and employment opportunities. Consequently, the
    proposal fails to accord with Policies MG03, BE09 and BE14 of the LP. Amongst
    other things, these policies set out the Brentwood settlement hierarchy and seek
    minimise less sustainable forms of travel. For similar reasons the proposal would
    also fail to accord with the sustainability objectives of the Framework.
Other Matters
24. The main parties agree that the Council is unable to demonstrate a five year
    housing land supply. It is agreed that the Council’s housing land supply is currently
    4.53 years.
25. The Framework seeks to significantly boost housing supply. Policy L2 of the
    Framework requires substantial weight to be given to proposals which make
    effective use of previously developed land. Policy L3 outlines that outside
    settlements, development footprints should make the best use of a site’s

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009849


       development potential. Given the scale of the proposal, I afford this factor limited
       weight.
Self-build
26. Planning Practice Guidance recognises that self-build custom housing helps to
    diversify the housing market and increase customer choice. The Framework
    accordingly includes a range of measures designed to boost the supply of such
    housing.
27. The Council is required to keep a register of those seeking to acquire serviced
    plots for self-build and custom housing in the area under the requirements of the
    Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended) (the Act). The Act
    also requires Councils to give enough suitable development permissions to meet
    the identified demand for self-build and custom housing.
28. However, at the application stage and as part of the appeal there was no planning
    obligation to secure some means of ensuring the proposal would be constructed
    for such use. It seems to me that a planning condition requiring occupation of the
    dwelling by the person who built it would be unlikely to pass the tests within Policy
    DM6 of the Framework. There is therefore no mechanism to ensure that the
    proposal would be a self-build house. As such, I have to assess the proposal as
    market housing.
Conditions
29. I have had regard to the planning conditions that have been suggested by the
    Council. I have considered them against the tests in the Framework and the advice
    in the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). I have made such amendments as
    necessary to comply with those documents and for clarity and consistency.
30. I have imposed standard conditions relating to the submission and timing of
    reserved matters applications and the commencement of development. I have
    combined the two suggested conditions into a single condition in the interest of
    clarity and brevity. An approved plans condition is necesarry in the interests of
    certainty.
31. Also necessary are conditions requiring details of foul water disposal and surface
    water drainage in the interests of public health and safety and to ensure that
    surface water is managed appropriately on site. I have imposed conditions related
    to hard and soft landscaping, boundary treatments and the retention of trees and
    hedges in the interests of character and appearance.
32. Conditions relating to the vehicular access and visibility splays are necesarry in the
    interests of highway safety. A condition requiring a limit on water consumption is
    required to ensure efficient use of water resources and a condition related to high-
    speed broadband connections is necesarry to accord with the requirements of
    Policy BE07 of the LP.
33. As the site is located in a quiet area, and benefits from a large area suitable for
    storage of materials and parking of vehicles, I do not consider that a condition
    requiring a Construction and Environmental Management Plan and Construction
    Management Plan are necessary. Consequently, I have not imposed the
    suggested conditions. However, a condition restricting the hours of construction
    works is necessary in the interests of neighbouring occupiers’ living conditions.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009849


34. In the absence of substantive evidence to indicate potential contamination at the
    site, I have not imposed the Council’s suggested suite of contamination conditions,
    as this would not be reasonable as required by Policy DM6 of the Framework.
    However, I have imposed a suggested condition which requires immediate
    reporting to the Council, and follow up with an investigation and risk assessment,
    in the event that any contamination is discovered.
35. Policy DM6 of the Framework is clear that conditions should not be used to restrict
    national permitted development rights unless there is clear justification to do so. I
    have not been provided with sufficient evidence as to why such conditions would
    be reasonable or necessary to restrict permitted development rights for the
    dwelling. Therefore, I have not imposed the suggested conditions to this effect.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
36. In the context of the presumption in favour of sustainable development, Policy S5
    of the Framework applies. Where development is proposed within the Green Belt,
    Policy S5 directs decision-makers to Policies GB6, GB7 and GB8 in the first
    instance. In this case, the proposal would not constitute inappropriate development
    when assessed against Policy GB7. Accordingly, Policy S5.2 applies. This states
    that, when applying Policy S5, the circumstances in which the benefits of a
    proposal are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects include, but
    are not restricted to, situations where the proposal would fail to comply with a
    national decision-making policy in the Framework that indicates planning
    permission should be refused in specific circumstances.
37. I have found that the appeal site would not be a suitable location for the proposal
    having regard to the accessibility of the site to services, employment opportunities
    and facilities. Consequently, there would be conflict with policies MG03, BE09 and
    BE14 of the LP. The overall housing land supply position indicates that the
    development plan is failing to meet its strategic challenges and the settlement
    strategy is not working effectively. The conflict with policies relating to these
    matters should therefore be afforded limited weight.
38. In this instance, the proposal does not conflict with any decision-making policies
    that indicate planning permission should be refused. Furthermore, the Framework
    requires substantial weight to be given to proposals that make effective use of
    previously developed land, which is the case here.
39. The Framework seeks to significantly boost housing supply and Policy HO7 states
    that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which
    will contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community. Given the poor housing land supply confirmed by the Council, I give
    the contribution of the additional dwelling substantial weight.
40. Overall, in my view therefore taken together the substantial benefits of the scheme
    outweigh any harms arising. Therefore, I do not find that the benefits of the
    proposal would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. Consequently,
    the appeal should succeed.

B Pattison
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009849


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
    1) The development shall not commence until details of the appearance and
       landscaping, (hereinafter called "the reserved matters") have been submitted to
       and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The application/s for
       approval of the reserved matters shall be made to the Local Planning Authority
       not later than 3 years from the date of this permission.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than 2 years from the
       date of approval of the last of the reserved matters to be approved.

    3) The development hereby permitted shall not be carried out except in complete
       accordance with the approved drawings and specifications listed below:
       • 4042-D1100-rev02;
       • 4042-D1000-rev02;
       • 4042-D3100-rev00;
       • 4042-D3200-rev01;
       • 4042-D3300-rev00;
       • 4042-D3400-rev01.

    4) Prior to or concurrently with the submission of any Reserved Matters application,
       a scheme for the disposal of foul water shall be submitted to and approved in
       writing by the Local Planning Authority, in consultation with Environmental
       Health. The scheme shall demonstrate that the drainage hierarchy has been
       followed, with evidence provided to confirm that connection to the public sewer is
       not feasible where a non-mains solution is proposed.
       Prior to the occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted the approved scheme
       shall be implemented in full and shall thereafter be retained and maintained.

    5) Prior to or concurrently with the submission of any Reserved Matters application,
       details of a surface water drainage strategy incorporating sustainable drainage
       measures shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority.
       The details shall demonstrate that surface water runoff will be managed on-site
       through proportionate sustainable drainage features appropriate to the scale of
       development. The approved drainage measures shall be implemented prior to
       first occupation and shall thereafter be retained

    6) No demolition/construction activities or deliveries shall take place, other than
       between 0800 to 1800 hours (Monday to Friday) and 0800 to 1300 hours
       (Saturday) with no working activities on Sunday or Bank Holiday.

    7) In the event that contamination is found at any time when carrying out the
       approved development it must be reported in writing immediately to the Local
       Planning Authority. An investigation and risk assessment must be undertaken,
       and where remediation is necessary a remediation scheme must be prepared
       and submitted for the approval in writing of the Local Planning Authority.
       Prior to the occupation of the dwelling and following completion of measures
       identified in the approved remediation scheme a verification report must be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009849


    8) Prior to or concurrently with the submission of a Reserved Matters application, a
       scheme of hard and soft landscaping shall be submitted and shall indicate the
       existing trees, shrubs and hedgerows to be retained, the location, species and
       size of all new trees, shrubs and hedgerows to be planted or transplanted, those
       areas to be grassed and/or paved. The landscaping scheme shall include details
       of all surfacing materials and existing and proposed ground levels. The scheme
       shall also include details of biodiversity enhancement measures to be
       incorporated within the site, such as habitat features and opportunities for
       wildlife. The landscaping scheme shall be completed during the first planting
       season after the date on which any part of the development is commenced or in
       accordance with a programme to be agreed in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority. Any newly planted tree shrub or hedgerow, or any existing tree, shrub
       or hedgerow to be retained, that dies, or is uprooted, severely damaged or
       seriously diseased, within five years of the completion of the development, shall
       be replaced within the next planting season with another of the same species
       and of a similar size, unless the Local Planning Authority gives prior written
       consent to any variation.

    9) Prior to or concurrently with the submission of a Reserved Matters application,
       details of all trees and hedges to be retained shall be submitted and improved in
       writing by the Local Planning Authority. This shall include details of trees outside
       the site whose canopies overhang the site, and the proposed protection by
       strong fencing, including the location and type. The fencing shall be erected in
       accordance with the approved details before any equipment, machinery or
       materials are brought onto the site for the purposes of the development, and
       shall be maintained until all equipment, machinery and surplus materials have
       been removed from the site. Nothing shall be stored or placed within any fenced
       area, and the ground levels within those areas shall not be altered, nor shall any
       excavation be made without the prior written consent of the Local Planning
       Authority.

    10) Prior to or concurrently with the submission of any Reserved Matters application
        which includes details of landscaping, details of all boundary treatments shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
        The details shall include the type, height, position and materials of all boundary
        treatments. Along the boundary of the site adjoining the public highway,
        boundary treatments shall be of a low and visually permeable form, and shall not
        include close-boarded fencing or other solid enclosures. The approved boundary
        treatments shall be implemented prior to first occupation and shall thereafter be
        retained and maintained in accordance with the approved details.

    11) Prior to the first occupation of the development, details of the visibility splays for
        the vehicular access shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority, in consultation with the Highway Authority. The details will
        demonstrate that the vehicular access at its centre line shall be provided with
        clear to ground visibility splays of 2.4 metres by 87 metres to the northeast and
        2.4 metres by 62 metres to the southwest, as measured from and along the
        nearside edge of the carriageway.
        Prior to occupation of the development the visibility splays shall be provided in
        accordance with the approved details and shall thereafter be retained free of any
        obstruction at all times.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6009849




    12) Prior to commencement of works to construct the vehicular access, details of its
        construction, including surfacing, levels and the crossing of the highway verge
        and ditch, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority, in consultation with the Highway Authority. These details shall accord
        with the access position, dimensions and alignments shown on drawing 4042-
        D3300-rev 00.
        Prior to first occupation of the dwelling the vehicular access, including crossing
        of the highway verge and ditch, shall be completed in accordance with the
        approved drawing and construction details and shall thereafter be retained.

    13) Prior to its occupation the dwelling shall be designed to achieve a water
        consumption rate of no more than 100 litres per person per day. Prior to
        occupation of the dwelling, evidence of compliance shall be submitted to and
        approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority

    14) Prior to its occupation the dwelling shall be provided with service connections
        capable of supporting the provision of the highest-speed broadband from the
        building to the nearest broadband service connection outside the site.

    15) No unbound material shall be used in the surface treatment of the vehicular
        access within 6 metres of the highway boundary.

    16) Notwithstanding the requirements of condition 10, any boundary planting
        adjacent to the highway shall be set back a minimum of 1 metre from the
        highway boundary and shall be located outside of any required visibility splays

    17) Prior to the occupation of the dwelling details of the facilities to be provided for
        the storage of cycles shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority. The approved facilities shall be secure, convenient, covered
        and provided prior to occupation and retained at all times and in accordance with
        the EPOA Parking Standards 2024.

END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
