Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by L Gardner MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009640
15 Stradbroke Drive, Chigwell, Essex IG7 5QU
        •       The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
                amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
        •       The appeal is made by A Cupidore against the decision of Epping Forest District Council.
        •       The application Ref is EPF/2554/24.
        •       The development proposed is conversion of structure into a residential dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       I understand that the building to which this appeal relates has existed on site since
         the 1980s, having originally been built as an annex to the dwelling at
         15 Stradbroke Drive. Whilst it is suggested that there have been periods of
         independent occupation of the building, the outcome of a lawful development
         certificate application1 confirmed that the Council are not satisfied that this has
         amounted to the creation of a separate residential unit, which has become lawful
         through the passage of time.
3.       During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
         (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were
         provided with an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of
         the Framework in my decision.
Main Issues
4.       The main issues are:
            •     the effect of the proposed development on the character of the area,
                  including its effect on trees; and
            •     whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living
                  conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to outlook and privacy.
Reasons
Character
5.       The area surrounding the appeal site is residential in nature, primarily formed of
         large, detached dwellings, set within spacious plots. Along Stradbroke Drive,
         dwellings are typically set back from the tree lined highway, with frontages
1
    Council’s reference EPF/2131/24

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6001788


      comprised mostly of areas of hardstanding used for parking, interspersed with soft
      landscaping. Overall, the area surrounding the appeal site has a spacious and
      verdant character.
6.    The appeal site occupies an established backland position, which comprises two
      detached dwellings set within a woodland context, which creates a more sylvan
      character than that experienced from Stradbroke Drive itself. Notwithstanding that
      their positioning is somewhat atypical to the character of the area, both dwellings
      broadly conform to the character of the dwellings within the wider area, being
      large, detached dwellings within spacious plots.
7.    The appeal proposal seeks to elevate the status of the existing building from its
      originally approved annex to a separate residential unit. The function of the
      building would be materially different to its originally intended purpose, and
      therefore, even without external extensions, alterations or changes to the spatial
      arrangements on site, the appeal proposal holds the potential to impact upon the
      character and legibility of the surrounding area.
8.    The proposed dwelling, with its modest form and scale within a constrained plot,
      would be significantly at odds with the established pattern of spacious residential
      curtilages with substantially sized dwellings. Even without a specific policy
      requirement to create irregular or informal plots, the sub-division of the plot to
      create a separate residential unit would disrupt the legibility and clarity of
      residential plots within the surrounding area.
9.    Consequently, it would be an unsympathetic form of development which, as a
      separate residential curtilage, would sit in an awkward proximity to the dwelling to
      which it was originally intended to be associated with. I therefore find it reasonable
      that the Council has identified this to represent an over-intensive use of the site,
      despite the modest scale of the building itself.
10. Although there is an abundance of trees within the immediate surroundings (some
    of which I understand to be protected by tree preservation order), the appeal
    proposal does not seek to introduce new built form, relying on the existing building
    and its associated access.
11. On this basis, I am satisfied that if I were otherwise minded to allow the appeal, the
    protection of existing tree specimens could be dealt with through an appropriately
    worded condition. Notwithstanding this, I do not find that the imposition of
    conditions would be able to overcome the entirety of the harm which I have
    identified above.
12. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposal would have a harmful
    effect on the character of the area. It would therefore be contrary to Policy DM9 of
    the Epping Forest District Local Plan Part One (2023) (the Local Plan), insofar as
    the policy requires all new development to contribute to the distinctive character
    and amenity of the local area, including relating positively to their locality, having
    regard to form, scale, massing and the rhythm of local plots.
13. The Council’s reason for refusal also refers to Policy DM10 of the Local Plan which
    relates to Housing Design and Quality, including internal space standards, amenity
    space, green infrastructure and tenure. I have identified no specific conflict with
    this policy arising from the development. Nevertheless, a lack of conflict with Policy


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6001788


        DM10 of the Local Plan does not overcome the harm I have identified in respect to
        Policy DM9 of the Local Plan.
Living conditions
14. Policy DM9 of the Local Plan also refers to privacy and amenity, seeking for
    proposals to not result in an over-bearing or overly enclosed form of development,
    whilst also seeking an avoidance of loss of privacy including for proposed
    occupiers. Policy DM10 of the Local Plan seeks for proposals to include private
    garden / amenity space.
15. The building to which this appeal proposal relates is already in situ, and therefore
    already shares a physical relationship to the nearest residential dwellings. The
    closest neighbour for the proposed residential unit, would be 15 Stradbroke Drive
    (No 15), the dwelling to which the building was originally constructed in association
    with.
16. The side elevation of the building is in close proximity to a garage serving No 15.
    However, the window on this elevation serves a bathroom. Whilst there is also a
    door serving the living area, this is further away from the neighbouring garage, with
    a relatively unconstrained outlook. I therefore do not find that the presence of the
    garage at No 15 would create a sense of enclosure which would be harmful to the
    living conditions of the future occupiers of the proposed dwelling.
17. Given the positioning of windows and location of the proposed garden area, I find
    that the greatest potential for a loss of privacy through overlooking would be from
    the neighbouring dwelling at 15a Stradbroke Drive. However, noting the distance
    between built form, and that the proposed garden area would span to the side and
    rear of the dwelling, I do not find that the overlooking experienced would be
    materially harmful to the living conditions of future occupiers.
18. I therefore find that the proposed development would provide acceptable living
    conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to outlook and privacy. In
    respect to this main issue, I have identified no specific conflict with Policies DM9 or
    DM10 of the Local Plan.
Other Matters
19. The appeal site is located within 3km of the Epping Forest Special Area of
    Conservation, which is a European site as defined in the Conservation of Habitats
    and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended). Had I found the appeal scheme to
    be acceptable in all other regards it would have been necessary for me to examine
    this matter in further detail. However, as I have found that the scheme would be
    unacceptable for other reasons, it is not necessary for me to consider whether
    there would be a likely significant effect on the integrity of the European site or
    undertake an appropriate assessment.
20. My attention has been drawn to a previous permission and lawful development
    approval2 which have established the residential planning context of the wider site.
    Whilst the appellant contends that this evidences that the principle of multiple
    residential units in this backland setting has been accepted, I have no further
    details regarding the form or scale of the previous approval. Based on the
    evidence, I cannot be satisfied that the previous permission is in any way
2
    References EPF/0835A/86 EPF/0026/22


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6001788


      comparable to the appeal scheme before me, or that it represents a fall back
      position which would justify the harm created through the appeal proposal.
21. Highway safety was not listed as a reason for refusal on the decision notice.
    However, it was raised as an issue in the associated officer report, in the context
    of the further intensification of the existing vehicular access. Even if I were to find
    that the existing vehicular access would be suitable for an additional dwelling, this
    would not change my view on the overall merits of the appeal proposal set out
    above.
Planning Balance
22. Policy S4 of the Framework outlines that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
23. The Framework is clear that, in applying Policy S4, the circumstances in which the
    benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where there is a failure
    to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
24. Even small developments present the opportunity to make a meaningful,
    immediate difference to housing land supply. The proposal would lead to the
    efficient development of a windfall site, creating a dwelling which meets national
    space standards, and creating a potential increase in local spend. In the context of
    Policy L2(1)d of the Framework insofar as it relates to additional development
    within existing plots, I have afforded the benefits of the proposal substantial
    weight.
25. On the other hand, I have identified that the proposal would have a harmful effect
    on the character of the area. In this respect, the proposal would be at odds with
    Policy DP3(1) of the Framework which requires development proposals to respond
    to their context, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings,
    including through the arrangement of development plots and buildings. Policy
    DP3(3) of the Framework is clear that development proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of the policy.
26. I find that, in the application of Policy S4 of the Framework, the benefits of
    approving the development, including the associated housing delivery, would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, arising in part from the failure to
    comply with Policy DP3(1) of the Framework as well as the conflict with Policy
    DM9 of the Local Plan.
Conclusion
27. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a
    whole and there are no other material considerations, including the provisions of
    the Framework, which outweigh this finding. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
