Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by K Crutchfield BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009558
7 Wych Lane, Gosport PO13 0SU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Luke Townsend-Brown of Townsend-Brown Capital Ltd against the
     decision of Gosport Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00067/FULL.
•    The development proposed is Outbuilding - storage space to main host house No. 7 Wych Lane.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for an outbuilding -
      storage space to main host house No. 7 Wych Lane, Gosport PO13 0SU in
      accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00067/FULL, subject to the
      following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved plan: 7 Wych Ln- BCP Elev. Plans Dwg A1 Rev. 0.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A new National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026. The
      parties have had the opportunity to comment on the new document.
3.    The proposed ground floor plan indicates an external store. Further details of an
      external store have not been provided and it is not included in the description of
      development on the application form. I have not therefore treated it as part of the
      appeal development.
Main Issue
4.    The main issue is whether the proposed building would have an incidental
      relationship to the main dwelling.
Reasons
5.    The appeal property, no 7 Wych Lane is a ground floor flat. The vehicular access
      to the site is located to the side of no 7; it also provides access to garages and
      areas of parking associated with other nearby residential properties.
6.    The proposed outbuilding would be located on an area of hardstanding to the rear
      of nos 7 and 9 Wych Lane which is separated from the host dwelling by an area of
      hardstanding used for the access and parking to no 9. The appellant confirms that


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009558


      the proposed building would be incidental to no 7, used for storage and a home
      office.
7.    The proposed outbuilding would be separated from the host dwelling by the
      access and parking area to no 9. However, this access and parking area is small
      in size, and the proposed outbuilding would be located in reasonable proximity to
      the host dwelling to enable it to be able to function as an incidental building.
8.    The floor area of the outbuilding would be larger than the host dwelling and
      therefore it would not be subordinate in scale. The host dwelling is small in size,
      and the appellant contends that the limited floorspace creates a greater need for
      storage and workspace accommodation. The proposed floor area and overall
      scale is not unusual for an outbuilding of this nature, or of a scale that it could not
      function as an incidental building.
9.    The Council and interested parties are concerned about the possible future use of
      the proposed outbuilding, in particular the potential for primary or independent use
      that could include residential accommodation. However, the appellant has not
      sought permission for such a use. Whilst the proposal is detached and includes a
      toilet and one of the storage rooms appears to have a small kitchenette area, it
      does not provide full kitchen or bathroom facilities and does not include sleeping
      accommodation to enable independent occupation. The proposed plans include
      parking and the provision of external space. However, there is not sufficient
      evidence before me to suggest that these would not be shared with the host
      dwelling.
10. I appreciate that the building, like many other incidental outbuildings has the
    potential to be occupied other than as incidental accommodation to the host
    dwelling. However, in the event that the outbuilding is not built or used as
    proposed, or if there is a material change of use in the future to create a separate
    dwelling, then a separate grant of planning permission would be required, and the
    building would be at risk of enforcement action if such permission is not granted.
11. For the reasons above I conclude that the proposed building would have an
    incidental relationship to the main dwelling. As such, it accords with policy LP10 of
    the Gosport Borough Local Plan (2015). This policy, amongst other provisions,
    seeks to ensure that the development form has a high quality appearance in terms
    of scale and layout.
12. The decision notice asserts that the development conflicts with policy LP23 of the
    Gosport Borough Local Plan (2015). However, this policy relates to matters of the
    layout of sites in relation to parking and access, which is not referred to in the
    reason for refusal. I do not have substantive evidence before me to suggest that
    there is a conflict with this policy and as such, it is not determinative.
Other Matters
13. Interested parties have raised concerns about an increase in vehicular
    movements. I have no substantive evidence before me to suggest that any
    additional vehicular movements associated with the proposed outbuilding would
    cause highway safety issues; I see no reason to disagree with the Council’s
    conclusions on this matter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009558


14. Concerns have also been raised about the amount of parking. The Council did not
    refuse the application for this reason. The plans show one parking space adjacent
    to the proposed outbuilding and there is also existing hardstanding immediately to
    the rear of no.7 which would not be affected by the proposed development. I have
    no substantive evidence before me to suggest that this level of parking would be
    unacceptable.
15. The proposed plans appear to maintain the width of the access road and therefore
    would not affect manoeuvring space within the access road.
16. Some vegetation would need to be removed. The Council state that this vegetation
    has limited value in terms of its contribution to the local environment and that there
    is no indication of bat activity within the area or that the vegetation would form a
    suitable habitat. Based on the evidence before me, and my site visit, I find no
    reason to disagree with the Council’s conclusions on this matter.
17. I note the comments concerning landownership. However, Certificate A was
    completed for the planning application and appeal forms certifying that the
    applicant is the sole owner of all the land within the boundaries of the site, and I
    have no substantive evidence that this Certificate is incorrect.
18. The future maintenance of the access road and associated drainage system, any
    potential damage to the access, or obstruction of neighbouring occupiers’ access
    during the construction period are private matters.
19. The Council comment on the future monitoring of the use of the outbuilding; this is
    a separate process and is not relevant to the planning merits of this appeal.
Conditions
20. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition specifying
    the approved plans as this provides certainty.
21. I am satisfied that the description of the development is precise in describing the
    proposed development and consistent with a building to be used in a way that is
    part and parcel of the existing dwelling use. Therefore, a condition limiting the use
    to that proposed is not necessary.
Conclusion
22. For the above reasons, the proposal accords with the development plan. Material
    considerations do not indicate a decision should be taken other than in accordance
    with the development plan. I therefore conclude the appeal should be allowed.

K Crutchfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
