Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by P Brennan BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009513
Land at Nunhayes, Great Stone, Cuddington HP18 0AZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr P Healy of M.A. Healy Ltd against the decision of Buckinghamshire
     Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/4389/FA.
•    The development proposed is works of demolition and the erection of a detached dwelling with
     access, parking, and amenity space.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
      in August 2026. The parties have been provided with the opportunity to comment
      on the implications of the revisions to their cases. I have taken account of the
      revised Framework, and any comments made, in my determination of the appeal.
3.    The appeal site is within the Cuddington Conservation Area (CCA) wherein I have
      a statutory duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
      Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the LBCA Act) to pay special attention to the
      desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the area.
4.    I also have a duty under Section 66(1) of the LBCA Act to have special regard to
      the desirability of preserving listed buildings or their settings or any features of
      special architectural or historic interest which they possess. The listed buildings,
      identified in evidence, are ‘Nunhayes Cottage’ and Outbuilding and ‘Great Stone
      House,’ both Grade II listed.
Main Issue
5.    The main issue is whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance
      the CCA, the significance of the adjacent Grade II listed buildings and the effect on
      Nunhayes: a Non-Designated Heritage Asset (NDHA).
Reasons
Cuddington Conservation Area
6.    The CCA forms a large proportion of the wider settlement of Cuddington and has
      remained relatively unchanged with limited infilling. The village core contains
      buildings of various dates and architectural styles; including thatched and timber

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009513


      framed buildings and the stone Tyringham Hall which are of the sixteenth and
      seventeenth century, whilst later brick buildings include the Victorian school and
      schoolhouse.
7.    The CCA is characterised by its mix of architecture and historic agrarian character
      with varied plot sizes, and having a sporadic pattern of development, being deficit
      of strong building lines, within a structure of narrow, winding lanes. The use of
      wychert, a mix of chalk, clay, and straw, as a building material is widespread
      throughout the CCA. Its significance derives from its history as an agricultural
      community, its irregular pattern of development that includes green and verdant
      gaps between buildings and its architectural character due to its use of wychert.
8.    Policy BE1 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local Plan 2013-2033 (VALP) supports
      development proposals that do not cause harm to the significance of heritage
      assets. Policy HE9 (1) of the Framework identifies that development within or
      affecting the significance of conservations areas should retain and conserve
      buildings or other features which make a positive contribution to the character or
      appearance of the conservation area. It also identifies that proposals should
      consider the area’s special architectural or historic interest in the design of
      development. It states that harm should be considered on the terms of total loss;
      harm, no effect and positive effect, I shall apply this approach to my assessment.
9.    The appeal site comprises an existing side garden, formerly used as an orchard
      but is now a cleared grassed area, to the west of Nunhayes. The proposed two-
      storey dwelling would be set behind the existing front boundary wall. Residential
      dwellings and their plots border the appeal site. Forming part of a former wider
      farm holding which included ‘Nunhayes’ (as agricultural barns), the site makes an
      important and positive contribution to the character and appearance of the CCA,
      despite having limited visibility from public vantage points.
10. Planning permission has been granted for new development on the site adjacent
    to the appeal site and to the rear of ‘Nunhayes’ (application reference
    21/04844/APP) which has commenced on site. The proposed dwelling would be
    sited between the existing dwelling at ‘Nunhayes’ and the previously approved
    dwelling to the west. It would sit close to the side of ‘Nunhayes’ and partially
    forward of its front elevation and in line with the approved dwelling.
11. The approved new dwelling to the front would be of a design and scale similar to
    the stable building that it would replace, whilst the new bungalows to the rear are
    designed in contrast to the barn design, residential building to the front. Each of
    these dwellings have space around them and complement the sporadic
    development pattern established within the CCA.
12. Conversely, the appeal proposal would infill a small remaining gap between
    ‘Nunhayes’ and the previously approved dwelling. It would appear cramped when
    compared to the spacious nature of its neighbours and development within the
    surrounding conservation area. The development would also establish a forced
    building line with ‘Nunhayes’ and the new dwelling that would be unbroken along
    Great Stone, providing a more formal development pattern to this part of the CCA
    than currently exists, to its detriment. The dwelling would also be more domestic in
    appearance than its neighbours. Consequently, the domestic and ordered
    character to the design and siting of the proposed dwelling would be discordant



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009513


      and visually incongruous with the agrarian historic character of the neighbouring
      properties and the CCA as a whole.
13. The proposed development would be behind an existing boundary wall. Due to the
    narrowness of Great Stone and the height of the wall, public views are limited into
    the site. Nonetheless, and whilst I accept that topography and design features
    would limit public views, it would be visible from public vantage points from
    intermediate views approaching the site along the highway. Therefore, the
    perception of the proposal being shoehorned into an ‘open’ space would be
    prevalent, even if the existing gap is not abundantly apparent from the highway
    due to the walled enclosure.
14. As a result, the proposed dwelling would erode the sporadic pattern of the existing
    loose-knit building pattern within the village. It would also diminish an important
    green gap between buildings in conflict with the agricultural evolution of the village
    and CCA. The harmful impact of the proposed dwelling would be compounded by
    the extensive area of hardstanding to its frontage which would be extended from
    that already approved by the planning permission for the adjacent site. This area
    would be visible from Great Stone and the adjacent dwelling through the access
    into the site.
15. Consequently, the proposed development, due to its siting and design, would fail
    to preserve or enhance the significance of the CCA. Under the terms of the
    Framework, the degree of harm found to the CCA would be calibrated at the mid-
    range of such harm.
Listed Buildings
16. ‘Nunhayes Cottage’ and its outbuilding are located on the corner of Great Stone
    and Spickett’s Lane. The one and a half storey cottage dates from the seventeenth
    century. It is constructed from wychert and rendered with its south elevation being
    of brick and forming part of the boundary wall to the road. The roof is half-hipped
    and thatched. The eighteenth-century outbuilding is adjacent to the cottage and
    formed a stable building and store. It is also constructed from wychert on a
    rubblestone plinth and has a hipped thatch roof. The significance of the listed
    cottage and the outbuilding relate primarily to their age, vernacular construction,
    and design, alongside their historic character and rural setting.
17. Despite the residential conversion of existing buildings at ‘Nunhayes’ and the
    Annex barn and residential development occurring on the opposite side of Great
    Stone, the setting of the cottage and outbuilding has remained relatively
    unchanged. ‘Nunhayes’ and its Annex barn would provide screening to the
    proposal, with limited intervisibility between the appeal site and the cottage. The
    wychert wall to the front boundary of the appeal site would also be retained to the
    front of the proposed development, thereby preserving the boundary wall which is
    a significant characteristic of Great Stone and the cottage and outbuilding.
    Consequently, notwithstanding the appeal site’s proximity to ‘Nunhayes Cottage’
    and Outbuilding, the proposed development would preserve their setting, and their
    significance would not be harmed, causing no effect.
18. ‘Great Stone House’ is located on the opposite side of the road to the appeal site.
    It is a two-storey dwelling from the later eighteenth century, which sits at a higher
    level than the adjacent highway. It is constructed from rubblestone, which to the
    front imitates large masonry blocks with a recessed pattern of one course of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009513


      brickwork laid horizontally and vertically. The dwelling, whilst immediately facing
      the Annex barn and whilst existing boundary hedging partially restricts views
      towards the appeal site and ‘Nunhayes,’ there is good intervisibility between the
      two. Its significance lies in its architectural and historic character and its rural
      setting.
19. New dwellings have been developed adjacent to ‘Great Stone House,’ which have
    to a modest extent, changed the nature of its rural setting over time. However, the
    setting to the front of ‘Great Stone House’ has remained relatively unchanged.
    Nevertheless, notwithstanding the appeal site’s proximity to ‘Great Stone House’
    and the intervisibility between the two, the proposed development would preserve
    the setting of ‘Great Stone House,’ the significance of which would not be harmed,
    causing no effect.
Non-designated Heritage Asset
20. The Council at the time of determining the planning application had not formally
    identified ’Nunhayes’ as a NDHA either through its Local Plan or a local list. It had
    however been identified as such through the made Cuddington Neighbourhood
    Plan (NP) and has subsequently been added to the Council’s Local Heritage
    Assets Local List.
21. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) defines a non-designated heritage asset
    (NDHA) as “buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes identified by
    plan-making bodies as having a degree of heritage significance meriting
    consideration in planning decisions, but which do not meet the criteria for
    designated heritage assets.”
22. The building dates from the seventeenth/eighteenth century and is a timber framed
    former agricultural barn with a mix of tile and thatch roof that has been converted
    to a residential dwelling. It sits in a position, partially behind the smaller eighteenth
    century Annex barn. The dwelling is partially screened by wychert walls along
    Great Stone and has a large of expanse of garden to the front, rear, and side.
23. Policy BE1 of the VALP identifies that, amongst other things, proposals which
    affect the “significance of a non-designated heritage asset should be properly
    considered, weighing the direct and indirect impacts upon the asset and its
    setting”. Policy HE7(2) of the Framework identifies that “where a development
    proposal would harm the significance of a non-designated heritage asset, this
    should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal having regard to the scale
    of any harm or loss and the significance of the non-designated heritage asset.”
24. In assessing its significance, I have taken into consideration the degree of change
    made to the building, its surroundings, and its functional links to its historic context.
    Its significance as a NDHA relates to its architectural and historic character and its
    expansive rural garden setting. Whilst its agricultural use has changed and its link
    to a wider farm holding has become severed over time, its setting and appearance
    have remained relatively unchanged, with several former agrarian buildings
    remaining within its setting and the courtyard arrangement still visible.
25. I acknowledge that the three dwellings and access road previously approved are
    located on a considerable area of what would formerly have been the original farm
    holding and subsequently part of the NDHA’s setting. However, a significant
    portion of the wider site remains as garden land to the dwelling at ‘Nunhayes,’

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009513


      including the side garden which forms the appeal site. This side garden provides a
      necessary green gap between Nunhayes and the current stable building and
      approved dwelling. Consequently, its significance has not been diminished to an
      extent whereby further development within its setting, and its cumulative effects
      would not cause harm, and I therefore ascribe harm to the significance of the
      NDHA. The degree of harm found to the NDHA under the terms of the Framework,
      would also be calibrated at the mid-range of such harm.
26. The proposal would occupy a gap to the side of ‘Nunhayes’ with the proposed
    dwelling being around 2.5m to Nunhayes. Given the frontage length of ‘Nunhayes,’
    this gap would fail to provide a proportional and adequate separation distance
    between the two buildings, for these to be read as two separate entities. This
    crowding effect would diminish the significance of the NDHA. Also, the loss of the
    green space to the side of the NDHA would create a cramped form of development
    close to the west elevation of Nunhayes which would irreversibly harm its setting
    and subsequently its significance.
Summary
27. The proposal would harm the setting and significance of the CCA and the setting
    and significance of the NDHA, causing harm to the character and appearance of
    the area.
28. Consequently, for the reasons given above and despite finding no harm to the
    significance of the Grade II listed buildings, the proposal would fail to satisfy the
    requirements of the LBCA Act and would conflict with the Framework where it
    seeks to conserve the significance of heritage assets. The proposed development
    would cause moderate harm to the setting of the NDHA, which contributes to the
    area’s local character and identity and would harm the CCA.
29. These harms would raise conflict with VALP Policies BE1 and BE2 and NP
    Policies CDN03 and CDN04. These policies, amongst other matters, support
    development proposals where they conserve and where possible enhance
    heritage assets in a manner appropriate to their significance, including their
    setting; respect and complement the characteristics of the site and its
    surroundings and the local distinctiveness and vernacular character of the locality
    in terms of form, proportions, architectural detailing and materials, are of high
    quality design, use local materials and techniques and provide sufficient gaps
    between buildings to protect views of the countryside.
Other Matters
30. Whilst I note that Cuddington Parish Council raised no objection to the proposed
    development, this neither weighs for nor against the proposal in the planning
    balance.
31. The appellant has drawn my attention to four developments within Cuddington that
    secured planning permission for residential developments at Spickett’s Lane, the
    Junction of Spickett’s Lane and Aylesbury Road and Land west of Dadbrook. The
    appellant’s statement of case appears to identify these as relevant for the purpose
    of illustrating where the Council has allowed development with a mix of
    architectural styles similar to that proposed. However, whilst the plans of these
    developments are before me, I am not provided with the details of the Council’s
    assessment and am therefore unable to ascertain whether similarities exist

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009513


      between the proposal and the developments. Two of the developments identified
      were also determined prior to adoption of the VALP and were therefore assessed
      under a different policy context. Consequently, there is no direct comparison to be
      made between these that weighs in the appeal’s favour.
32. The appellant also drew my attention to a development approved behind ‘Great
    Stone House’ at Spickett’s Lane/Aylesbury Road, to illustrate that the proposal
    would not harm its significance. However, as I have also found the proposal to not
    harm the significance of Great Stone House, the decision is a neutral factor in the
    appeal proposal’s assessment.
Heritage Balance
33. Policy HE6(1) of the Framework identifies that substantial weight be given to a
    heritage asset’s conservation and Policy HE6(3) identifies that any harm to a
    designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight.
    Furthermore, Policy HE6(4) of the Framework requires development that would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and
    its significance should be weighed against public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. The Framework Policy HE7(2) requires that where a development
    proposal would harm the significance of a NDHA, this should be weighed against
    the benefits of the proposal.
34. The proposed development would harm the significance of the CCA to which I am
    required to ascribe considerable importance and weight and would harm the
    significance of ‘Nunhayes’ as a NDHA.
35. The Framework, at Policy H07, requires substantial weight to be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. This is especially pertinent in a district
    where the Council is not meeting its required 5-year supply of housing land. This
    provision is identified as 3.62 years by the Council and 3.16 years by the appellant
    and is clearly considerable no matter which figure I were to adopt.
36. The appeal proposal would bring forward some public benefits, notably in relation
    to the delivery of a residential dwelling within a District where a 5-year housing
    land supply is not achieved. Nonetheless, the provision of one dwelling would only
    make a limited contribution towards the Council’s housing land supply deficit.
37. The appeal scheme would also provide construction jobs and some local
    investment during its build out, as well as longer term expenditure in the local
    economy. However, I attach limited weight to these benefits considering the scale
    of development proposed and the modest size of the site in question.
38. Therefore, overall, I attach substantial weight to the combined benefits of the
    proposal. However, whilst the proposal’s public benefits attract substantial weight,
    they would not outweigh the considerable weight ascribed to the harm that would
    be caused to the heritage significance of the CCA and the significance of the
    NDHA and the substantial weight afforded to the conservation of designated
    heritage assets.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
39. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with VALP policies BE1 and BE2
    and NP policies CDN03 and CDN04 and would conflict with the development plan

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009513


      when taken as a whole. Planning law requires that applications for planning
      permission be determined in accordance with the development plan unless
      material considerations indicate otherwise.
40. Policy S03 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S04, for development within a settlement, states that such
    development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
41. The appeal site is within a settlement, and the proposal would provide a dwelling in
    an accessible location. Furthermore, the proposed dwelling would provide
    accommodation of an acceptable size with appropriate private space for use by
    future occupiers.
42. Nonetheless, the proposal would not be consistent with the overall street scene
    and would not respond well to its context, in conflict with policies L2(1)(d)(i) and
    DP3(1) of the Framework. The proposal would also cause harm of considerable
    weight to the CCA that would not be outweighed by the public benefits relating to
    the delivery of one dwelling in conflict with policy HE6(4). Harm to the significance
    of the NDHA would also occur and in undertaking a balanced judgement, the
    benefits of one dwelling would not outweigh the harm, in conflict with HE7(2).
43. In this instance, the benefits of the proposed development within a settlement,
    would be substantially outweighed by the identified adverse effects of the
    proposal, when assessed against the national decision-making policies of the
    Framework as a whole. As such the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development would not apply. Accordingly, the identified conflict with the
    development plan would not be outweighed by the material considerations.
44. For the reasons given above the appeal is, therefore, dismissed.



P Brennan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
