Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009331
21 Bute Close, Hinckley, Leicestershire LE10 0SJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. Lewis Bourne against the decision of Hinckley and Bosworth Borough
    Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00013/HOU.
•   The development proposed is for a two storey side extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure and Preliminary Matters
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
3. I have omitted narrative wording from the description of development above, given
   that the proposal has been revised and also for clarity and relevance purposes. It
   does not change any element of the appeal scheme and so would not affect the
   ability of the main parties to make their cases in respect thereof. Revised plans
   were received during the life of the planning application. The Council’s decision
   was based on them, and I have therefore taken them into account.
4. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the
   main issues in the appeal or the outcome thereof. Since their arguments would not
   therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation with the main
   parties.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on a) the character
   and appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area and b) the living
   conditions of the occupiers of Number 19 Bute Close’s rear garden (No. 19), with
   specific regard to privacy.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
6. The appeal relates to a two storey semi-detached dwelling, with a front porch and
   side conservatory. It occupies a prominent corner plot with a spacious side garden

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009331


     within a cul-de-sac. The appeal property forms as one of three semi-detached,
     pitched roof pairs of a similar original design, positioned along the entrance bend of
     Bute Close. They have been minimally extended, largely preserving their original
     form. The repetition of details, consistent material palette and fenestration
     pattern establishes a distinctive, cohesive rhythm when arriving at the cul-de-
     sac. They therefore exhibit a collective and original identity. Together, all these
     elements contribute positively to the area’s suburban character and appearance.
7. The proposal would be set back from the front and have a height lower than the
   main ridge. However, this would not create a truly subordinate appearance, given
   that the extension would have a total width and massing of a similar size to the host
   dwelling. It would therefore result in a bulky, excessively large and dominant
   addition that would appear disproportionate, causing the host property to read as
   an entirely new dwelling that has doubled in size. Moreover, it would appear heavily
   unbalanced with the adjoining property and would disrupt the original consistency
   of the three semi-detached pairs that frame the entrance into the cul-de-sac. Its
   prominence would be further exacerbated by the appeal site's open corner plot
   position, where it would be readily visible from the street scene. Whilst the large
   plot and spacious side garden could accommodate an extension of this size, this
   does not in itself justify the proposal’s overwhelming scale, massing and design.
8. The proposed gable elevation would be blank. However, this would not, in this
   instance, have an unacceptable impact. This is due to the existing gable having few
   small scale windows and limited architectural detailing, which is also reflected in a
   number of other simple side elevations visible within the cul-de-sac.
9. That said, for the above reasons, the proposal would result in unacceptable harm to
   the character and appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area. It would
   be contrary to Policy DM10 of the Site Allocations and Development Management
   Policies Development Plan Document 2016 (SADMP), the SPD and the
   Framework. Together, and amongst other things, these require developments to
   complement or enhance the character of the surrounding area, noting that
   overdevelopment of corner plots can create an oppressive quality which can lead to
   a significant change in the prevailing character of a place.
Living Conditions
10. No. 19 is the adjoining semi-detached dwelling. The proposed extension would
    feature large Juliet doors to its side elevation serving the new master bedroom,
    which would face directly towards No. 19’s rear garden. Notwithstanding this, this
    opening would be sufficiently separated, with a distance measuring more than the
    total width of the host dwelling. Whilst the opening would offer a high vantage point
    for views, the close arrangement of properties in the area means that their garden
    already experiences a degree of mutual overlooking from neighbouring first floor
    windows. This includes the existing first floor rear window serving bedroom one at
    the host dwelling, which has a much closer positioning to the shared boundary and
    more direct overlooks over No. 19’s rear garden. The existing boundary fence
    would provide some screening.
11. For these reasons, the proposal would not result in harm to the living conditions of
    the occupiers of No. 19, with specific regard to privacy. Accordingly, it would not
    conflict with Policy DM10 of the SADMP and the SPD. Together, and amongst
    other things, this policy and guidance require developments to not have a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009331


     significant adverse effect on the privacy and amenity of nearby residents, and to
     ensure that adequate space between and around buildings is recognised as a core
     component of residential amenity.
Other Matters
12. No planning history or permission has been provided to demonstrate that the side
    garden was intended for a separate dwelling. In any event, such development
    would be materially different from the proposed extension. The amendments made
    to the scheme following discussion with the Council would not overcome the
    identified harm with regard to the first main issue, for the above reasons. The
    Council not accepting suggested amendments are matters that should be taken up
    with them directly and are not for me to resolve here.
Conclusion and Recommendation
13. With regard to Policy S4 of the Framework and the principle of development within
    settlements, there would be some benefits to the extension of the dwelling. The
    proposal would generate local employment during the construction phase, but this
    would be time limited and is therefore of moderate weight. It would also provide
    increased and improved internal accommodation for the occupiers of the dwelling
    but as this represents a primarily private benefit, it would attract very limited weight.
14. The harm I have found with regard to the first main issue and the subsequent
    development plan conflict, would be considerable and enduring and I therefore
    ascribe it significant weight. Policy DP3 of the Framework also states that
    development proposals should respond to their context so that they integrate with
    and enhance their surroundings. The benefits of granting planning permission for
    the proposals would therefore be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
15. Whilst I have found in the appellant’s favour on the second main issue, this is a lack
    of harm and thus a neutral matter which is not capable of weighing against the
    harm I have found in regard to the first. Material considerations do not indicate a
    decision other than in accordance with the development plan, which the scheme
    conflicts with for the reasons I have set out. I therefore recommend the appeal
    should be dismissed.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
