Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Alison Fish BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6009864
Land outside 80 Middle Street, Yeovil BA20 1LT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Thomas Johnston of NWP Street Ltd against the decision of Somerset
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00448/FUL.
•    The development proposed is installation of 1 no. new communications kiosk with integrated
     defibrillator and advertising display.

Appeal B Ref: 6009865
Land outside 80 Middle Street, Yeovil BA20 1LT
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Thomas Johnston of NWP Street Ltd against the decision of Somerset
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00449/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is installation of 1 no. new communications kiosk with integrated
     defibrillator and advertising display.
     ________________________________________________________________________________

Decision
Appeal A
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for installation of 1 no.
   new communications kiosk with integrated defibrillator at land outside 80 Middle
   Street, Yeovil BA20 1LT in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   26/00448/FUL, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the
   attached schedule.
Appeal B
2.     The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the advertising display at
       land outside 80 Middle Street, Yeovil BA20 1LT in accordance with the terms of
       the application, Ref 26/00449/ADV. The consent is for five years from the date of
       this decision and is subject to the five standard conditions set out in the
       Regulations and the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026 a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
   was published. There have been no fundamental changes relevant to the main



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009864 and 6009865


        issues in this appeal. Therefore, I will not prejudice any party by taking the
        Framework into account in reaching my decision.
4. There are two appeals relating to the same site which were submitted on the same
   application form. I have therefore used the same description for both appeals in the
   banner heading but have varied them accordingly in the formal decisions above.
5. They differ in that Appeal A relates to planning permission and Appeal B relates to
   express advertisement consent. However, to avoid duplication and as they raise
   similar and interrelated issues, I have dealt with the two appeals together, except
   where otherwise indicated.
6. In respect of Appeal B, the Regulations1 require that decisions are made only in the
   interest of amenity and public safety. Therefore, whilst I have taken account of the
   development plan policy the Council refers to, insofar as it may be relevant, it has
   not been decisive in my determination of Appeal B.
Main Issue
7. The main issue in respect of Appeals A and B is the effect on the character and
   appearance and amenity of the area.
Reasons
8. The appeal proposal relates to the installation of a new kiosk, not unlike a
   traditional telephone box, housing a telephone, touchscreen and defibrillator. It
   would be open on two sides and feature an illuminated digital advertisement display
   on the rear.
9. The appeal site is a section of pavement in Middle Street, a pedestrianised area of
   the town centre. Located within the Primary Shopping Area and Primary Shopping
   Frontages as designated in the South Somerset Local Plan 2006-2028, adopted
   March 2015 (LP), the appeal site is located in a busy, commercial environment.
10. Middle Street is a wide, open thoroughfare for pedestrians, rising from east to west.
    The recent demolition of properties along its northern side creates an enhanced
    feeling of space. At the higher, western end public realm works have been carried
    out in an area known as ‘The Triangle’ to create an amphitheatre with seating for
    100 people, a water feature and improved hard and soft landscaping.
11. When viewed from The Triangle, the appeal site is located at a much lower level.
    This, together with the compact form and modest scale of the proposed kiosk would
    prevent it from appearing overly dominant or visually intrusive in the street.
12. The kiosk would be located close to existing street furniture. The addition of the
    kiosk in this busy commercial setting would not be incongruous. Its off-centre siting
    towards the southern side of Middle Street means that when approaching along
    Middle Street from the east, the perception of space would not be lost. The rising
    gradient of Middle Street means that The Triangle would remain a prominent and
    elevated feature in the street and the kiosk would not detract from the positive
    contribution The Triangle makes to the street scene.
13. The advertisement display would be visible from this direction, being located on the
    rear of the kiosk. However, the advertisement would be seen in the same context as
1
    Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decision 6009864 and 6009865


     the numerous surrounding advertisements on this busy commercial street, which
     includes other free-standing advertisements close by. As such, it would not appear out
     of keeping with the commercial character of the surroundings, and subject to
     appropriate controls on the level of illumination, it would not be visually dominant in this
     well-lit area.
14. In addition, the width of the street and the visual distance to the nearby signage
    would be sufficient to prevent excessive visual clutter that would harm the amenity
    of the area.
15. I therefore find that in respect of Appeal A, the proposal would not undermine the
    quality of the public realm. The effect on the character and appearance of the area
    would therefore be acceptable and the proposal would comply with Policy EQ2 of
    the LP which seeks to achieve high-quality development which respects the local
    context.
16. With regards to Appeal B and having regard to the Regulations and Policy EQ2,
    insofar as it is relevant, I conclude that the advertisement would not be harmful to
    amenity.
Other Matters
17. Policy CO1 of the Framework states that in considering proposals for
    telecommunications infrastructure, the need for the expansion or upgrading must
    not be questioned and that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of
    maintaining or improving network coverage.
18. The siting of the kiosk provides in excess of 3 metres of unobstructed footway in all
    directions. Pedestrian flows would not be limited or impeded given the spacious
    width of Middle Street.
19. The maintenance and upkeep would be the responsibility of the operator and this
    could be secured through a condition requiring adherence to the management plan.
    The management plan also details arrangements for the installation of CCTV and
    how anti-social behaviour incidents would be addressed.
20. The appellant’s design and access statement confirms that the proposed
    communication kiosk would be in full compliance with the International Commission
    on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection standards. Moreover, there is no substantive
    evidence before me that the proposal would lead to other public health issues,
    including screen addiction. Conditions would restrict luminance to an appropriate
    level.
21. Given the scale and location of the proposal, there is no requirement to
    demonstrate achievement of sustainability principles and there is no substantive
    evidence that the proposal would be harmful to wildlife.
22. It is understood that there is an intention to provide a new footway and that the
    proposed kiosk may then be sited close to the junction where the footway would
    emerge. However, in the absence of substantive evidence regarding the certainty
    of such a proposal or that the siting of the proposed kiosk would prevent this from
    occurring, I see no reason to withhold permission on this basis.
23. The content of the advertisements in Appeal B is not relevant to my consideration
    of the appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009864 and 6009865


Conditions
Appeal A
24. In addition to the management plan condition referred to above and the standard
    time condition, it is necessary to specify the approved plans in the interests of
    certainty.
25. Based on the information available, this permission is considered to be one which
    will not require the approval of a biodiversity gain plan before development is begun
    because a statutory exemption applies.
Appeal B
26. In addition to the five standard conditions, conditions controlling luminance levels,
    display time and effects are necessary in the interests of the visual amenity of the
    area. However, given that the advertisement is to be displayed in a wholly
    pedestrianised area, a condition preventing content which resembles traffic signs is
    not necessary.
Conclusion
27. For the above reasons, both Appeal A and Appeal B are allowed.

Alison Fish
INSPECTOR


                                           Schedule of conditions

Appeal A

    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawing nos: CK0193/01 Location Plan; CK0193/02 Site Plan Proposed and
       NWP-KIOSK/001 Elevations.

    3) The development shall be installed, managed, maintained and thereafter
       operated in accordance with the submitted New Communication Kiosk
       Management Plan dated October 2025.

Appeal B

    1) The intensity of the illumination of the digital display screen shall be no greater
       than 300 candelas per square metre (cd/m2) between dusk and dawn in line with
       the maximum permitted recommended luminance as set out by the Institute of
       Lighting Professionals in its 'Professional Lighting Guide 05: The Brightness of
       Illuminated Advertisements’ (or its equivalent in a replacement Guide).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
Appeal Decision 6009864 and 6009865


    2) The minimum display time for each piece of content on the digital display screen
       shall be 10 seconds.

    3) There shall be no moving images, animation, video or full motion images
       displayed.

    4) The interval between successive advertisements shall be no greater than 1
       second and the complete display shall change without effect. The display shall
       include a mechanism to default to a blank or black screen in the event of
       malfunction, or if the advertisement is not in use.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
