Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 September 2026
by John Felgate BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009544
Bulls Green Cottage, Clodmore Hill, Arkesden, Essex CB11 4HQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Edwin and Sophie Bee against the decision of Uttlesford District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is UTT/26/0201/HHF.
•    The development proposed is a two-bay cartlodge-style garage and workshop/garden store.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for a two-bay cartlodge-
       style garage and workshop/garden store, at Bulls Green Cottage, Arkesden, Essex
       CB11 4HQ, in accordance with the application Ref UTT/26/0201/HHF, subject to
       the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development shall be carried out in accordance with the following
              approved plans: G100/102/-Rev 2; and G100/101-Rev2.
Preliminary matters
2.     Amended plans were submitted by the appellants on 25 March 2026, following the
       receipt of comments from the Council’s conservation officer. These new plans are
       acknowledged in the Council’s refusal notice. I have made my decision on this
       basis.
Reasons for decision
3.     Bulls Green Cottage is a late 18th or early 19th century timber-framed cottage, with
       plastered walls and a thatched roof. The property is set in a large plot, in wooded
       countryside, and accessed via a gravelled ‘byway open to all traffic’. The building
       is listed, Grade II, and has been recently extended to the rear, with the benefit of
       the necessary approvals. In the absence of any other evidence, its significance as
       a heritage asset seems to me to lie in its evidential value as an example of local
       building styles and construction techniques, typical of a modest rural dwelling of its
       time, such as might have been associated with small-scale farming, horticultural or
       forestry activities.
4.     The development now proposed would comprise a 2-car garage, of standard size,
       with a smaller workshop and garden store attached. The new building would.be
       constructed mainly of black weatherboarding on a timber frame, with a brick plinth.
       The hipped roof would be in two sections, with a lowered apex over the store, and
       natural slate covering throughout.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009544


5.     In the Uttlesford Local Plan (the ULP), adopted in March 2026, Core Policy 61
       seeks to conserve heritage assets and their settings in a manner appropriate to
       their historic character and significance. Core Policy 62 requires that proposals
       within the curtilage of a listed building should respect the building’s historic context
       and setting, including through design, siting and materials. In the National
       Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), revised in August 2026, Policy HE4-1 seeks
       to avoid or minimise harm to heritage assets and their settings; and Policy HE5-3
       makes clear that it is the effect on their significance, rather than the scale of the
       development, that should be the prime consideration.
6.     In the present case, the new garage and store would be sited within the listed
       building’s present curtilage, and would be forward of the house, close to the
       byway. In this position, there is no doubt that the development would be within the
       heritage asset’s setting.
7.     But nevertheless, the new building would be modest in size, simple in form, and
       suitably rustic in character and materials. In all these respects, the design seems
       to me entirely sympathetic to the surroundings, and unobjectionable in terms of
       appearance. In addition, the garage would be well away from the house itself,
       separated by about 13m or so, at the nearest point. To my mind, this combination
       of scale and distance would ensure that the new building was visually subordinate.
       Seen from the byway, the existing trees on the site boundary would provide
       screening from the south, and a green backdrop from the north. This, together
       with the acceptable design, would result in the development being unobtrusive.
8.     Overall therefore, the scheme would result in a suitably designed minor building, in
       an inconspicuous position, and comfortably separated from the main house.
       Consequently, in my view, the development now proposed would not detract from
       the listed building’s setting, and would leave its significance as a heritage asset
       unharmed.
9.     For these reasons, I find that the appeal proposal would conserve the setting of
       Bulls Green Cottage in a manner appropriate to its historic character and
       significance, and would respect its historic curtilage and context, in accordance
       with the relevant ULP and NPPF policies identified above.
Conditions
10. In granting permission, I have imposed the standard conditions relating to the
    timescale for commencement, and requiring adherence to the approved plans.
    The reason for the latter is to ensure certainty as to the details that have been
    approved.
11. I note the Council’s request for a further condition preventing the use of the new
    building as a separate dwelling, but such a condition is unnecessary as such a use
    would require planning permission in any event.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons explained above, I now conclude that the appeal should be
    allowed.

J Felgate
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
