Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by B Phillips BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009984
61 Station Road, Drayton and Farlington, Portsmouth PO6 1PJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Wells against the decision of Portsmouth City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00169/HOU.
•    The development proposed is a front dormer.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a front dormer at 61
       Station Road, Drayton and Farlington, Portsmouth PO6 1PJ in accordance with
       the terms of the application, Ref 26/00169/HOU, and the plans submitted with it,
       subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing nos; Location Plan no.PP-14696968v1, Proposed Block Plan
              no.6126.22.0 and Proposed Elevations, Floor Plans and Street Scene
              no.6126.22.1 Revision G.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
              building.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have removed unnecessary wording from the description of development above.
3.     The submitted proposed drawings include extensions and additions approved
       under planning application 25/00488/VOC. These are not shown on the existing
       plans, but for clarification, do not form part of the proposal in front of me.
4.     The Council has confirmed that the emerging Portsmouth Local Plan (July 2024),
       referred to in the refusal reason, has been submitted for examination under
       Regulation 22 on 18th March 2026. There remains an unresolved objection to
       Policy PLP1, and as such, I give this policy only moderate weight.
5.     The inaccuracies in the proposed plans identified by the Council are noted,
       however their minor nature does not prevent full consideration and determination
       of the proposal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009984


Main Issue
6.     The main issue in this case is the effect of the proposal on the character and
       appearance of the existing property and street scene.
Reasons
7.     Station Road includes a wide variety of dwellings and architecture, from two storey
       semi-detached to detached bungalows and dormer bungalows. These have
       various roof styles, including front dormers of varying size and form, and there are
       a number nearby the appeal dwelling. There is therefore no consistency in terms
       of design apparent, including to the roof forms.
8.     The proposed dormer would be set in from the ridge, eaves and sides of the roof,
       and would not therefore appear overly wide nor excessive in size. As a
       consequence, it would sit comfortably within the roof next to the gable, and its
       window size would be similar to the existing first floor window immediately below it.
       The proportion of fenestration to tile hanging would therefore be appropriate, and it
       is position directly above the first-floor window would maintain the balance of the
       frontage.
9.     The suitable design and modest scale of the dormer mean that it would not appear
       as a top-heavy incongruous addition and would not detract from the existing
       design of the dwelling, including its bay and front gable.
10. The proposed dormer would therefore not harm the existing character of the
    existing property, nor, given the mixed surrounding context and roof forms with
    dormers of similar design and scale, would it harm any character or appearance of
    the street scene.
11. The proposal would therefore not conflict with Policy PCS23 of the Portsmouth
    Plan (2012) and Policy PLP1 of the emerging Portsmouth Local Plan (July 2024),
    which collectively, amongst other matters, require a high standard and quality of
    design and place-making.
Conditions
12. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have imposed a condition
    requiring the development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans
    as this provides certainty.
13. A condition requiring the dormer to match the existing dwelling in terms of
    materials is necessary to ensure the development is in keeping with the existing
    property.
Conclusion
14. There are no material considerations that indicate the development should be
    determined other than in accordance with the development plan. For the reasons
    given above and having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal is allowed.

B Phillips
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
