Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009059
Flat 2, Berther Road, Hornchurch, London RM11 3HS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Nadir Gul against the decision of the London Borough of Havering Council.
•   The application reference is P0771.25.
•   The development proposed is a change of use of the first floor from a self-contained residential flat
    (Use Class C3) to a large House in Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis) comprising seven bedrooms
    with shared facilities.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are the effect on the housing mix with particular regard to the
   provision of family housing; the effect on the living conditions of residents with
   regard to room sizes and communal space provision; the effect on community
   cohesion and the living conditions of the neighbouring residents with regard to
   noise and disturbance; and the effect on the amenities of local residents with
   regard to parking provision.
Reasons
3. The proposal is for a 7-bed house in multiple occupation (HMO). The use has
   already commenced. The plans show that the property was previously a three
   bedroom flat although the council describe it as having had two bedrooms during
   previous applications. It is situated above a large restaurant on the corner of
   Berther Road and Butts Green Road. Immediately to the rear of the property is the
   entrance to Emerson Park Overground Station. There is a parade of commercial
   properties on the opposite side of Butts Green Road.
Housing mix
4. The council are concerned that the use has resulted in the loss of a family sized
   dwelling. The Havering Local Plan 2016-2031 (2021) (HLP) includes Policy 8 which
   relates to HMO. It supports such uses providing a number of criteria are met. The
   first is that the overall size of the original property is not less than 120m 2. The
   supporting text advises that the policy seeks to deliver appropriate residential
   conversions whilst maintaining a supply of family housing in line with the strategic
   housing need of the borough. It states that the Strategic Housing Market
   Assessment identifies a need for three bedroom properties in the borough,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6009059


     meaning the conversion of small family homes to HMO would have a particularly
     negative impact on the supply of family housing.
5. The council’s delegated report suggests that the flat is 107m2 based on gross
   internal floor area with the stairwell discounted. The council’s statement includes a
   calculation that measures the internal area including the stairwell and this arrives at
   an area of 116.5m2. This excludes the ground floor area under the small bathroom.
   The application form states that the gross internal floorspace is 130m 2. The
   appellant’s statement suggests that the floor area is 156m2, but it is not clear how
   that figure was calculated.
6. Policy 8, unlike Policy 9 which follows it, does not refer to floor space. It refers to
   the overall size of the original property to be converted. Given this specific wording,
   it would not be unreasonable to use external measurements. Whilst the stairwell
   does not offer useable floor space, it is an integral part of the accommodation as it
   is for the exclusive use of the residents. There is nothing in the policy to suggest
   that it should be excluded from the calculation.
7. Whilst there is no agreement on this matter, the dimensions provided, relating to
   the pre-existing accommodation, when measured externally, suggest that the
   overall size of the original property to be converted, may just exceed the minimum
   area specified in Policy 8.
8. The appellant has suggested that the property is not a traditional family
   dwellinghouse. The policy does not distinguish between property types, and the
   supporting text relates to the identified need for three bedroom properties and
   family housing rather than dwellinghouses. However, a flat above a restaurant with
   a poor arrangement with regard to access, through a narrow passage from the
   parking and bin storage area and past the outdoor seating area, would not be an
   ideal arrangement for a family with children. I am also mindful of the council’s view
   that it was a two bedroom flat.
Living conditions of residents
9. The council are concerned about the quality of the accommodation, given the
   number of bedrooms. The property has been sub-divided in a way that has resulted
   in a number of small bedrooms, one particularly small; a small kitchen for the
   number of bedrooms; and no internal communal space for use as a living room or
   dining room. The occupants of the seven rooms would share one small bathroom
   with a single shower and no bath. No wash hand basins are shown within the
   bedrooms.
10. Policy 8vi requires that HMO contain communal space, including either a dining or
    living area, large enough for all the occupants to use simultaneously. Although
    there are wide passageways shown and an area outside rooms 5, 6 and 7, these
    do not offer appropriate communal accommodation. The layout conflicts with this
    policy requirement.
11. Policy 8vii requires that the development meets the requirements of the East
    London HMO Guidance (Guidance). The supporting text advises that the Guidance
    has been adopted by the council. However, the status of the document is not
    entirely clear. Nevertheless, it provides a useful starting point when considering
    living conditions.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision: 6009059


12. The Policy 8vi concern regarding the lack of communal space is exacerbated by
    the size of the kitchen. The Guidance sets out a figure of 9.5m 2 for the size of a
    kitchen for 6 or 7 residents whereas the kitchen shown on the plans is only 7.91m 2.
    Given the lack of supporting communal space, this represents very poor provision.
13. The Guidance sets out that rooms for sleeping, with kitchen facilities in a separate
    room, should be a minimum of 8.5m2. In this case, based on the submitted plans,
    five of the rooms are below this standard. Whilst some are only marginally below
    this minimum standard, the smallest is shown as being only 4.93m2. This is below
    the mandatory national minimum sleeping room size for adults in HMO of 6.51m 2
    set out in the Licensing of Houses in Multiple Occupation (Mandatory Conditions of
    Licences) (England) Regulations 2018.
14. The Guidance advises that there should be two toilets and two bathrooms for 6-10
    occupiers in licensable HMO, with one containing a bath; and that bedrooms should
    have wash hand basins when possible. The layout does not demonstrate that the
    property reaches a standard even close to these expectations with a single shower
    room and toilet.
15. The appellant has suggested that if any room is marginally non-compliant, this is a
    matter that is capable of resolution through conditions, occupancy restrictions or
    minor layout amendments. Significantly changing the layout to come closer to the
    expectations of the Guidance and Policy 8 is likely to change the nature of the
    development and could only be achieved by a new application.
16. With regard to the plans submitted, the layout conflicts with Policy 8 vi and vii. Even
    setting aside the specifics of the Guidance, it is clear from the layout, that the
    accommodation does not provide suitable living conditions and represents
    particularly poor design.
Community cohesion and the living conditions of the neighbouring residents
17. The property is above a restaurant and close to a number of other commercial
    properties. It also backs onto the railway station. Access to it is set away from the
    property boundary which is made up of a high brick wall. The neighbouring house
    has a garage and parking area closest to the boundary of the site. Any increase in
    activity associated with this use is unlikely to be noticeable given the levels of
    activity associated with the restaurant and other commercial activities. Furthermore,
    I am not satisfied that its use by a greater number of adults would materially alter
    the cohesion or quality of the local community.
Parking
18. No parking or cycle storage is proposed as part of the proposal. The council
    consider that the demand for parking would be greater than the original flat.
    However, the site is well served by public transport. Parking availability is limited as
    much of the road has parking restrictions. Many of the houses have off street
    parking. The lack of parking would encourage residents to use public transport and
    not have a car which would gain support from London Plan 2021 (LP) Policy T1. LP
    Policy T6B advises that car-free development should be the starting point for all
    development proposals in places that are well-connected by public transport. LP
    Policy T6.1 refers to maximum parking standards as does HLP Policy 24. The
    proposal does not conflict with these standards with regard to car parking spaces.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision: 6009059


19. HLP Policy 8iv requires that proposals meet Havering's parking requirements and
    would not have an unacceptable impact on parking conditions and traffic
    congestion in the area. Overall, the lack of car parking provision would not result in
    a significant increase in inconvenience for local residents and does not weigh
    against the proposal or conflict with the objectives of the development plan. The
    lack of cycle provision does weigh against the proposal.
Conclusions
20. The development has retained a residential use within the property and has
    increased the intensity of its use. It would not result in harm to the character or
    appearance of the area, the amenities of local residents or to the community life of
    the area. It contributes to the provision of lower cost housing in an area that has
    good accessibility.
21. It has resulted in the loss of a property that was capable of accommodating a
    family, although it is not ideally suited to family use. I am unable to conclude
    conclusively with regard to the size threshold of HLP Policy 8. However, the harm
    from the loss of family sized accommodation could be balanced by a more efficient
    use of the accommodation. However, I am not satisfied that the development
    represents a more efficient use, given the shortcomings of the living
    accommodation.
22. The internal arrangements, to achieve seven bedrooms, have resulted in a
    particularly poor layout; and accommodation which provides residents with
    unacceptably low living standards. As this could be avoided by addressing the
    requirements of Policy 8, the layout represents particularly poor design. The
    National Planning Policy Framework is clear that development that is not well
    designed should be refused.
23. In conclusion, whilst there are matters that weigh in favour of the more intensive
    use of this accommodation, the poor design and adverse impacts of allowing such
    poor quality accommodation, would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
    benefits. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
