Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026 by S Jamieson BA(Hons) MPlan MRTPI
Decision by H Jones BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009957
4 Peacock Grove, Red Lake, Telford TF1 5EU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Marius Nedeloiu against the decision of Telford and Wrekin Council.
•   The application Ref is TWC/2026/0164.
•   The development is erection of a timber framed gazebo.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published and, in making my recommendation, I have had regard
   to its content. I am satisfied that the revisions do not affect the substance of the
   main issues in the appeal. Since the main parties would not therefore be
   prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
4. I have been provided with a copy of policies DD1 and DD3 of the emerging Telford
   and Wrekin Local Plan Review. Although the evidence before me indicates that the
   emerging plan is at an advanced stage, I have very limited information on the
   extent to which there maybe unresolved objections to these policies or the
   requirement for modifications to be made to them. Consequently, the precise
   content of the policies could be the subject of change. In the circumstances, I
   attribute limited weight to the emerging policies.
5. On site, a gazebo has been built. The Council determined the planning application
   on a retrospective basis, and I have treated the appeal in the same way.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are the effect of the development on:
          •    the character and appearance of the appeal dwelling and the area; and
          •    the living conditions of occupiers of the appeal dwelling, with particular
               regard to their private outdoor space.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009957


Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and appearance
7. The appeal dwelling forms part of a modern residential estate. However, the
   dwellings within it have been designed in a traditional architectural style. Peacock
   Grove exhibits much consistency owing to its brick facing materials, pitched and
   tiled roofs, regular fenestration patterns and architectural features such as front
   dormers and porches. While some properties have single-storey rear projections,
   these are generally limited to typically designed conservatories. Collectively, these
   features give the area a cohesive and orderly quality that positively contribute to its
   character and appearance.
8. The gazebo extends across the full width of the appeal dwelling and projects
   considerably from the rear elevation. As a result, it forms a significant structure
   which has a dominating effect on the rear elevation. The gazebo’s extensive timber
   framework, corrugated polycarbonate roof and thin vinyl curtains are at odds with
   the more solid and robust material composition of the appeal dwelling and
   neighbouring properties. Consequently, the gazebo forms an incongruous feature
   which harmfully contrasts with, and detracts from, the dwelling’s appearance and
   the area's cohesive and orderly qualities.
9. In reaching these views, I acknowledge that various materials are commonly used in
    garden structures. However, in this case, the combined effects of its material
    composition, scale and abutment to the dwelling means that the gazebo forms an
    unsympathetic addition to the property and area.
10. While the structure is not visible from the front of the property and vegetation
    screens it from views along Mossey Green Way and the M54, it is readily apparent
    in views from the vehicular turning head adjacent to No. 3 Peacock Grove and from
    neighbouring rear gardens. Therefore, the harmful effects I have described above
    would be experienced by some residents and visitors to the area. Moreover, limited
    public visibility from certain vantage points does not negate the need for good
    design.
11. The appellant submits that the gazebo should not be treated as a permanent
    extension. However, I have no firm basis on which to conclude that it would not
    endure nor, consequently, that the harmful effects arising from it would be
    temporary. I have also had regard to the submissions made, and proposition that
    conditions could secure, that the gazebo would only be used for normal domestic
    purposes associated with the existing dwelling and that its present design and
    finishes would be retained. Nonetheless, since I have concluded that the gazebo’s
    overall design is unsympathetic, these factors do not serve as adequate mitigation
    and therefore do not overcome the harm identified.
12. Consequently, the development has a harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the appeal dwelling and area. As a result, it conflicts with policies
    BE 1 and BE 2 of the Telford & Wrekin Local Plan 2011 - 2031 (2018) (Local Plan)
    which require, amongst other things, that development respects and responds
    positively to its context and enhances the quality of the local built environment;
    demonstrates an integrated design approach from the outset; and, in relation to
    residential alterations, that developments respect the character of the area and
    remain in keeping with the existing building.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009957


Living conditions
13. The development results in a reduction in the amount of garden space serving the
    appeal property. However, even accounting for the detached shed located at the
    end of it, the garden provides sufficient space for occupiers to undertake a range of
    typical domestic activities, such as sitting out, drying clothes and gardening. The
    garden which remains is proportionate to the size of this modest, terraced dwelling
    and its suburban surroundings.
14. I have been provided with very limited information on the content or status of the
    guidance on garden sizes to which the Council refer and, as a result, it is a factor of
    limited weight in my assessment of the scheme. In any event, as set out above, the
    development does not prevent occupiers from carrying out normal garden activities
    or diminish their ability to enjoy this private outdoor space.
15. The evidence indicates that permitted development rights for extensions to the
    appeal dwelling have been removed. However, the removal of these rights does
    not, in itself, demonstrate that such development would be harmful to the living
    conditions of occupiers. Rather, it means that planning permission is required along
    with an assessment of the case on its individual merits.
16. For the above reasons, the development has an acceptable effect on the living
    conditions of occupiers of the appeal dwelling, with particular regard to their private
    outdoor space. In these regards, the development accords with policies BE 1 and
    BE 2 of the Local Plan which require, amongst other things, that development
    integrates appropriate landscaping and residential alterations be adequately
    accommodated within the curtilage of the existing property without adversely
    affecting amenity.
Other Matters
17. Some garden structures are located nearby, including a conservatory at No. 10
    Peacock Grove. However, the full details and circumstances which led to their
    development are not before me, including whether each required or has obtained
    planning permission. Furthermore, the specific design of the gazebo the subject of
    the appeal differs from other structures in the area, such that they are not directly
    comparable. Accordingly, the presence of these structures does not justify or
    override the harm I have identified in my first main issue.
18. The development has not drawn objection from neighbouring residents or
    consultees. The Council did not object to the development in sheer principle terms
    and the development does not result in the harmful loss of privacy or light, harmful
    noise generation, harm to neighbouring occupiers, or prejudicial effects on highway
    safety. However, the absence of harm in relation to these matters is a neutral factor
    which does not weigh in the development’s favour.
Conclusion and Recommendation
19. While I have concluded that the development would have an acceptable effect on
    the living conditions of occupiers of the appeal dwelling, with particular regard to
    their private outdoor space, this does not outweigh the harm that would be caused
    to the character and appearance of the dwelling and the area. Because of this
    harm, the development conflicts with policies within the development plan.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009957


20. The Framework establishes a presumption in favour of sustainable development.
    Since the site lies within a settlement, the Framework indicates that development
    should be approved unless its benefits are substantially outweighed by adverse
    effects when assessed against the Framework's national decision-making policies.
21. The benefits in this case are derived from the development generating additional
    floorspace for the appeal dwelling, creating a sheltered area to be used in
    conjunction with the garden.
22. Against this, the harm to the character and appearance of the dwelling and area
    means that the development conflicts with national decision-making policy within
    the Framework (DP3(1)) which sets out that developments should respond to their
    context so that they integrate and enhance their surroundings. Policy DP3 further
    sets out that developments should be refused when this would not be achieved.
    Therefore, I attach substantial weight to this harm. Taking these points together,
    the benefits of granting planning permission would be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects.
23. Together, Local Plan policies SP 1 and SP 4 require developments to accord with
    local and national policies. Due to the adverse effects I have identified, and the
    related policy conflicts, the development conflicts with both of these policies.
24. Overall, the development conflicts with the development plan as a whole and there
    are no material considerations, including the Framework, that indicate the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with the development plan. I therefore
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Jamieson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
25. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

H Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
