Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by J Heppell BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009919
Ewen House, High Road, Fobbing, Essex SS17 9JH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Joe Whitelock against Thurrock Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01158/FUL.
•    The development proposed is construction of pool and eco annexe with green roof construction.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Joe Whitelock against the decision of
       Thurrock Council. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The appeal relates to a planning application that was not determined by the
       Council within the prescribed period. The Council subsequently confirmed that had
       it been in a position to determine the application, it would have refused permission
       on the grounds of inappropriate development in the Green Belt, failure to preserve
       or enhance the character or appearance of Fobbing Conservation Area (CA), and
       an unacceptable risk to highway safety.
4.     Following the submission of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
       were afforded the opportunity to comment on the implications of the new
       Framework for the proposal.
5.     Amended plans accompanied the appeal showing the design of the proposed
       buildings altered to incorporate pitched roofs. In such circumstances, the Planning
       Appeals – Procedural Guide guides that the two tests in the judgement in Holborn
       Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney (2018) should be
       applied: that is, whether the proposed amendments involve a substantive
       difference to the application; and, whether they would cause procedural unfairness
       to anyone involved in the appeal.
6.     As the amendments substantially changed the massing of the scheme, and as
       interested parties had raised concerns about the scheme and I cannot be certain
       that they were aware of the proposed substitution of plans, I have determined the
       appeal on the basis of the originally-submitted plans.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009919


Main Issues
7.       The main issues in this appeal are:

     •     whether the appeal site is grey belt and whether the development would be
           inappropriate development in the Green Belt having regard to the Framework
           and any relevant development plan policies;

     •     if inappropriate, the effect of the development on the openness of the Green
           Belt;

     •     the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area with
           particular regard to designated heritage assets;

     •     the effect of the proposal on highway safety; and

     •     if inappropriate, whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other
           harm, would be clearly outweighed by other considerations so as to amount to
           the very special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development
8.       The development plan and accompanying policies map identify the appeal site as
         lying within the Metropolitan Green Belt. The Framework states that inappropriate
         development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be
         approved except in very special circumstances. The Framework further
         establishes that development in the Green Belt should be regarded as
         inappropriate, subject to a number of exceptions set out in Policy GB7. The
         appellant has made a case that the proposal is for the redevelopment of previously
         developed land and would utilise grey belt land and that, by satisfying the
         requirements of the relevant parts of Policy GB7, it should not be regarded as
         inappropriate development.
Whether previously developed land
9.       It is not within the scope of this appeal to determine the site’s lawful use. However,
         as the appellant’s case relies in part on whether the site is previously developed
         land, I have weighed the evidence before me on this matter. The Glossary to the
         Framework defines previously developed land as land which has been lawfully
         developed and is or was occupied by a permanent structure and any fixed surface
         infrastructure associated with it, including the curtilage of the developed land and
         land comprising large areas of fixed surface infrastructure such as large areas of
         hardstanding. It excludes land that was previously developed but where the
         remains of the permanent structure or fixed surface structure have blended into
         the landscape.
10. The application form described the site as a vacant builder’s yard, last used for the
    storage of building materials. The planning history shows that Hurst & Sons
    Builders Merchants was replaced by two houses, St Michaels House and Ewen




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6009919


         House, with the red line for that application including the site1. The site shares the
         driveway of Ewen House but is not part of its garden.
11. I saw on my visit that the part of the site lying to the rear of St Michaels House and
    Ewen House was covered by hardstanding and contained several small buildings
    used to store machinery and materials. A trailer, a container and two caravans
    were being stored in the open along with building materials. Whilst many of the
    materials appeared to be relatively new, and interested parties stated that the
    buildings postdate the construction of the houses, the hardstanding appeared to
    be of some age and therefore commensurate with the builder’s yard.
12. The part of the site to the rear of Vine Lodge and Sandiacre had a different
    character, being covered with low level vegetation and containing a disused
    chicken coop, which interested parties stated was used for the keeping of hens.
    Whilst the appellant provided an earlier image showing the site without vegetation,
    neither this nor the presence of scattered oil drums and other discarded materials
    provide compelling evidence that it was previously developed.
13. There is no dispute between the main parties that the site was within the red line of
    the planning permission for the pair of houses and that part of it is covered in
    hardstanding. The Council referred me to an unsuccessful appeal against a
    refused certificate of lawfulness where an Inspector concluded that the site had not
    been in use for storage (use class B8)2, and contended on this basis that the site
    was not lawfully developed. However, the Inspector’s findings do not rule out the
    possibility that the site was put to uses other than B8, particularly as the driveway,
    whilst narrow, provides a viable vehicular access to the site.
14. Notwithstanding the absence of a certificate of lawfulness, on the basis of the
    evidence before me the part of the site behind St Michaels House and Ewen
    House is previously developed land. However, there is insufficient evidence that
    the land behind Vine Cottage and Sandiacre was previously developed, given that
    the remains of any permanent structure or fixed surface structure that may have
    existed have since blended into the landscape.
15. I conclude that the site as a whole is not previously developed land. In these
    circumstances, the proposal cannot satisfy Policy GB7(e) of the Framework or
    Policy PMD6(6) of the Core Strategy and Policies for Management of
    Development (as amended) Adopted January 2015 (CS), both of which relate
    specifically to the redevelopment of previously developed land.
Whether grey belt land
16. I therefore turn to whether the development would utilise grey belt land, which is
    defined in the Glossary to the Framework as land comprising previously developed
    land and/or any other land that, in either case, does not strongly contribute to any
    of purposes a, b, or d in Policy GB2(1). Given my conclusion above, the site is
    ‘other land’ and therefore capable of being grey belt land.
17. It is common ground between the main parties that the site does not contribute
    strongly to checking the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas (purpose a),
    preventing neighbouring towns merging into one another (purpose b) or preserving
    the setting and special character of historic towns (purpose d). On the basis of the
1
    LPA reference 01/01270/FUL.
2
    PINS reference APP/M1595/X/19/3231066


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6009919


       evidence before me, I find no reason to disagree with these findings. The site is
       therefore grey belt land as defined by the Framework, and falls to be assessed
       against the four criteria in Policy GB7(g).
18. Criterion i requires development not to fundamentally undermine the purposes
    (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan. I have
    already found that the development would not conflict with purposes a, b or d, and
    it is not in dispute between the main parties that there would be no conflict with
    purpose e (assisting urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of derelict
    and other urban land). However, the Council considered that the proposal would
    conflict with purpose c, which is to assist in safeguarding the countryside from
    encroachment.
19. The Council expressed a concern that the proposed buildings would extend the
    built form of Fobbing beyond the plots which front High Road, thereby encroaching
    into the countryside and altering the character and appearance of the locality.
    Whilst the proposal would have this effect, the degree of encroachment would be
    not be so significant as to affect the ability of the remaining Green Belt across the
    plan area to serve all five Green Belt purposes in a meaningful way. The proposal
    would not therefore conflict with purpose c and satisfies criterion i.
20. Criterion ii requires an evidenced unmet need to be demonstrated for the type of
    development proposed. The appellant stated that the annexe would be custom/self
    built and provide independent living for a family member, but no details were
    supplied of the family member concerned or their specific needs. It was indicated
    that if the building was no longer required as an annexe within the next twenty
    years, it could be repurposed as an accessible bungalow, for which the Thurrock
    Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2015 and the Housing Strategy for
    Thurrock 2015-2020 identified a need, particularly in the fast growing over 55s
    category. The appellant pointed to low rates of housing completions in Thurrock in
    recent years and provided a search of a local estate agent’s website showing the
    scarcity of bungalows in the area.
21. In the absence of a detailed case supporting the personal need for an annexe for
    independent living, this aspect of the proposal carries limited weight. The proposal
    is described as custom/self build, but no indication has been provided of the need
    for self build units in the area or how the proposal would satisfy this need. No
    evidence has been put forward to explain the need for a pool. The potential use of
    the annexe in the future as a separate dwelling is a theoretical prospect only. It
    has not therefore been demonstrated that there is an unmet need for the
    development, and consequently criterion ii is not satisfied.
22. Criterion iii requires development to be in a sustainable location, by reference to
    Policy TR3 which requires opportunities to be taken to utilise transport
    infrastructure involving more walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport use.
    Although Fobbing possesses only a very limited range of services and is served by
    bus only four times a day, it is feasible to walk to shops and facilities in
    Corringham. I observed that the pedestrian route to Corringham utilises a
    pavement with street lighting and is relatively level for most of the way. I therefore
    find no reason to disagree with the Council’s conclusion that the site promotes
    walking to Corringham and, in combination with the small number of village
    facilities and limited bus service, is sustainably located having regard to its rural
    situation. It therefore satisfies criterion (iii).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009919


23. Criterion iv relates to major development for the provision of housing and is
    therefore not applicable.
24. In summary, although the site is grey belt, the proposal conflicts with Policy
    GB7(g) of the Framework. Consequently, it would be inappropriate development in
    the Green Belt.
Effect on openness
25. Although the site is located behind properties fronting High Road, its rear boundary
    aligns with the long rear gardens of several nearby houses. Behind the site the
    land falls away before rising again, giving the properties in this section of High
    Road a degree of prominence in local views. However, the overgrown hedgerow
    which marks the site’s boundary provides an element of natural screening, which
    is supplemented by a thicker belt of trees behind the paddock abutting the site.
26. The cumulative volume of the existing buildings on the site is modest. The
    structures which are not fixed are of greater volume, but as there is no indication
    that they are lawful, I have attached limited weight to the benefit of removing them.
    The appellant has referred to the potential removal of a greenhouse and
    outbuildings within the garden of Ewen House, and asked for an unimplemented
    permission for a garage to be taken into account, but as Ewen House forms part of
    an established residential frontage in the CS where some forms of development
    are permitted, their removal would provide only a limited benefit in terms of Green
    Belt openness.
27. Openness has both spatial and visual aspects, and requires consideration of the
    degree of activity likely to be generated. In spatial terms, the proposal would result
    in the introduction of a covered pool in place of a several small buildings, and an
    annexe where currently there is only a chicken coop, giving rise to a significant
    increase in built form and a consequent loss of spatial openness. The buildings
    would be single storey in height and have a relatively low profile in visual terms,
    and moreover would benefit from natural screening, resulting in only a moderate
    impact on visual openness. A domestic annexe and pool would have limited
    activity associated with them.
28. Taking these factors together, the proposal would result in a harmful loss of
    openness, in conflict with the fundamental aim of Green Belt policy, set out in
    Chapter 13 of the Framework, of keeping land permanently open.
Character and appearance
29. Despite its proximity to Corringham, Fobbing retains the character of a small rural
    village set in open countryside. It possesses a distinct linear form, reflecting its
    origins as a port located next to Fobbing Creek. High Road is situated on a ridge
    which extends into the surrounding marshland, with Wharf Road winding
    downwards towards the edge of the former creek. By extending to the edge of the
    ridge, the curtilages of the properties beside High Road provide a well-defined
    boundary to the village, with the adjacent lower level land remaining largely
    undeveloped.
30. S72(1) of the Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 places a
    statutory duty on decision makers to pay special attention to the desirability of
    preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a CA. Fobbing is


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009919


       designated as a CA, whose significance derives from its medieval origins as a port
       with access to the Thames, which mean that it benefitted from fishing and trading
       opportunities. The higher section of Fobbing was separate from the area around
       the wharf and remained so until the twentieth century. The wharf became
       redundant when the creek was dammed in 1953. Subsequent infill development
       resulted in the coalescence of the two parts of the village, leading to the linear
       form which is evident today. Despite the postwar development which has occurred,
       Fobbing retains its distinctive topography and street plan, along with a number of
       listed buildings including St Michael’s Church.
31. The Fobbing Conservation Area Character Appraisal March 2007 (CACA)
    identifies the special interest of the CA. This special interest includes areas of
    significant open space around and within the village, predominantly on the lower
    land around the village but including important open areas on the higher level such
    as the church yard. The appeal site and adjacent rear gardens are identified as
    part of the significant open space.
32. I have noted above that despite the drop in levels, the buildings on the ridge are
    generally well screened by existing vegetation in views from the surrounding
    countryside. From Footpath 22, which links Fobbing to Corringham, only the
    church tower and the ridges of some of the houses were visible on my site visit.
    When the trees are not in leaf, more of the buildings are likely to be visible.
33. The proposal would consolidate built form on the edge of the ridge defining the
    upper part of the village, albeit the proposed buildings would be single storey and
    at a lower level than the buildings fronting High Road. I am mindful of the CACA’s
    designation of the land as significant open space, but I have also had regard to the
    site’s recent history as part of a builder’s yard and the fact that the site is not
    completely open. Moreover, I observed single storey outbuildings in the rear of
    adjacent gardens within the significant open space. The appellant observed that
    permitted development rights enjoyed by householders have the potential to result
    in additional development within the significant open space.
34. Taking all these factors into account, a degree of consolidation of the existing
    single storey built form on the site need not be inherently harmful to the character
    or appearance of the CA. However, the extent of built form proposed would
    substantially reduce the largely open character of the site, which in turn would
    impinge unacceptably on the significant open space and therefore the setting of
    the CA. This harm would be exacerbated by the somewhat utilitarian design of the
    scheme, which fails to have regard to the materials and detailing which are
    characteristic of Fobbing. The result would be a moderate degree of harm to the
    CA’s significance, to which I attach considerable importance and weight.
35. In these circumstances, Policy HE6 of the Framework requires the effect on the
    designated heritage asset and its significance to be weighed against any public
    benefits resulting from the proposal. The immediate benefits of the custom-built
    proposal would be private rather than public, by providing an annexe and pool for
    Ewen House. The appellant has highlighted the visual benefits of tidying up an
    unkempt site, and the biodiversity net gain and ecological enhancements which
    would result. Local contractors would be employed, with resultant benefits to the
    local economy. The sustainability credentials of the proposal are however neutral
    in the planning balance. As I have noted above, the potential for the development
    to provide an independent dwelling in the future is theoretical only and does not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009919


       attract weight. Overall, I attach limited weight to the public benefits of the proposal.
       The harm to the significance of the designated heritage asset outweighs these
       benefits.
36. A number of listed buildings are located near the appeal site. S66(1) of the Act
    places a statutory duty on decision makers to have special regard to preserving
    the setting of listed buildings. The grade I listed St Michael’s Church, located on
    the opposite side of High Road from Ewen House, derives its significance from its
    eleventh century origins, its architectural qualities and prominence within the
    village, and its cultural associations. Being some distance from the church and
    screened by intervening buildings, the site is not part of the church’s setting.
37. Prosbus Hall and 1 & 2 Church View Cottages, which are grade II listed, are
    located either side of Ewen House. Dating from the eighteenth century, their
    significance derives from their architectural quality and their historic association
    with Fobbing when it was a prosperous port. The houses are separated from the
    appeal site by several intervening properties in each case, meaning that their
    setting would not be affected and their significance would not be harmed.
38. The grade II listed 1 & 2 Lion Hill date from the sixteenth century, with their
    significance likewise deriving from their architectural quality and historic
    associations. They are oriented with their rear elevations facing obliquely towards
    the site. Given the separation distance and the intervening natural screening, their
    setting would be unaffected and their significance preserved.
39. I conclude that the proposal would fail to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the area and the CA, contrary to policies CSTP22, CSTP23,
    CSTP24, PMD2 and PMD4 of the CS. Together these policies set out the
    Council’s approach to protecting the character of Thurrock and its historic
    environment, with an expectation that proposals will demonstrate high quality
    design, strengthen the sense of place and promote the importance of heritage
    assets.
Highway safety
40. The proposal would share the existing driveway of Ewen House, which provides
    access to the site via a set of gates located behind the house. The Council raised
    a concern that, being narrow and long, the driveway is unsuited to larger vehicles,
    and could give rise to conflict between cars. Refuse collection arrangements and
    emergency access were also raised as potential issues.
41. Given that the existing drive already serves the site, and that the proposal is for an
    annexe and pool in association with the house albeit with dedicated parking, the
    function of the drive would not change and its use would intensify to only a limited
    degree. It is moreover not uncommon for two or more houses to share a drive.
    There would therefore be no necessity for a splayed entrance to allow vehicles to
    pass. Whilst the drive is longer than is typical and does not possess a dedicated
    passing place, its use is unlikely to be so intensive as to give rise to manoeuvres
    which would endanger highway users, particularly as High Road is lightly
    trafficked.
42. In regard to emergency access, the appellant has offered to install a
    sprinkler/hydrant, which could be controlled by a condition were I minded to allow
    the appeal. As the proposal is for an annexe, bin collection would be undertaken in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009919


       association with Ewen House, and could be controlled by condition if required. The
       construction phase could similarly be managed via a suitable condition.
43. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not have an adverse effect on
    highway safety and would accord with policies PMD2 and PMD8 of the CS, which
    together require proposals to provide easy and safe access plus sufficient car
    parking.
Other considerations
44. The appellant provided a detailed list of benefits, many of which I have touched on
    already. These included the use of local contractors thereby boosting the local
    economy, the tidying up of an unkempt site, ecological enhancements and
    biodiversity net gain, and the use of sustainable construction techniques. I attach
    limited positive weight to these considerations.
45. The proposal is described as self build, but in the absence of a mechanism to
    secure this, I cannot afford weight to it. Nationally described space standards
    apply to all schemes and compliance with them is a neutral factor. The potential for
    the annexe to one day become an accessible bungalow and contribute to a
    category of housing which is in short supply is not a benefit that flows directly from
    the proposal and cannot be afforded weight.
Green Belt Balance
46. I have found that the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green
    Belt and would harm its openness, matters to which Policy GB6(2) of the
    Framework requires me to attach substantial weight. It would result in harm to the
    significance of a heritage asset, which is a matter of considerable importance and
    weight by reference to Policy HE6(3) of the Framework. The other considerations
    above do not clearly outweigh the harm arising from inappropriateness and other
    harm. The very special circumstances required to justify the proposal do not,
    therefore, exist.
47. Policy PMD6 of the CS sets out the Council’s Green Belt strategy. It indicates that
    the Council will maintain, protect and enhance the open character of the Green
    Belt in Thurrock in accordance with the provisions of the Framework, and that
    planning permission will only be granted for new development provided it meets
    the requirements of the Framework and the CS. Although the plan significantly
    predates the 2026 version of the Framework, meaning that it does not identify grey
    belt land as an exception, the proposal does not accord with the provisions of
    either Policy PMD6(6) or the Framework.
48. The proposal would conflict with Policy PMD6(6) of the CS in respect of Green
    Belt, and policies CSTP22, CSTP23, CSTP24, PMD2 and PMD4 in relation to its
    impact on character and appearance including heritage assets.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
49. The Glossary to the Framework states that villages which lie within and are
    defined as part of the Green Belt, as is the case with Fobbing, are not settlements
    for the purposes of the Framework, and consequently Policy S4 is not engaged.
    As the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt, Policy S5 does
    not apply to it either. The proposal should therefore be determined in accordance
    with Policy GB7, with which I have found conflict.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6009919


50. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole, and the
    material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal should
    be dismissed.

J Heppell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
