Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by F Harrison BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009211
96A Green Dragon Lane, Southgate, Enfield N21 2NJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mrs K Costa against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Enfield.
•   The application Ref is 26/00343/FUL.
•   The development proposed is the conversion of first floor flat into 2 self-contained flats, involving
    conversion of loft into habitable room with rear dormer gable wall.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. A Revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. There have been some layout and subsequent paragraph
   numbering changes. I am however satisfied that, having reviewed the relevant
   changes, they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main issues
   or indeed the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since they would not
   therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effects of the proposed development on a) the living
   conditions of future occupiers with specific regard to internal floorspace; and b) the
   character and appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Living Conditions
5. Policy D6 of The London Plan, 2021 (LP), amongst other things, imposes a
   minimum floor to ceiling height of 2.5 metres across at least 75% of the Gross
   Internal Area of a dwelling. Based on the sectional drawings submitted, the 2.5
   metres minimum standard would not be met for either the existing flat or the
   proposed, with both floors falling below this minimum requirement. Even if the
   staircase was altered as shown in the appellant’s submissions, there is no

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009211


     substantive evidence to demonstrate that the increase in floorspace would meet the
     relevant standard. In any event, the staircase amendment relates to the first floor
     flat and so would not alter the shortcomings of the proposed floorspace and floor
     heights in the second floor flat.
6. The minimum floor to ceiling heights prescribed by Policy D6 are intended to
   secure a satisfactory standard of accommodation and a good quality living
   environment for future occupiers. In failing to meet those standards, both the
   proposed studio unit and modified existing unit would provide accommodation of a
   lower quality than that sought by the development plan.
7. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would fail to provide satisfactory living
   conditions for future occupiers, contrary to Policies D4 and D6 of the LP, Policy CP
   30 of the Enfield Core Strategy, 2010 (CS), and Policies DMD 8 and DMD 37 of the
   Enfield Development Management Document, 2014 (DMD). These policies,
   amongst other things, require high-quality residential development and satisfactory
   living conditions for future occupants.
Character and Appearance
8. The appeal building forms one half of a semi-detached, two-storey dwelling, with
   symmetrical front-gabled projecting bays and hipped side roof slopes. Both
   properties have since been subdivided, providing self-contained flats.
   Notwithstanding these internal alterations, the pair retain a relatively simple and
   balanced understated architectural composition. The site occupies a visually
   prominent position fronting a mini roundabout on the corner of Green Dragon Lane
   with Old Park Ridings. Its rendered white exterior contrasts with the predominantly
   brick facades of surrounding properties, further accentuating its visual prominence
   within the street scene.
9. The surrounding area displays a wide variety of architectural styles, materials and
   detailing, including detached, semi-detached and apartment blocks. The prevailing
   character is one of visual diversity rather than strict uniformity. Variations in roof
   form, frontage treatment, fenestration patterns and external finishes are evident
   throughout the street scene. Notwithstanding this diversity, the area remains
   attractive and coherent due to the broadly consistent scale of development,
   generous plots, landscaped setting and limited visible alterations, which contribute
   to a pleasant, cohesive and spacious street scene.
10. The proposed rear dormer window would extend across the majority of the rear roof
    slope and rise to a point close to the ridge. This would result in an overly large,
    boxy and incongruous addition that would significantly erode the original quality of
    the roof’s shape, appearing disproportionately large. Whilst a dormer extension
    exists on the adjoining property, that structure is appreciably smaller in scale, set in
    from the roof edges and reads as a subordinate addition. The proposed dormer
    would be readily visible from public vantage points, as it would be clearly seen from
    Old Park Ridings and the rear gardens of neighbouring properties. The visibility
    from these relatively close-range views would heighten the perception of its scale
    and incongruity, thereby exacerbating the harm to the character and appearance of
    the area.
11. The hipped to gable roof alteration, would introduce a further discordant element
    that would disrupt the architectural symmetry and rhythm of the existing roof form.
    These changes would result in a conspicuous and unsympathetic alteration that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009211


     would undermine the coherence of the semi-detached pair and erode the
     architectural integrity of the original design. Whilst I acknowledge that the
     surrounding area exhibits a degree of variation in roof forms and architectural
     detailing, these differences exist within a prevailing pattern of broadly consistent
     scale, massing and composition. In this context, the proposed alteration would
     appear incongruous and would detract from the cohesive and spacious suburban
     character of the area. The harm would be particularly pronounced given the appeal
     property's prominent position within the street scene.
12. Overall, the proposal would not create a visually attractive development to maintain
    a strong sense of place, failing to comply with the identity key principle for well
    design places as required by Framework Policy DP3.There is no clear justification
    for the conflict with the relevant aspects of the principles set out in Policy DP3
    paragraph 2, in these circumstances, development should be refused.
13. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would cause unacceptable
    harm to the character and appearance of the area. It would thus conflict with
    Policies D4, D8 of the LP, Policy CP 30 of the CS, and Policies DMD 6, DMD 8,
    DMD 13 and DMD 37 of the DMD. Amongst other things, these seek to ensure new
    development is of a high-quality design and in keeping with the character of the
    property, and not dominant when viewed from the surrounding area.
Other Considerations
14. With regard to Policy S4 of the Framework and the principle of development within
    settlements, the harm I have found, and the subsequent development plan conflict,
    would be obvious and enduring and I therefore ascribe it significant
    negative weight.
15. The proposal would also fail to comply with national decision making policy DP3 of
    the Framework which states that proposals should be refused if without clear
    justification, they conflict with relevant aspects of the principles in paragraph 2 of
    Policy DP3 for well-designed places.
16. Whilst the proposal would make a positive contribution to the mix and type of
    housing in the Borough, which is a clear benefit, owing to the scale of the scheme it
    attracts limited positive weight.
17. In applying Framework Policy S4 and having regard to the circumstances listed in
    paragraph 2, the benefits of the proposed development would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects to the living conditions for future occupiers and
    the character and appearance of the area identified above, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies of the Framework.
Conclusion and Recommendation
18. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan and there are no sufficiently weighty material considerations to
    indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009211


Inspector’s Decision
19. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
