Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009363
Land at Mushroom Lane, Brigsley, North East Lincolnshire DN37 0BJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Hansen against the decision of North East Lincolnshire Council.
•   The application reference is DM/0749/25/OUT.
•   The development proposed is nine dwellings and garages with access to be considered and all other
    matters reserved.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2    The main issues are whether the houses would be in a sustainable location for new
     development and represent an effective use of land; and the effect on the character
     and appearance of the area.
Reasons
3. The description of development has been agreed by the parties and would result in
   outline permission for nine dwellings. The main parties have had the opportunity to
   comment on the content of the National Planning Policy Framework 2026
   (Framework) including Policy L3; and given its expectations, the effective use of
   land has been included within the main issues.
4. The site is located outside, but adjacent to, the development boundary established
   by the North East Lincolnshire Local Plan (2018) (LP). Part 1 of Policy 5 advises
   that development within or outside the boundaries will be considered with regard to
   suitability and sustainability, having regard to a number of matters including size,
   scale and density; and provision of services (education, healthcare, community,
   retail and recreation). This is generally consistent with the Framework and can be
   afforded full weight. Part 3 of the policy is inconsistent with the Framework and can
   be afforded very limited weight.
5. For sites outside settlements, Framework Policy S5 lists developments that should
   be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
   any adverse effects. As this proposal does not represent infill development, the
   only other potentially relevant matter, within the list, is part (j), development which
   would address an evidenced unmet need. As it is accepted that the local planning
   authority cannot demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable housing sites, it


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6009363


     satisfies Policy S5(1ji) in that it would be physically well-related to an existing
     settlement.
6. Framework Policy S5(2) sets out that the circumstances in which the benefits of
   approving development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by
   adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where the development
   proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
   which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
   circumstances. The only relevant national decision-making policies which state that
   development proposals should be refused relate to the effective use of land, and
   principles for well-designed places. These are considered below along with the
   issue of the suitability of this location for new development.
Effective use of land
7. Framework Policy L3(2b) requires that development footprints should make the
   best use of a site’s development potential, taking into account the policies in the
   Framework. The design and access statement sets out that the density of the site
   would be 6.8 dwellings per hectare across the 1.3 hectares site. This represents a
   gross rather than net density.
8. The appellant has provided comments following the publication of the Framework
   and refers to the layout and character of the adjacent developments; and advises
   that the proposal would retain the established hedgerows and tree boundaries as
   well as incorporating adequate areas of landscaping, including biodiversity
   enhancements and an attenuation pond. A net density figure has not been
   provided. The Indicative Site Plan provides the sizes of areas listed as garden,
   parking, road and dwelling footprint. Setting aside all of the open space, biodiversity
   area, swales and attenuation pond area figures, this would still result in a very low
   net density.
9. I am mindful of the character of the adjacent housing and the landscaping and
   biodiversity benefits proposed. I also note the support for low density development
   from local residents. However, whilst acknowledging that the site plan is indicative,
   I am not persuaded that the provision of nine dwellings on this site represents an
   effective use of land or satisfies Framework Policy L3. In these circumstances, the
   policy is clear that the development should be refused. The proposal would also fail
   to satisfy the efficient use of land required by LP Policy 22(Bix) which can be
   afforded full weight.
Character and appearance
10. Housing development on the site was previously considered in relation to the
    dismissed appeal APP/B2002/W/17/3184046. The Inspector found that the
    development of the site for housing would change its intrinsic character from an
    open field associated with the countryside around the village to a site of a more
    suburban residential character; and would represent an inappropriate intrusion into
    this rural setting. It was concluded that the proposal would represent built
    development projecting into the countryside and would be detrimental to the
    character and appearance of the area.
11. Whilst I have not been provided with the plans associated with the previous appeal,
    the current proposal, whilst retaining and able to consolidate the landscaping
    around the boundaries of the site, would also result in harm to the character and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
Appeal Decision: 6009363


     appearance of this area. It would fail to satisfy Framework Policy N2(1a) with
     regard to landscape character and would also be contrary to Part 1(I) of LP Policy
     5.
12. Framework Policy DP3(3) advises that development proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with its objectives. The proposal has sought
    to satisfy this policy and although the proposal would result in harm to the character
    and appearance of the area, the details of design are reserved matters and it would
    not result in clear conflict with Policy DP3 to the extent that it would trigger the
    requirement that it should be refused. However, the landscape impact and policy
    conflict weighs against it.
Suitability of the location
13. The Site Context Plan shows a 500m isochrone centred on the site. This does not
    represent walking distances but there are no services or facilities shown within this
    area. The limited services of Brigsley are between the 500m and 1000m
    isochrones. These include a bus stop; a village hall, play area and church. The
    footpath to Brigsley is narrow and unlit.
14. There is a footpath all the way to the larger settlement of Waltham. However, the
    services within that settlement are a significant distance; the footpath initially is of
    limited width; and the road is not lit until the outskirts of Waltham. The Framework
    defines a reasonable walking distance as being around 800m. Distances from the
    site are prohibitive for walking to schools, shops and healthcare facilities. Whilst
    reference has been made to bus stops, including the Brigsley stop and the stop
    required by application DM/1167/16/FUL, these are also some distance away; and
    as no evidence is provided with regard to bus frequency, it cannot be assumed that
    a convenient service would be available.
15. LP Policy 3 sets out the settlement hierarchy and provides a framework for the
    council's decisions on the location and scale of development advising that
    development should be commensurate with a settlement's position in the
    settlement hierarchy. Waltham, to the north, is a Level 2 Local Service Centre. The
    policy sets out that such settlements perform the role of key local service centres
    offering a good range of basic services and amenities, combined with good
    accessibility to the wider services available in the urban area. Whilst proximity to
    Waltham is a benefit, its services nearly all lie beyond the 1000m isochrone and
    well beyond a reasonable walking distance.
16. With regard to locating development in sustainable locations, Framework Policy
    TR3(1a) advises that proposals should be in locations that are sustainable, limiting
    the need to travel, particularly by private car; and offer a genuine choice of
    transport modes. It advises that the Connectivity Tool should be used alongside
    other relevant quantitative or qualitative evidence in assessing the connectivity of
    particular locations. Based on the evidence presented and my findings during my
    visit, it must be concluded that this site is poorly connected and residents would be
    likely to rely heavily on the use of private vehicles to access most services. Both
    parties have had the opportunity to comment on the results from the Connectivity
    Tool. The results do not conflict with this conclusion.
17. The site performs poorly with regard to the promotion of sustainable travel and it
    does not offer a genuine choice of transport modes for residents. In particular,
    services such as education, healthcare and retail are not easily accessible by

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision: 6009363


     sustainable travel options. The proposal conflicts with Framework Policy TR3. It
     also conflicts with Part 1(C) of LP Policy 5 which similarly requires an assessment
     in relation to sustainability.
Other matters
18. Framework Policy HO7 requires that substantial weight be given to the benefits of
    providing homes which would contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. The houses would also contribute to the
    economic objectives of the Framework, during construction and as a result of their
    occupation. They would support the social objectives of the Framework from the
    provision of the houses themselves and the benefits the residents would bring with
    regards to supporting local services, social facilities and the local community.
19. It is proposed that the development would exceed the statutory requirement for
    biodiversity net gain. It would also gain support from Framework Policy N2(c-g) as it
    would use green infrastructure and nature-based solutions to secure multiple
    benefits including for biodiversity; surface water and pollution management; and
    recreation. It would also gain support from Policy N3 as it is proposed to
    incorporate a large number of new trees in addition to those to be retained. This
    also gains support from elements of LP Policy 22 which can be afforded full weight.
20. Reference has been made to the approvals of housing within the vicinity of the site
    over a number of years. Whilst I have had regard to these; and the dismissed
    appeal, the proposal must be considered on its own merits; and local and national
    policy.
Conclusions
21. The proposal would result in nine new houses in an area where the supply of
    housing land is significantly below that required. The provision of houses must be
    given substantial weight. Considerable weight can be given to the benefits to the
    social and economic objectives of the Framework from the building of new houses
    and the actions of the future residents. The proposal exceeds the biodiversity net
    gain requirements; would provide new habitats; and proposes to retain and
    considerably enhance the amounts of trees on the site. These matters gain support
    from Framework Policies N2(c-g) and N3; and LP Policy 22.
22. The site is well-related to the existing settlement boundary and therefore satisfies
    Framework Policy S5(1ji) and results in a number of benefits as set out above. The
    Framework is clear that development should be approved, unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
    against its national decision-making policies.
23. The development would fail to make an effective use of land in conflict with
    Framework Policy L3 which is one of the national decision-making policies which
    state that development proposals should be refused. It also conflicts with the
    density requirements of LP Policy 22(Bix). The site is located in an area of poor
    connectivity contrary to Framework Policy TR3 and Part 1(C) of LP Policy 5, which
    results in considerable weight against it. I also give considerable weight to the
    impact on the character and appearance of the area and the failure to satisfy
    Framework Policy N2(a) and Part 1(I) of LP Policy 5 with regard to landscape
    character.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
Appeal Decision: 6009363


24. These conflicts, particularly but not limited to Framework Policy L3, represent the
    circumstances, set out in Framework Policy S5(2), in which the benefits of
    approving development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects. I conclude that the benefits, when taken together, would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      5
