Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6009135
6 and 6a Fairview Road, Wednesfield, Wolverhampton WV11 1BY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by N Carissimo against the decision of Wolverhampton City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00187/FUL.
•    The development proposed is Change of Use of existing retail unit to residential. An extension of an
     existing flat, and a two-storey side extension to create two additional flats.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026. Whilst this made certain revisions to aspects of national planning
       policy, the provisions in respect of the matters relied on by the main parties are not
       materially changed. Therefore, I did not need to consult with the main parties
       regarding the revised Framework.
3.     The existing plans do not show the single-storey side extension that was approved
       in 2015 and has now been built. The Council inform that this has not been built
       fully in accordance with the approved plans, including revised fenestration details,
       and is an ongoing matter being considered by the Council. As such, and
       notwithstanding the unregulated window formation, I shall take the existing
       extension into consideration when assessing the visual effects of the proposal.
4.     The Council also inform that a raised patio area, to the rear of the existing rear
       extension, has been built without the requisite consent. The proposal does not
       seek to regularise this work and I have not considered it within the scope of this
       proposal. This is therefore a separate matter for the Council to pursue.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
       •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
            the area,
       •    Whether the proposal would provide suitable living conditions for existing and
            future occupiers with respect to the provision of external space and in the
            relationship of parking spaces to habitable room windows,



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009135


       •    Whether the proposal would make a suitable and adequate provision for car
            parking and the effects of this on highway safety, and
       •    the effect of the proposed removal of the existing commercial unit to the
            provision of services in the area.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     Fairview Road and Fairview Grove predominantly consist of interwar housing, with
       a small parade of former retail units found at the junction of these roads. The
       dwellings are largely two-storey, with hipped roofs and projecting bay windows.
       Frontages are mostly enclosed by walls and hedges and include on plot parking
       for one or two vehicles. The streets have a relatively regimented form with most
       buildings sharing a common front building line. The appeal site is an end unit
       within the parade, this block of 4 units has a flat roof and a rather flat façade, with
       windows and doors that add some limited interest to the architectural form. A
       single storey side extension, with a flat roof, has been added to the appeal site.
       Despite the extension, the corner remains largely open with views through and
       around the site, making a positive contribution to the character and appearance of
       the area.
7.     The appeal site is a corner plot, with a side road that turns back on a near
       45-degree angle, creating a prominent and partially open corner plot that makes a
       positive contribution to the streetscene of both adjacent roads.
8.     The proposal would extend the parade to its side, over the existing single-storey
       side extension, encroaching vertically into the existing space to the side of the two-
       storey part of the building. Therefore, whilst the proposal would include design
       features that mimic the scale, flat roof and window arrangement of the existing
       parade it would appear as a bulky and discordant addition as viewed from the
       corner. From Fairview Grove the proposed extension would extend well beyond
       the established building line of dwellings along the road and would place a tall and
       obtrusive feature close to the footway, dominating the corner and the adjacent
       junction. This would be discordant with surrounding built form which is set away
       from the junction.
9.     The established building line, formed by properties along Fairview Grove, would be
       substantially breached at first-floor by the proposal. This is noted despite the
       recognition that the existing single storey side addition already extends beyond the
       building line at a low level, but this feature retains space above it allowing the
       previously built extension to not materially intrude into the streetscene. In contrast,
       the proposed development would represent a dominant form of development with
       a scale and effect uncharacteristic of buildings in the area. Accordingly, the
       proposal would demonstrably harm the appearance of the streetscene.
10. Whereas the proposed parking area would align with the parade’s use in providing
    frontage parking to service the retained retail units, causing no material adverse
    effect on the appearance of the area.
11. Nonetheless, the proposal, due to its scale and proximity to the corner, would
    harm to the character and appearance of the area. The proposal would therefore
    conflict with saved policies D4, D7, D8 and D9 of the Wolverhampton Unitary


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009135


       Development Plan [2006] (UDP) and policy ENV3 of the Black Country Core
       Strategy [2011] (CS). These seek, among other matters, for development to
       respond positively to the established pattern of streets and building lines, for
       corner buildings to emphasise the prominence and importance of its position and
       for development to have an appropriate massing and orientation to make a
       positive contribution to an area.
Living conditions
12. The rear area of the site would provide a combined amenity area for the occupiers
    of the existing flats and proposed flats to share. This area is currently laid with
    hardstanding, with an annotated total area of 125sqm, as demonstrated at Figure
    1 of the appellant’s evidence in ‘final comments’. The Council has not drawn my
    attention to any numerical requirement the establishes the required size of shared
    external space for flats. As a result, the assessment of the suitability of external
    space, including its overall size and how it might ‘fall short’, is therefore a matter of
    planning judgement.
13. The occupiers of two flats (3 and 4) would have direct access to the rear space,
    whilst the remaining two flats (1 and 2) would need to access the area from the
    gate within the front boundary. Access for flat 1 and 2 would be moderately
    awkward, having to walk along the front of the building, enter at a gate and then
    squeeze past a narrow gap at the first corner. Nevertheless, this would not in itself,
    be a substantial design flaw. However, the rear area includes a small triangle of
    land at ‘c’ which would be a small impractical space, offering limited use and
    essentially reducing the overall quantum of space available.
14. The rear area is a relatively small and awkward shape. It is hard-surfaced and
    overlooked from the footway through the gate. Moreover, occupiers of flat 3 at the
    ground floor rear of the building, would experience noise and disturbance through
    its use, with potentially multiple groups of occupiers using the space together into
    the evening. The space provided is constrained and being adjacent to the footway,
    not especially private. As a result, the external area would be unlikely to be used
    much of the time due to these constraints.
15. The appellant identifies that the site is within walking distance of several areas of
    public open space, being between 500m and 1700m away. This benefit is noted
    but does not adequately replace that which should be available on site as good
    quality private external space.
16. Also, due to an absence of any privacy buffer, and with the doorway entrance to
    flat 4 passing close to the living room window of flat 3, disturbance for occupiers of
    flat 3 would be likely to be significant. Although this window could be conditioned
    to be obscurely glazed, this would create a poor outlook.
17. Flat 1 would be located at the front of the building with front facing windows
    serving a living room and two bedrooms. If future residents park in their assigned
    spaces, the parking for flat 2 would be in front of two front doors, the occupier of
    flat 1 would park in front of their own lounge window with parking for flats 3 and 4
    being in front of the windows of bedrooms of flat 1. As such, some noise and
    disturbance from car headlights could be experienced by the occupier of flat 1 if
    the owners of flat 3 and 4 used their cars at anti-social times. However, any
    disturbance would be likely to be occasional, and this would therefore be a
    moderately adverse effect that would not amount to material harm.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009135


18. Taking the above points together, the proposed amenity space would be poor-
    quality, creating a limited provision of external space for future and existing
    occupiers of the building. The proposed development would also create a poor
    relationship for the occupiers of flat 3 with users of the external space, resulting in
    poor living conditions through inadequate privacy, and unacceptable levels of
    noise and general disturbance. As a result, the proposal would conflict with UDP
    saved policies D4, H6, EP4 and EP5 with respect to effect on living conditions.
    These include the requirement for development to not create cramped layouts in
    relation to adjoining properties and to protect the amenity of neighbouring
    residents.
Parking provision
19. LP Policy AM12 establishes maximum parking provision for residential
    development. This requires a maximum of 1.5 spaces, per dwelling across the
    district with a reduced maximum of 1 space per dwelling in highly accessible
    locations, such as Wolverhampton City Centre. In providing parking at a rate of
    less than 1.5 spaces per dwelling, the proposal would comply with this policy.
20. However, the limited provision of parking could result in overspill parking in the
    local highway. Based on the policy this could result in the maximum of two cars
    parking in the highway. Nonetheless, the appellant’s Transport Statement (TS)
    asserts that the proposed use of the site for four flats would have a lesser parking
    demand than the previous lawful use of the site for commercial use, generating
    fewer trips, which seems a likely possibility. This also appears to be the view taken
    by the Council when considering the proposal at 8-10 Fairview Road.
21. Most dwellings on Fairview Road and Fairview Grove have on plot parking for one
    or two cars. The design of the plots, for most semi-detached homes, places
    garages and their associated driveways side by side with neighbouring plots. This
    results in dropped kerbs being placed in pairs to serve two neighbouring plots and
    creates a regular pattern of raised kerbs providing frequent scope for on street
    parking.
22. Although, on-street parking spaces were noted as available during my visit I
    recognise that parking stress would be higher at evenings and weekends. I am
    also cognisant that some residents have identified that on street parking capacity
    is limited at peak times. Nonetheless, despite the street being relatively narrow I
    am unconvinced that any on street parking, arising from the proposal, would result
    in substantial on street parking demand that might hamper the free flow of traffic or
    demonstrably harm highway safety.
23. The appellant’s TS demonstrates that the site is in a sustainable location, with
    good access to local shops and amenity, with bus stops identified on Cannock
    Road and goods and services at ‘The Kingsway’ (A460), Cannock Road and ‘The
    Scotlands’. Furthermore, cycle storage for 6 bicycles is proposed, providing an
    alternative to the use of the private car for short journeys. Therefore, despite the
    Council’s assertion that the area has poor access to public transport, the site is
    found to be within an urban area and is regarded as being in a sustainable
    location.
24. Consequently, the proposal would not create a significant increase in on-street
    parking pressure or result in an adverse effect on highway safety. As such, the
    proposed scheme would comply with UDP saved policies AM15, AM12, D5 and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009135


       H6 and CS policy ENV3, regarding parking and highway safety matters. These
       seek, among other matters, for development to comply with car parking
       requirements and provide appropriate access and parking arrangements.
Impact on local services
25. The parade originally consisted of 4 retail units, with flats above. Three units
    remain in commercial use consisting of a hairdresser, tattoo studio and the appeal
    site, a former hairdresser.
26. CS policy CEN6, with respect to meeting local needs for shopping services,
    explains that shops that provide an important service to a local area will wherever
    possible, be protected. The 1987 Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order
    (as amended) places the commercial unit in the ‘E’ Use Clas, as a retail unit.
    Supporting commentary explains that the role of the policy is to encourage local
    centres to meet as many day-to-day needs of residents as possible.
27. The appellant demonstrates that a large number of hairdresser businesses
    operate in the area, listed in the main evidence and supported by an annotated
    map. This illustrates that this type of service is well catered for in the area.
    Furthermore, the current parade provides only a limited offer of services to local
    residents, based on the current use of the units. It is also noted that the appeal
    site’s commercial unit is reported has not been in commercial use for an extended
    period of time.
28. As such, it is considered that the commercial unit does not provide an important
    service to the local area and therefore it is not possible or approporiate to protect it
    in this context. Consequently, the proposal would comply with CS policy CEN6,
    whose objectives have been set out above.
Planning Balance
29. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with development plan UDP
    saved policies D4, D7, D8, D9, EP4 and EP5 and CS policy ENV3. I give this
    conflict significant weight. The proposal would deliver new housing and create
    economic befits both during construction and to the local economy through new
    occupiers spending locally. Therefore, despite the benefits of the proposal and
    compliance with other policies of the UDP and CS, it would conflict with the
    development plan when taken as a whole. Planning law requires that applications
    for planning permission be determined in accordance with the development plan
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
30. The Framework, at policy H07, requires substantial weight to be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. Furthermore, Policy S03 of the
    Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable development for
    development within settlements. Policy S04, for development within a settlement,
    states that such development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies of the Framework.
31. The appeal site is within a settlement, in a suburb of Wolverhampton, and would
    result in a net gain of 2 new dwellings. The site is within walking distance of bus
    routes that would provide easy access to the centre of Wolverhampton via


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009135


       Cannock Road. The sustainable locational benefits of the site are consistent with
       the Framework which seeks development to support sustainable patterns of
       movement, enabling good accessibility for different users and make the most of
       existing and proposed transport infrastructure, which weigh in favour of the
       scheme.
32. Nonetheless, the proposal would not be consistent with the overall streetscene, in
    conflict with policy L2(1)(d)(i) of the Framework. The scheme would also create
    poor living standards for existing and future residents, in terms of provision of
    external space and effect on privacy, as sought by the Framework’s policy
    L2(1)(d)(ii), resulting in the creation of unacceptable living standards.
33. In this instance, the benefits of the proposed development, would be substantially
    outweighed by the identified adverse effects of the proposal, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. As
    such, the presumption in favour of sustainable development would not apply.
    Accordingly, the identified conflict with the development plan would not be
    outweighed by the material considerations.
Conclusion
34. For the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
