Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009255
The Orchard, Charley Road, Charley, Leicestershire LE12 9YB
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Mather against the decision of North West Leicestershire District
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/01218/FUL.
•      The development proposed is conversion of existing garage to single C3 self-build dwelling with
       associated parking and alterations to residential curtilage.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion of existing
   garage to single C3 self-build dwelling with associated parking and alterations to
   residential curtilage at The Orchard, Charley Road, Charley, Leicestershire LE12
   9YB in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/01218/FUL, subject to
   the conditions in the attached schedule.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Since the Council’s decision, and following submission of the appeal, a revised
   National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has been published. I have
   invited comments from the main parties in respect of the revised Framework and
   have taken any comments received into consideration.
4. For the purposes of the appeal banner heading, I have taken the description of the
   proposed development from the planning application form. However, I have
   removed the site address as this repeats the address already set out. I have also
   removed the reference to ‘Resubmission’ as this is not a description of
   development, albeit I am aware that the application is a resubmission following the
   Council’s refusal of a previous planning application1 which was subsequently
   dismissed at appeal2 (the previous appeal).




1
    LPA ref 24/01245/FUL
2
    Appeal ref APP/G2435/W/25/3365289

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009255


Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposed
   development with particular regard to the Council’s spatial strategy and
   accessibility to local services and sustainable modes of transport.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The North West Leicestershire Local Plan (2021) (LP), Policy S2, sets out the
   Council’s settlement hierarchy to be used when assessing the suitability of a
   settlement for new development. The evidence before me suggests that the appeal
   site sits outside any defined ‘Limits to Development’ in the LP. Given the appeal
   site’s location amongst a small group of dwellings with no services or facilities, the
   site aligns with the definition of a hamlet which sits at the bottom of the settlement
   hierarchy.
7. Policy S2 confirms that the general principle is that those settlements higher up the
   settlement hierarchy will take more growth than those lower down and that the type
   of development proposed should be appropriate to the scale and character of the
   settlement and its place in the hierarchy. In the case of hamlets, it confirms that
   development will be considered in the context of the countryside Policy S3 of the
   LP.
8. Policies S2 and S3 of the LP are consistent with the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) which seeks sustainable patterns of development and
   also confirms that the term ‘settlement’ does not include hamlets outside
   predominantly built-up areas.
9. The proposed development in this case falls to be considered under Policy S3(d) of
   the LP which sets out that the re-use and adaptation of buildings for appropriate
   purposes, including housing, will be supported, subject to those considerations set
   out in criteria (i) to (vi). There is no dispute that criteria (i) – (v) would be met, and
   from my own observations I find no reason to disagree. Criteria (vi) requires that
   the proposed development is accessible, or will be made accessible, by a range of
   sustainable transport.
10. However, the appeal site is located well away from the nearest settlements with
    any meaningful provision of services and facilities, and there are no nearby public
    transport options available. The surrounding roads are unlit and lack footways and
    so walking to those settlements would not be convenient. This would be particularly
    the case at times of the year where hours of daylight are reduced, during periods of
    inclement weather or for occupiers with mobility issues. Even if EV bike charging
    could be conditioned, cycling would also likely be hampered to some degree by the
    same factors. In these respects, there would not be a range of sustainable
    transport available and future occupiers and visitors to the dwelling would be
    heavily reliant on private vehicular transport. The appeal site therefore has poor
    accessibility credentials and conflicts with Policy S3(vi).
11. Consequnetly, the appeal site is not a suitable location for the proposed
    development, with particular regard to the Council’s spatial strategy, and
    accessibility to local services and sustainable modes of transport. In that regard, it
    would conflict with policies S2 and S3 of the LP, which together seek to direct
    development to locations that are accessible by a range of sustainable transport.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009255


Other Considerations
12. Notwithstanding that the Council can demonstrate a 5 year supply of deliverable
    housing land, there is no dispute that the Council is currently failing to meet its
    statutory duty under the Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as
    amended) to meet the demand for self-build and/or custom-build (SBCB) housing.
    The main parties have presented different figures in terms of the current shortfall.
13. Regardless of the number of self-build permissions already granted in the district,
    whether there is a policy in the emerging Local Plan seeking a minimum
    percentage of self-build and custom housebuilding on plots of 30 dwellings or more,
    or whether there is the potential for future permissions in the district to address the
    current and future shortfall, I must have regard to the current position. Even based
    on the lowest figure before me of 19 plots, I agree with the Council that this
    represents a significant unmet need. There is also no dispute that the submitted
    Unilateral Undertaking (dated 4 November 2025) would secure the proposed
    development as a self-build dwelling.
14. Consequently, the proposed development has the potential to make a small, but
    positive contribution towards meeting the shortfall in SBCB housing in the area.
    Together, policies HO1 and national decision-making policy HO7 of the Framework
    confirm that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes
    which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the
    community. This includes homes needed for different groups including people
    wishing to commission or build their own homes.
15. The Council has referred me to a recently determined appeal at Hall Farm, Copt
    Oak Road. However, that case was considered on its own merits and did not relate
    to a self-build proposal. The other appeals referred to by the Council, including
    those on the appeal site, were determined with regard to the provisions of previous
    iterations of the Framework.
Planning Balance, Conclusion and Recommendation
16. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires
    planning applications to be determined in accordance with the development plan
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise. For the reasons set out under
    the main issue, the proposal conflicts with the spatial strategy and accessibility
    requirements in Policies S2 and S3 of the LP. The conflict with the development
    plan is an important factor and relates to the principle of whether the proposed
    development should be in this location. However, this is tempered by the fact that,
    as it re-uses an existing building, it cannot be located elsewhere. Furthermore,
    given its location within an existing residential property amongst a small group of
    dwellings it is already a destination.
17. I am mindful of the previous appeal on the site for a similar proposal. However, the
    different factor now is the provisions in the new Framework. Policy S3 of the
    Framework confirms that decisions on development proposals should apply a
    presumption in favour of sustainable development. This means outside settlements,
    Policy S5 of the Framework should be applied, which in turn sets out that only
    certain forms of development should be approved. Of relevance to the appeal,
    those forms include the re-use of an existing building, unless the benefits of doing
    so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009255


18. In terms of the harm identified under the main issue, national decision-making
    Policy TR3 of the Framework is most relevant. This sets out, ‘so that development
    is located where it can support sustainable patterns of movement, enable good
    accessibility for different users and make the most of existing and proposed
    transport infrastructure’, development proposals should reflect specified principles.
19. Given the likely low levels of traffic associated with one dwelling, the environmental
    effects would be minimal. In terms of the appeal site’s rural location, although the
    appellant’s identified condition could be attached to secure EV charging points for
    cycles, any more realistic opportunities to improve walking, wheeling, cycling and
    public transport to improve connectivity in this instance do not exist and would not
    be proportionate to the development proposed. In the circumstances, the conflict
    with the principles under Policy TR3 would be limited.
20. Moreover, for the reasons set out above and in line with policies HO1 and national
    decision-making policy HO7 of the Framework, the provision of a self-build dwelling
    is a benefit of the proposed development which attracts substantial weight.
21. Therefore, even when the conflict with the spatial strategy and accessibility
    requirements in the LP is weighed in the balance, the proposal is for a form of
    development which should be approved as the benefits of doing so are not
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects in this particular instance, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies.
Conditions
22. In the interests of precision and certainty, standard conditions should be attached in
    respect of the timescale for implementation and requiring the development
    approved to be carried out in accordance with the submitted drawings.
23. To protect the character and appearance of the area, it is reasonable to attach a
    landscaping condition similar to that suggested by the Council, albeit I have
    amended the wording to incorporate the separately suggested requirement for bin
    storage. The re-worded condition also specifies when the details should be
    provided, and subsequently implemented by, in the interests of conciseness and
    precision. Given that ‘alterations to residential curtilage’ are an integral part of the
    proposal, it is reasonable to require that these details are confirmed prior to
    commencement of works.
24. It is also reasonable to include conditions requiring the car parking shown to be
    implemented and for the appellant’s suggested bicycle store with charging facility to
    be provided. These conditions are reasonable in the interests of ensuring the
    dwelling has adequate off road parking arrangements and to encourage cycling.
    With regards to the cycle store, I have simplified the wording when compared to the
    appellant’s example which related to a scheme for multiple plots. Both conditions
    are required to be met prior to first occupation of the dwelling.
25. As the site area is clearly defined, currently forms part of The Orchards, and is
    comparable to neighbouring plots, it is unclear what the Council means when it
    suggests a ‘curtilage restriction condition’ or the reasons that this would be
    reasonable and necessary. Furthermore, the Framework and the Planning Practice
    Guidance indicate that conditions should not be used to restrict national permitted
    development rights unless there is clear justification to do so. In the absence of any


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009255


     such justification it would not be reasonable to attach the Council’s suggested
     conditions in these respects.
Conclusion and Recommendation
26. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
27. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR


                                           Schedule of Conditions
1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
   date of this decision.
2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with drawing
   nos: 4A (Location Plan and Site Plan) and 3 (Proposed Elevations and Floor
   Plans).
3) Prior to any construction works commencing, precise details of all landscaping,
   boundary treatments and bin storage shall be submitted to and approved in writing
   by the Local Planning Authority. Once approved any boundary treatments, bin
   storage and hard surfacing shall be provided in accordance with the approved
   details prior to the first occupation of the dwellinghouse and any approved soft
   landscaping shall be planted within the first planting or seeding season following
   first occupation.
4) Prior to first occupation of the dwelling, precise details of cycle parking for a
   minimum of two bicycles shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
   Planning Authority. The cycle parking should incorporate a standard 13A socket to
   allow electric bicycles (e-bikes) to be charged in situ. Once approved, the cycle
   parking shall be installed in accordance with the approved details before the
   dwelling is first occupied and retained for those purposes only for the life of the
   development.
5) Car parking shall be provided in accordance with approved drawing No 4A (Site
   Plan) prior to the first occupation of the dwellinghouse and shall be retained for
   such purposes thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
