 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 21 September 2026
 by J D Westbrook BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:24 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009354
 865 Lea Bridge Road, Walthamstow, E17 9DS
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr K Rafiq against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
      Waltham Forest.
 •    The application Ref is 252242
 •    The development proposed is the erection of a first-floor rear extension above the existing ground-
      floor retail shop.



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The Council considers that the proposed development, given the design, layout,
   height, scale and materials would be acceptable within the existing urban form in
   the vicinity and the wider locality in accordance with relevant development plan
   policies. I concur with that opinion, and the main issue in this case is, therefore, the
   effect of the proposed first-floor extension on the living conditions of the occupiers
   of the neighbouring residential accommodation at No 867 Lea Bridge Road, by way
   of light and outlook.
Reasons
3. No 865 is a two-storey commercial property situated on the north-west side of Lea
   Bridge Road. It is part of a long row of largely retail units. From the information
   available to me and from my site visit, it would appear that the retail and
   commercial units generally have large rear extensions, either single-storey or two -
   storey. The appeal property has a full-length single-storey rear extension and the
   proposed development would involve the construction of a first floor, 6.3 metres in
   length above the existing ground floor.
4. The Council contends that the proposed extension, because of its positioning and
   design, would be detrimental to the amenities of the adjoining occupiers at No.867
   Lea Bridge Road, by reason of overdominance, visual intrusion and loss of outlook.
5. Policy 57 of the Council’s adopted Local Plan (LP) indicates that new development
   should respect the amenity of neighbours by avoiding harmful impacts from
   enclosure, outlook and loss of daylight/sunlight.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009354


6. The existing first-floor at the appeal property has a rear elevation that continues the
   rear elevation at the adjoining No 867. It would appear that the first floor at No 867
   contains a dwelling and that the rear elevation of the dwelling includes a habitable
   room window some 0.5 metres from the boundary with No 865. The proposed
   extension at No 865 would project 6.3 metres from the rear elevation and would
   occupy the full width of the property, up to the boundary with No 867. It would have
   a low mono-pitch roof with an eaves height of 2.3 metres at the boundary.
7. The current outlook from windows in the rear elevation of the dwelling at No 867 is
   already constrained to the north-east by a full length two-storey rear extension at
   No 869. The outlook to the north-west and west is currently open over the single-
   storey extension at the appeal property. The proposed extension would
   substantially block this outlook with a blank wall 6.3 metres long and 2.3 metres
   high. It would be only 0.5 metres from the habitable room window at No 867 and
   would result in an adverse ‘tunnel effect’ to the view from that window. On the basis
   of this increased sense of enclosure and restricted outlook, it would be significantly
   harmful to the living conditions of the occupiers of the adjacent dwelling.
8. Although the mono-pitch nature of the roof of the proposed extension would
   mitigate some of the adverse effects of loss of light to the nearest window in the
   adjacent property, the siting of the extension to the west of No 867 and close to the
   boundary would still result in significant loss. This would add to the oppressive
   nature of the extension on the outlook from the neighbouring dwelling.
9. The appellant states that the extension is located to the rear of the property within
   an urban residential setting, and contends that it does not project to a degree that
   would create an oppressive or overbearing impact when viewed from adjoining
   habitable room windows. He concludes that it maintains adequate separation
   distances and that the relationship between the properties is typical of terraced
   residential development in the locality. However, this is not an urban residential
   setting and the relationship with the appeal property is not one of a typical terraced
   residential development. As stated above, by reason of its position and scale, I find
   that the projection of the extension and its position on the property boundary would
   result in an oppressive and over-dominant impact for occupiers of the adjacent
   dwelling at No 867.
Conclusion
10. I find that the proposed extension would be significantly harmful to the living
    conditions of the occupiers of the dwelling at No 867 Lea Bridge Road by way of
    both adverse impact on outlook and loss of light. On this basis, it would conflict with
    Policy 57 of the LP and, accordingly, I dismiss this appeal.



J D Westbrook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
