Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by S Ramsden BSc (Hons) MA MA IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009260
2 Island Cottages Stanwell Road, Horton, Windsor, Slough SL3 9PQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Gurdeve Singh against the decision of Royal Borough of Windsor and
     Maidenhead.
•    The application reference is 25/03424/FULL.
•    The development proposed is for a front gable feature, alterations to fenestration to include relocated
     front door, single storey front/side extension, single storey rear/side extension, part raised ridge, 2no.
     front, 2no. side and 2 no. rear dormers with Juliet balcony, following demolition of existing elements.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
      published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
      merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
      parties with regard to these changes.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues are:
      •      whether the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt having
             regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies;
      •      the effect on openness of the Green Belt;
      •      the effect of the proposed extension upon the character and appearance of
             the host property and the surrounding area;
      •      whether the identified flood risk has been sufficiently assessed and would be
             appropriately mitigated against and;
      •      whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would
             be clearly outweighed by other considerations so as to amount to the very
             special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
4.    The appeal site comprises a semi-detached bungalow, situated on a small, narrow
      island formed by two branches of the Colne Brook, accessed by a short track off
      Stanwell Road. The house dates from the 1960s, but appears heavily altered
      having been extended subsequently on a number of occasions. The attached
      bungalow has also been extended, including with dormer windows to its roof.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009260


5.    Other than the two houses, which have numerous outbuildings, the island contains
      a large electricity pylon in an area of rough pasture immediately to the rear of the
      appeal site. Although the surrounding land is flat, the island appears relatively
      enclosed by trees and vegetation. The surrounding area comprises a mixture of
      small villages and pockets of residential development, interspersed with gravel
      pits, small fields, reservoirs and semi-industrial/commercial units. The character of
      the area is also influenced by its proximity to the flightpath of aeroplanes from
      Heathrow Airport, which lies to the east. The appeal site is in the Metropolitan
      Green Belt.
6.    The proposed development would occupy a similar footprint to the existing
      building, although it is proposed to replace the existing roofs of No 2 with a raised,
      predominantly flat-roof structure. The roof would have pitched elements to each
      side, some with dormers containing glazed doors with Juliet balconies. Although
      there are no stairs shown on the ground floor plan, this appears to be intended as
      an additional floor level within the roof space. This view is reinforced by reference
      to a first floor level in the appellant’s statement of case.
Whether inappropriate development
7.    The five purposes of Green Belts are listed in policy GB2.1 of the Framework. The
      Framework states that ‘inappropriate development’ is, by definition, harmful to the
      Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special circumstances.
      Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless one of the exceptions listed
      in policy GB7 applies.
8.    One exception given in policy GB7.1.b of the Framework is the extension or
      alteration of a building provided that it does not result in disproportionate additions
      over and above the size of the original building.
9.    The proposed development would result in a dwelling which would, by floor area,
      be around 170% of the original 1960s bungalow. This would increase to around
      270% if a first floor is included in the calculations. Both figures indicate a
      disproportionate addition over and above the size of the original building. The
      proposed development would also entail a significant increase in the volume of the
      building.
10. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would be inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt under policy GB7.1.b of the Framework.
Openness
11. The Framework states that the Government attaches great importance to Green
    Belts, the fundamental aim of which is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land
    permanently open.
12. The Framework describes that the essential characteristics of Green Belts are
    their openness and their permanence. There is no definition of openness in the
    Framework, but the courts have established that openness has both a spatial and
    a visual aspect. Assessment of openness is a matter of planning judgement based
    on the specific facts of the case.
13. The increase in size and volume of No 2, would result in harm both spatially and
    visually to the openness of the Green Belt. However, any impacts would be
    localised and limited, given the location of the appeal site, the extent of visual

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009260


      enclosure, the nature of its surroundings and nearby development. Whilst harm to
      the Green Belt would be limited in nature, as set out in the Framework, it
      nevertheless attracts substantial weight.
Character and appearance
14. The proposal is described as alterations and extensions to the existing bungalow
    although, given the extent of the extensions and the proposed new roof structure,
    little of the existing dwelling would remain discernible.
15. Whilst the proposed development would, to some extent, unify the various
    accretions that have been added to No 2, the proposed roof form would be
    unconvincing, either as a flat roof extension or as a traditional hipped roof. Its form
    would relate poorly to either the host building, that of its immediate semi-detached
    neighbour, or more traditional roof forms in the wider area. The number and size of
    the proposed dormers would draw further attention to the disproportionate bulk, in
    comparison to the ground floor, of the roof.
16. Similarly the two-storey, glazed central entrance feature would contrast
    unfavourably with the solidity of the host building. The misalignment of the various
    dormers with the ground floor windows, along with the varying roof pitches, would
    not add to the visual coherence of the overall design.
17. For these reasons, the proposed development would not constitute high quality
    design, and would relate poorly to its surrounding context. Although there would be
    limited visibility of the development from the public domain, that does not diminish
    the harm I have found on this issue.
18. The proposed development would therefore conflict with Policy QP3 of the Royal
    Borough of Windsor & Maidenhead Borough Local Plan (the Local Plan) 2022,
    which seeks to deliver high quality design that enhances its local context. It would
    also conflict with Policies NP/HOU1 & NP/HOU2 of the Horton and Wraysbury
    Neighbourhood Plan (the Neighbourhood Plan) 2020, which taken together seek to
    deliver good quality design which makes a positive contribution to the character
    and sense of place of the built environment and landscape.
19. The proposed development would also not comply with Principles 7.7 and 10.5 of
    the Borough Wide Design Guide (2020), which seek to resist the introduction of
    roof forms on development that diverge from the prevailing character and ensure
    roof alterations are sympathetic and subservient to the design of the main building.
Flood Risk
20. The appellant states that the appeal site is in Flood Zone 2, whereas the Council
    submit that it is in Flood Zone 3. However, standing advice from the Environment
    Agency (the EA) for minor household extensions is the same in both instances.
21. The appellant has submitted a flood risk assessment (FRA); however it is
    incomplete as certain sections are blank. It does not address river flooding with a 1
    in 100 annual probability plus an allowance for climate change, as is required by
    current EA standing advice.
22. The proposed development has approximately the same footprint as the existing
    building and would contain a similar range of rooms at ground floor. The proposed
    development would also have a similar floor level to the existing building, and as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009260


      such there is unlikely to be a significantly different flood risk associated with the
      proposed development than currently exists.
23. The FRA proposes a range of flood proofing and resilience measures. It would be
    possible to secure such measures by planning condition, along with any additional
    requirements from a 1 in 100 annual flood probability when known, were I not
    dismissing the appeal for other reasons.
24. However, based on the information submitted the identified flood risk has not been
    sufficiently assessed nor would it be appropriately mitigated against. Accordingly
    the proposed development conflicts with Policy NR1 of the Local Plan which
    requires that an appropriate flood risk assessment has been carried out and it has
    been demonstrated that development is designed to ensure that flood risk from all
    sources of flooding is acceptable.
25. Similarly the proposed development does not accord with Policy NP/SUSTDEV 02
    of the Neighbourhood Plan, which seeks to encourage development that is as
    flood resilient as possible.
Green Belt balance and Conclusion
26. The proposal constitutes inappropriate development in the Green Belt which is, by
    definition harmful to the Green Belt and should only be approved in very special
    circumstances. I have also found the proposal would result in some limited harm to
    openness.
27. Policy GB6.2 of the Framework specifies that substantial weight is given to any
    harm to the Green Belt, including harm to its openness and that very special
    circumstances will not exist unless the potential harm to the Green Belt is clearly
    outweighed by other considerations. This is a high hurdle for a development
    proposal to overcome.
28. In addition, I have found that the proposed development would have a harmful
    effect on the character and appearance of the host property and surrounding area.
29. A lack of identified planning harm with regards to ecology and the living conditions
    of neighbouring occupiers is of neutral weight in the balance.
30. The other considerations put forward in favour of the proposal only carry limited
    weight and, as such, do not clearly outweigh the harm identified; accordingly the
    very special circumstances needed to justify the development do not exist. The
    proposed development would, therefore, conflict with Policy QP 5 of the Local
    Plan, which seeks to protect Green Belt, unless very special circumstances are
    demonstrated.
31. The proposal would be contrary to the development plan and the Framework. For
    the reasons given above, and having had regard to other matters, I conclude that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

S Ramsden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
