Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by Chris Mayes CMLI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009026
64 Thornton Road, Bootle, Sefton L20 5AR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Rourke of Bright Start Care Ltd against the decision of Sefton
    Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application reference is DC/2025/01781.
•   The development proposed is change of use of residential dwelling (C3) to children's care home (C2)
    for one child.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issues
2. During the course of the appeal, the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was revised. The parties were provided with an opportunity to
   comment on the implications of the revised Framework. I have had regard to the
   revised Framework in determining the appeal.
3. The planning application was submitted before the adoption of the Bootle Area
   Action Plan (BAAP) on 15 January 2026. However, planning decisions must be
   taken in accordance with the development plan and other material considerations
   prevailing at the time of determination. As such, the BAAP forms part of the
   statutory development plan and I have had full regard to its policies in determining
   this appeal.
4. The first reason for refusal in the decision notice refers to Policy EQ1 of the Local
   Plan for Sefton 2030 (April 2017) (LP). The Council accepts that this is a
   typographical error and that the correct policy reference is Policy HC2, which
   relates to residential care accommodation. The Council's position on the appeal
   has been clearly explained in its appeal statement and officer report, the appellant
   has addressed Policy HC2 in their submissions, and no prejudice has arisen as a
   consequence of the error. I have therefore considered the appeal on the basis that
   the reference to Policy EQ1 was intended to refer to Policy HC2.
5. The Council's officer report describes the proposal as a retrospective application.
   However, the application form states that the change of use had not taken place at
   the time the application was submitted. In any event, whether or not the use had
   commenced does not materially affect my assessment of the planning merits of the
   proposal and I have determined the appeal on the basis of the development as
   proposed.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009026


6. It therefore follows that the main issues are:
           •    whether the site would provide a suitable location for the proposed
                children’s care home; and,
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring
                occupants, with particular reference to noise.
Reasons
Location
7. The appeal site comprises a two-storey end-terrace dwelling situated on a corner
   plot at the junction of Thornton Road and May Street. It lies within an established
   residential area predominantly characterised by terraced housing of a broadly
   consistent scale and appearance. The proposal would involve no external
   alterations to the property, and the building would retain its domestic appearance.
8. The proposal is modest in scale. It would accommodate a single child within an
   existing dwelling and there is little evidence that it would materially alter the
   external appearance of the property or fundamentally change the residential
   character of the property or street in visual terms. Furthermore, I accept that
   children's homes can, in appropriate circumstances, coexist successfully within
   residential areas.
9. Policy HC2 of the LP addresses the provision of residential care accommodation
   and indicates that proposals which would result in or exacerbate an oversupply of
   such accommodation will be refused. However, the evidence before me does not
   enable me to reach a definitive conclusion as to whether the proposal would result
   in or contribute to an oversupply of children's residential care accommodation
   within the Borough. Consequently, I attach limited weight to that matter.
10. More directly relevant to the circumstances of this appeal is Policy BAAP18 of the
    BAAP, which seeks to maintain balanced and sustainable residential communities
    and protect the character and amenity of residential areas by avoiding undue
    concentrations of children's residential care homes. Among other things, the policy
    states that no building will be converted into a children's residential care home
    within 400m of an existing converted property meeting similar needs.
11. The parties agree that an existing children's residential care home operates from
    11 Linacre Lane and that the appeal site lies within 400m of that property.
    Consequently, the proposal would fail to satisfy the locational requirements of
    Policy BAAP18 and would conflict with that policy.
12. While the proposal would not materially alter the appearance of the property or
    street in visual terms, BAAP18 proceeds on the basis that an undue concentration
    of children's residential care homes can affect the character and amenity of
    residential areas, irrespective of whether individual proposals give rise to obvious
    physical change. The locational requirement forms part of the mechanism through
    which those objectives are pursued. While planning judgement must always be
    exercised in the application of development plan policies, the wording of BAAP18 is
    unambiguous.
13. I have had regard to the appeal decisions [APP/D4635/W/25/3359517 (23 May
    2025) and APP/G4620/W/24/3354903 (4 March 2025)] together with the other

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009026


     appeal decisions cited by the appellant. Those decisions demonstrate that
     children's homes are not inherently inappropriate within residential areas and that
     each proposal must be considered on its own merits. However, they were
     determined in the context of different development plan policies, site circumstances
     and evidential bases. As such, they do not diminish the weight that should be
     afforded to the adopted development plan in this case.
14. I also recognise the appellant's submission that there is a general need for
    children's residential care accommodation. While I do not dispute that proposition,
    the evidence before me does not demonstrate circumstances that would justify
    departing from the locational requirements of Policy BAAP18.
15. I have also considered the evidence relating to crime and community safety. While
    my decision does not turn on this matter, the evidence from Merseyside Police
    indicates that the wider area experiences levels of crime and anti-social behaviour
    which raise safeguarding concerns for a vulnerable future occupant. Although I
    acknowledge the appellant's concerns regarding the geographical scope of some of
    that evidence, I nevertheless attach weight to the professional judgement of the
    Police. In my view, those concerns reinforce, rather than determine, my conclusion
    that this is not an optimal location for the proposed use.
16. I have had regard to the fact that the proposal would accommodate only a single
    child and that staffing and supervision would be provided. These are important
    considerations and weigh in favour of the proposal. Nevertheless, they do not
    overcome my concerns regarding the suitability of the location itself.
17. Drawing these matters together, I conclude that the appeal site would not provide a
    suitable location for the proposed children's care home. The proposal would conflict
    with Policy BAAP18 of the BAAP, which seeks to maintain balanced and
    sustainable residential communities and prevent undue concentrations of children's
    residential care homes.
Living Conditions of Neighbouring Occupants
18. I have had regard to the concerns expressed by neighbouring occupants regarding
    the potential for noise disturbance arising from the proposed use, particularly given
    the relationship between the appeal property and adjoining dwellings.
19. The proposal would accommodate a single child within an existing dwelling and
    there is little evidence before me that it would result in a materially greater intensity
    of activity than would reasonably be expected from a family household. While a
    residential care home may operate differently from a conventional dwelling, I have
    seen no persuasive evidence that the nature of the proposed use would inevitably
    result in unacceptable living conditions for neighbouring occupants.
20. I recognise that limited information has been provided regarding sound insulation
    and noise mitigation measures. However, the concern is not one of principle.
    Rather, it relates to the detail of any mitigation required to ensure an acceptable
    living environment for adjoining occupants. In my judgement, that matter could
    reasonably be addressed through the imposition of a planning condition requiring
    the submission, approval and implementation of an appropriate scheme of sound
    insulation and noise mitigation before the use commences.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009026


21. Accordingly, on this main issue I conclude that the proposal would not result in
    unacceptable harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupants with
    particular regard to noise. Subject to appropriate mitigation secured by condition
    the proposal would preserve the amenity of neighbouring occupants and would
    ensure that any impact of noise would not be significant or could be reduced to an
    acceptable level. The proposal would therefore accord with Policies EQ2 and EQ4
    of the LP in relation to this issue.
Conclusion
22. Although I have found that the proposed development would not result in harm to
    the living conditions of neighbouring occupants, I have found that it would not
    provide a suitable location for a children’s care home. In my view, this matter is
    determinative. The proposal would, therefore, conflict with the development plan
    when read as a whole.
23. The material considerations, including the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework, do not indicate that a decision should be made other than in
    accordance with the development plan. For the reasons given above I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.



Chris Mayes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
