 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 25 July 2026
 by A. J. Boughton MA (IPSD) Dip.Arch. Dip.(Conservation) RIBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009688
 306 Ballards Lane, London, N12 0EY,
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Kia Karamian against the decision of The London Borough of Barnet.
 •    The application Ref is 26/0505/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is new shop front including new vehicular access to tyre garage.

Decision

1. The appeal is dismissed.

Preliminary Matter

2. Although there are minor differences between the description of the development
   that appears on the application form and that used by the Council, these are not
   material to the matters to be considered. I have used the description appearing in
   the decision notice in the interests of clarity
   .
3. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published on 17 August 2026,
   to which I have had regard in the determination of this appeal.

Main Issues

4. The main issues are the effect of the development upon:
   • the character and appearance of the area, and
   • highway safety including upon the safety and movement of pedestrians and
      cyclists.

Reasons

Character and Appearance

5. The appeal site (No.306) comprises the ground floor of a two-storey building within
   a secondary retail parade within the Finchley Church End Town Centre which ends
   at No.302 Ballards Lane at the adjacent junction with Woodberry Grove and Hutton
   Grove, an uncontrolled crossroads. The parade contains a variety of business and
   secondary high street uses at ground floor level, with upper floors of ancillary
   spaces or in some cases1, a flatted dwelling. The appeal site is constrained, sitting

1 as in the case of the appeal site

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009688


    between other similar buildings which extend, as a terrace, the length of the parade.
    Occupying a plot width of approximately 6m at the Ballards Lane frontage the
    appeal site presents a modest forecourt to Ballards Lane, occupied at the time of
    my site visit by a small car. A single door provides access to an upper-floor flat,
    while a separate shopfront entrance leads into the front room of the building. It is
    this shopfront which is proposed to be replaced by a full width sliding/folding glazed
    screen, sufficient to admit a car. To the rear, a vehicle workshop with a servicing
    ramp occupies a conjoined building, all within the application site. This rear building
    has direct access across the pavement onto Rosemont Avenue, a secondary street
    that runs parallel to Ballards Lane, with good width and on-street parking.

6. The existing use of the appeal site is for vehicle repair and servicing which is
   advertised on the front elevation and with ‘A’ board signage directing customers
   towards the rear access on Rosemont Avenue. Most buildings on Ballards Lane to
   the north of the appeal site have frontage extensions from the original terrace line
   up to the back of pavement, however this is not the case with the appeal site or its
   immediate neighbours which are set back to the line of original frontage. These
   neighbouring users include2 a restaurant which extends onto the adjacent forecourt
   and a professional office. There are two retail businesses on the southern side of
   No.306. None of these uses appear to involve vehicle access across the pavement
   frontage and I saw no dropped kerbs nearby.

7. Whilst I note the observations by the appellant, character is not limited to visual
   considerations. The appeal site sits at the end of a line of businesses which provide
   day-to-day services and facilities for the local community. It fronts a major road at a
   point where there is a transition towards mainly residential use, including housing
   and, therefore, a suburban character. I observed a significant level of pedestrian
   movement along the footway, including children, passing the frontage of the appeal
   site and in some cases then crossing Ballards Lane or turning down a side street.
   This is indicative of the mixed character of the area and, in my consideration,
   indicates that substantial weight should be attached to improving or retaining walk-
   to access to businesses or services such as those near the appeal site. I consider
   that the wide pavement, which the appellant wishes to cross, is important in
   establishing a pedestrian and family-friendly route towards local town centre
   facilities and other nearby walk-to locations.

8. The proposed works would bring about only minor change to the appearance of the
   appeal site. The shopfront replacement would neither be obvious nor, given the
   amount of retail signage currently found, visually intrusive. However, the change in
   the character of use would be significant. It would necessarily involve movement of
   vehicles in and out of the currently closed frontage, presenting a potentially open
   shopfront and the noise of wheel removal and tyre-changing onto the street and
   close to the adjacent restaurant use. The number of vehicle movements would not
   be comparable with a normal household but much greater and throughout a working
   day such as I observed in my site visit, likely to be significant. Whilst such activity is
   commonly found in secondary retail areas, it would be an intrusive feature in this
   location given the character of the other nearby uses and the limited size of the
   forecourt.



2 At Nos.308 & 310


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
 Appeal Decision 6009688


9. Policy CDH01 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036 (BLP) sets out principles for high
   quality design, in particular to facilitate attractive streets and to promote active travel
   in a way which is sensitive to local character. Overall, the change proposed would
   detrimentally affect the experience of pedestrians and other road users in a number
   of ways; it would introduce uncertainty as to the potential movements of cars
   emerging from or entering the front of the premises, disturbing the sense of security
   which users of the wide pavement currently enjoy. It would introduce a new type of
   activity with its associated noise which is not currently present in proximity to
   premises which rely on walk-in custom. The proposed works would facilitate a use
   of the front part of the appeal site which is incompatible with the character of the
   adjoining premises. I conclude the proposal would conflict with Policy CDH01 of the
   BLP which at (C) requires development to respond sensitively to local character and
   to ensure streets are attractive and safe.

Highway Safety

10. The proposed development is plainly intended to attract the custom of car users in
    terms of tyre replacement, and this would result in vehicles crossing the footway to
    enter through the proposed new shopfront. Due to the limited width of the access
    each customer would need to reverse out of3 the premises and would likely involve
    other customers also waiting on the highway at busy times. The proposed crossover
    would be located between an uncontrolled road junction and a signal-controlled
    pedestrian crossing, at a point where zig-zag markings are on both sides of the road
    which are intended to prevent waiting or related overtaking. Although the light
    control of the crossing would allow opportunity for access or egress of cars,
    movements involving reversing into or turning across the lines of traffic, or any
    waiting by customers, would conflict with the principle of holding lines of traffic at a
    standstill on the approach to a pedestrian crossing to allow pedestrians to cross
    safely.

11. Overall, the manoeuvring necessary for customer cars to enter and leave the
    premises would create potential for conflict or collision not only with traffic on a busy
    urban road but also with pedestrians and other users of the footway. Such users
    may not be predictable in their movements or could appear suddenly because of the
    proximity of the junction with Woodbury Grove, and may not initially be visible to
    drivers reversing from the premises. I observed the pathway being used by parents
    with pushchairs and small children with bicycles. Reversing would be both
    unavoidable and a notable risk in such situations as rearward visibility for drivers is
    restricted.

12. Policy TRC01 of the BLP seeks the delivery a more sustainable transport network
    through opportunities to reduce car use, increase use of sustainable modes and
    encourage active travel. At section A of that policy the Council seek to ensure that
    development should ‘address the needs of pedestrians and cyclists by ensuring (b)
    a healthy, safe and attractive walking and cycling environment…in the immediate
    vicinity of the development’. I have previously explained that the development,
    although individually small in scope would create risk of harm to road users,
    particularly users of the footway which would be crossed by vehicles belonging to
    customers of the premises. I therefore find that the development would both

3 Alternatively to reverse in and drive out


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision 6009688


    unacceptably harm highway safety and conflict with the objectives set out in Policy
    TRC01 (A) of the BLP in that it would fail to provide the safe and attractive
    environment which cyclists and pedestrians need if active travel is to be
    encouraged.

13. The appellant points to economic benefits including to paragraphs 11 and 39 of the
    now superseded National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) stressing that
    planning should ‘create the conditions in which businesses can expand and adapt’,
    suggesting there are economic benefits from operational improvements. It is my
    judgement, however, that any benefits likely to accrue to the existing business as a
    result of the works proposed are outweighed by harm to the public realm, risk to
    users and, by extension, potentially impairing the vitality of the part of the town
    centre in which the development would be located.

14. In conclusion, I consider that the proposal would conflict with Policy CDH01 of the
    BLP in harming local character and failing to provide a safe and attractive
    environment for cyclists and pedestrians. It would also introduce an unacceptable
    impact on highway safety from a conflicting movement of vehicles on a busy road in
    proximity to junctions and a pedestrian crossing point. This would also conflict with
    the guidance in the Framework (August 2026) at TR4 which seeks that priority
    should be given first to walking, wheeling and cycle movements and that scope for
    conflict with vehicles should be minimised. Taking all matters raised into account,
    my reasoning directs that the development fails to accord with the provisions of the
    development plan as a whole and that, in consequence, the appeal cannot succeed.



    Andrew Boughton
    INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
