Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 July 2026 by I Ingledew BSc (Hons)
Decision by T Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009765
8 Orchard Close, Northampton, West Northamptonshire NN4 6HF
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Titov against the decision of West Northamptonshire Council.
•   The application Ref is 2026/1305/PNHPD.
•   The development proposed is a proposed flat roof with lantern single storey extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is deemed to be granted under the
   provisions of Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph A.4 of the
   Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order
   2015 (as amended) for a proposed flat roof with lantern single storey extension at 8
   Orchard Close, Northampton, West Northamptonshire NN4 6HF in accordance with
   the application, ref 2026/1305/PNHPD, made on 24 March 2026 and the details
   submitted with it pursuant to Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A,
   paragraph A.4(2).
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Applications for costs
3. An application for a full award of costs was made by Mr and Mrs Titov against West
   Northamptonshire Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
4. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
   (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
   subject to limitations and conditions.
5. Where an application is made for prior approval for development which exceeds the
   limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph
   A.4(3) provides that the local planning authority may refuse the application where it
   considers that the proposed development does not comply – or that the developer
   has provided insufficient information to enable the authority to establish whether the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009765


     proposed development complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that
     are applicable to such permitted development.
6. Paragraph A.4(7) to Part 1 requires the local planning authority to assess the
   impact of the proposed development on the amenity of all adjoining premises,
   taking into account any representations received. Following the Council’s
   notification, no representations were received.
7. The procedure outlined in paragraph A.4(10) to Part 1 explains that development
   must not begin until the occurrence of either a) the local planning authority provides
   a written notice that prior approval is not required, b) the local planning authority
   provides written notice that prior approval is given, or c) the expiry of 42 days
   following the date on which the prior approval application under sub-paragraph (2)
   was received without the local planning authority notifying the developer as to
   whether the prior approval is given or refused.
8. Should the local planning authority fail to refuse the application within the statutory
   period, prior Approval is therefore deemed to be granted. The development can
   lawfully proceed if constructed or carried out in accordance with the submitted
   plans, and with the conditions and limitations imposed on the planning permission
   granted by the GPDO. Where prior approval is deemed to be granted by reason of
   the timing of the local planning authority’s decision, whether or not the proposal is
   permitted development is not a matter for me to consider when determining this
   appeal which solely relates to the prior approval process.
Main Issue
9. The main issue is whether the prior approval would be deemed to be granted
   planning permission under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
   GPDO.
Reasons for the Recommendation
10. Following the procedure of the GPDO, the statutory period for an application to
    determine if prior approval is required for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse under
    Part 1, Class A of the GPDO is 42 days. This period commences from the day
    following the application date, and the clock would stop at midnight on day 42.
11. The application, along with the information required under sub-paragraph (2) was
    received by the Council on the 24 March 2026. I have no evidence before me to
    suggest that the full suite of information required was not submitted on this date. 42
    days from the 25 March 2026 therefore result in the determination period ending on
    the 6 May 2026. The date of the decision notice before me is 12 May 2026, after
    the 42 day period had lapsed. Accordingly, in the absence of the council providing
    a written notice under paragraph A.4(10) within the application period, I therefore
    conclude planning permission is deemed to have been granted under Article 3(1)
    and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
Other Matters
12. The Council contends that the proposal would not meet the limitations and
    restrictions imposed by paragraph A.1(i). The commencement of development
    could only lawfully proceed if it is in accordance with the submitted plans and is in
    fact permitted development having regard to the relevant conditions and limitations
    imposed on the planning permission granted by the GPDO. The nature of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009765


     appeal means that this is not a matter to be considered by me in its determination
     and would be for the Council and appellant to resolve.
Conditions
13. Any planning permission granted under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A
    is subject to the conditions set out in that class. The GPDO allows for prior approval
    to be granted unconditionally or subject to conditions relating to the impact of the
    proposed development on the amenity of any adjoining premises. However, since
    finding that prior approval is deemed to have been granted, there is no facility to
    attach further conditions.
Conclusion and Recommendation
14. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed and prior approval is deemed to be
    granted.

I Ingledew
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
15. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

T Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
