Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009691
Land off Shire Lane, Hurst Green BB7 9QR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•   The appeal is made by Mr David Warbrick against the decision of Ribble Valley Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 3/2026/0159.
•   The development proposed is described as permission in principle for up to 3 no. self-build dwellings
    to include 1 no. bungalow for over 55's.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Permission in principle is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
   housing development. It has two stages. The first is the principle stage where only
   matters of location, land use and amount are considered. The second is the
   detailed ‘technical details consent’ stage, where the more precise details are
   considered. The appeal relates to the first stage, where I have considered the
   evidence, and specifically the plans, accordingly.
4. The Council has expressed substantive concerns over where Shire Lane meets
   Longridge Road. It is alleged that the visibility splays are sub-standard, the west
   junction is at an acute angle, and Longridge Road is subject to a 40mph speed
   limit. The road to the east is also too narrow and substandard for visibility splays.
5. I appreciate that the intensification of the site and use for up to three dwellings
   could have highway safety implications in this and the above context. The appellant
   has offered the possibility of widening the west junction as the land adjacent lies
   within their ownership. They state this could be secured by condition at this or later
   stage. Given the landownership and that this is evidently a matter that could be
   overcome, I have not investigated it further in my consideration of the main issue.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
   regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009691


Reasons for the Recommendation
7. Key Statement DS1 of the Ribble Valley Core Strategy 2014 (CS) outlines the
   spatial strategy for new housing developments and directs them first to the strategic
   sites and Principal and Tier 1 settlements. This is in the interests of encouraging
   development to those areas that have good access to services and facilities on
   which occupiers thereof would rely day to day, to reduce the need to travel and
   provide a mix of alternative options to do so. In the interests of promoting
   sustainable patterns of new development
8. Policies DMH3 and DMG2 of the CS seek to restrict residential development in the
   open countryside to that which meets a number of explicit criteria. CS Policy DMG2
   (2) sets out a list of considerations which development, located within Tier 2
   Settlements or outside the defined settlement areas, must meet. CS Policy DMH3
   reflects this and sets out a list which development within areas defined as open
   countryside will be limited to.
9. The appeal site is located within the Forest of Bowland National Landscape (NL)
   (formerly the AONB), outside the settlement of Hurst Green which is Tier 2. The
   site currently comprises a smallholding with an agricultural shed structure, which is
   accessed off Shire Lane. It would be outside of a settlement, and whilst the
   dwelling would have the potential to address identified housing need (a matter to
   which I shall return), to meet one of the exceptions set out under DMG2 and DMH3,
   it would also be required to be in keeping with the countryside landscape.
10. The appeal site has access to a limited range of facilities within the settlement of
    Hurst Green which is within walking distance. However, the road is unlit and lacks
    any segregated footpaths which would provide an unattractive option for accessing
    the services and facilities within the village by all users. There is a bus stop within
    Hurst Green for Route 5 which provides a link to Clitheroe for access to a wider
    range of facilities. However, this would also require walking along an unlit road.
    Therefore, the site would not be physically well-related to the existing settlement
    and sustainable modes of transport would not be reasonably available for future
    occupiers.
11. Whilst design is not a fixed matter and only indicative details of the proposed
    dwellings have been provided; the scheme would seek an amount of up to three
    units. They would require an access, and potentially incidental buildings going
    forwards, and the establishment of several distinct residential curtilages. All of
    these variables would contribute to a clear urbanisation of what is a high quality
    area of largely unspoilt rolling rural landscape at the point of the appeal site. There
    are buildings around and about, but these are mainly of an agrarian type
    associated with rural practices and some isolated and semi isolated dwellings.
12. Whilst I appreciate there has been no formalised assessment of the landscape and
    visual effect of the proposed development, the immediate and wider area which
    includes planted boundaries, groups of trees and hedge lined fields define the
    surroundings of the appeal site. Extending further, there is a clear and high quality
    unspoilt and undulating character to the landscape, reflective of its status. I am
    aware of the duty to seek to further the purposes of preserving and enhancing the
    special qualities of National Landscapes and the stance of Policy N4 of the National
    Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). With the above in mind, and in regard



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009691


     to the land use, amount and location of the proposals, the scheme would cause
     unacceptable harm to the special qualities of the NL.
13. The appeal site is not suitable for residential development, having regard to its
    location, use and amount. In these respects, the proposed development conflicts
    with Policies DMI2, DMG1, DMG2, DMG3 and DMH3 of the CS which require
    proposals to be located so that the need to travel is minimised, and that they
    incorporate good access by foot and cycle so that convenient links to public
    transport reduce the need to travel by car, and that where there is the potential to
    impact the natural environment this is avoided.
Other Matters
14. The proposal would not result in an infill development. This would typically concern
    a gap within an existing group. In contrast, whilst the appeal site sits along the
    boundary of another dwelling, the other side adjoins fields.
15. I have not been provided with the full details of appeal 3372635. Nevertheless, and
    from the Inspector's decision, the scheme was subject to different site constraints
    to those that apply in the appeal before me. The site adjoined the boundary of a
    defined settlement. Consequently, the circumstances of that case are not
    sufficiently comparable for my findings to change.
16. The Framework states that previously developed land excludes that which is or was
    last occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings. Given that the smallholding is
    currently occupied by an agricultural shed, the site would not be classed as
    previously developed land.
17. I do not have a scheme to seek prior approval for the permitted change of use of an
    agricultural building before me. I cannot therefore be satisfied, on the strength of
    what I have seen in the evidence, that one would satisfy the criteria set out by the
    relevant class. Accordingly, I can attach only very limited weight to the
    establishment of a dwelling or dwellings by this process as a fallback position.
Planning Balance
18. The Council is unable to demonstrate the supply of housing sites required by the
    Framework. With this and the appeal site’s location in mind, Policy S5 of the
    Framework explains that a planning permission should be granted, unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
19. It is sufficiently clear from the evidence on site and on the submitted plans that the
    appeal site is not physically well related to a settlement. There would be some
    benefits arising out of the scheme. It is presented as a self build project and would
    provide at least one unit for the occupation of over 55s. I am mindful of the support
    and substantial weight for such in the Framework, but I do not have a sufficiently
    compelling amount of evidence before me pertaining to an evidenced need in each
    regard. In any case, neither of these matters are secured via a completed planning
    obligation or otherwise.
20. The scheme would add housing to the Council’s supply but by a very limited
    number. Other associated economic and social benefits arising would be equally
    limited by the scale of the proposals. With this and the above in mind, I give the
    benefits of the proposals limited weight.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009691


21. The harms I have found in regard to the main issue would be wide ranging and long
    lasting. They would be related to the principle of the proposals and unacceptably
    impinge on the special qualities of the NL. The Framework is clear that substantial
    weight should be placed on the importance of conserving and enhancing the
    natural beauty of these areas. Policy DP3 asserts that development should respond
    to its context and Policy CC2 emphasises a requirement for good access to
    facilities in order to limit the need to travel. I give the harms and associated conflict
    with both the development plan and the Framework significant weight.
22. It is sufficiently clear therefore that the benefits of granting a planning permission
    for the proposed development would be substantially outweighed by adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework. The Framework does not therefore, in this particular case, indicate that
    the proposals should benefit from planning permission.
Conclusion and Recommendation
23. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan and material considerations, including the approach of the
    Framework, do not indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I
    therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
24. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
