Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 30 July 2026
by Alice James BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6009738
Footpath outside The Heart Centre, 54 Hepworth Way, Walton-on Thames
KT12 1GH
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group Plc against the decision of Elmbridge Borough
     Council.
    The application Ref is 2025/3164.
    The development proposed is installation of 1No. BT Street Hub Unit and associated advertisement
     panels on either side of the unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6009551
Footpath outside The Heart Centre, 54 Hepworth Way, Walton-on Thames
KT12 1GH
    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group Plc against the decision of Elmbridge Borough
     Council.
    The application Ref is 2025/3218.
    The advertisement proposed is installation of 1No. BT Street Hub Unit and associated advertisement
     panels on either side of the unit.

Decisions
1.    Appeal A is dismissed.
2.    Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.    Both appeals relate to the same site. I have dealt with them on the basis that
      planning permission is being sought for a BT Street Hub Unit (Hub) and that
      advertisement consent is being sought for the integrated advertisement panels.
      Each appeal has been considered on its own merits, but as they are intrinsically
      linked and raise related issues, I have combined them into a single decision letter.
4.    In respect of Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 require decisions regarding
      advertisements to be made only in the interests of amenity and public safety,
      whilst taking any material considerations into account. The Planning Practice
      Guidance notes amenity can include visual and/or aural amenity. The Council has
      referred to various development plan policies, which I have taken into account.
      However, they have not been decisive in my determination of Appeal B. The


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6009738 and 6009551


       Council’s reason for refusal in respect of Appeal B relates solely to amenity and
       not public safety. I have no reason to disagree with those findings.
5.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) was issued on 17 August
      2026, which replaces the previous NPPF published in December 2024, and all
      other iterations. I have given the parties the opportunity to comment but no
      response has been received. The policies in the NPPF are material considerations
      which must be taken into account in decision-making from the day of its
      publication. Therefore, I have taken them into consideration in this decision.
Main Issues
6.    The main issue for Appeal A is the effect of the proposed Hub on the character
      and appearance of the area.
7.    The main issue for Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisement on the
      visual amenity of the area.
Reasons
8.    The appeal site is located within a paved area adjacent to Walton Library and
      close to the edge of the pavement along Hepworth Way. At the time of my site
      visit, this area had a predominantly open character, containing two trees, bollards,
      street lighting and an information sign for The Heart Centre.
9.    Walton Library forms a gateway building with a glass façade and has strong
      building lines which create open views between The Heart Centre and Hepworth
      Way. The pointed roof apex acts as an urban focal point, making the building easy
      to identify within the streetscape. The large open paved area to the front of the
      building allows unobstructed views of the façade and roof, making the building
      visually dominant within the streetscape and creating a sense of arrival to The
      Heart Centre.
10. Due to the location, width and height of the proposal, it would appear as a bulky
    and visually prominent structure which would have a harmful impact on the open
    character of The Heart Centre entrance and the setting of the Walton Library as a
    prominent part of the townscape. The prominence of the proposal would be further
    heightened by its illuminated digital displays. As a result, the proposal would
    appear as an incongruous addition that would undermine the character and
    appearance of the area.
11. I acknowledge the presence of a bus shelter on the pavement between Walton
    Library and Hepworth Way. However, given its position away from the entrance to
    both Walton Library and The Heart Centre, it does not detract from the openness
    of the paved area.
12. Opposite retail units 55-59 of The Heart Centre, there is a paved area containing a
    greater volume of street furniture, such as cycle parking, bins, trees, temporary
    hoarding boards and lighting. The area also includes a freestanding hub with an
    integrated advertising display on one side and a call facility and defibrillator
    beneath a protective canopy on the other. This hub was allowed under
    APP/K3605/W/24/3351207, although the full detail of this appeal has not been
    provided. Although this section of pavement lies close to the appeal site and
    shares its commercial character, it appears more cluttered and is set further back
    from Walton Library. It is also separated from the appeal site by a service road.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6009738 and 6009551


       and does not appear to form part of the legible entrance of The Heart Centre.
       Consequently, this area has a less open character and is not directly comparable
       to the location of the scheme before me.
13. I recognise that this is a commercial area and street scenes evolve over time. The
    level of brightness, hours of illumination and frequency of image change could also
    be controlled via a planning condition. However, these matters would not
    overcome the harm to the character, appearance and visual amenity of the area as
    a result of the size and prominence of the illuminated displays.
14. Overall, in respect of Appeal A, I conclude that the proposal would have a harmful
    effect on the character and appearance of the area, contrary to the relevant
    provisions of Policy CS17 of the Elmbridge Core Strategy July 2011, Policies DM2
    and DM15 of the Elmbridge Local Plan Development Management Plan April
    2015. In summary, these policies seek to deliver high-quality design which
    responds positively to features of individual locations and integrates sensitively
    with the locally distinctive townscape.
15. For Appeal B, I conclude that the proposal would harm the visual amenity of the
    area. In so far as they are relevant, the proposal would be contrary to the relevant
    provisions of Policy CS17 of the Elmbridge Core Strategy July 2011, Policies DM2
    and DM15 of the Elmbridge Local Plan Development Management Plan April
    2015. In summary, these policies seek to ensure that advertisements are well
    designed and do not harm visual amenity, are in proportion to their surroundings
    and do not result in undue clutter.
16. The reason for refusal refers to policy CS9 of the Core Strategy. This policy is a
    strategic policy for the settlement of Esher. It does not appear to be directly related
    to this proposal as this proposed development is in Walton-on-Thames.
Other Matters
17. The appellant has indicated that should this appeal be allowed, it would result in
    the removal of a nearby BT phone box. The removal of this BT phone box would
    contribute to decluttering the street scene in a different location. However, no
    mechanism has been put forward to secure the removal of the phone box, which
    lies outside the appeal site. This matter has not led me to an alternative conclusion
    in respect of the main issues.
18. The appellant has drawn my attention to various appeal decisions and examples of
    proposals for other Hubs and a digital billboard. The full details have not been
    provided but based on the limited details Appeals APP/K3605/W/24/3347943,
    APP/Z5630/H/3209488, APP/N5090/Z/22/3296138, APP/N5090/Z/21/3287033,
    APP/J2373/H/22/3305026, APP/J2373/W/22/3304941, APP/J2373/W/22/3305075,
    APP/Q4245/W/25/3363934, APP/Q4245/W/25/3363942 and examples on Esher
    High Street, Weybridge High Street and Sandown Racecourse are in a different
    locations, with their own set of site specific circumstances. Consequently, these
    appeals and examples are not directly comparable to the proposal. Thus, I have
    determined the appeals before me on the basis of their own merits.
19. I acknowledge that the proposal would not harm any nearby heritage assets or
    highway assets and note that the appellant worked collaboratively with the Council
    during the application process. Nevertheless, these matters do not alter my
    conclusions in respect of the main issues.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6009738 and 6009551


Planning Balance and conclusion
20. The proposal, in Appeal A, would harm the character and appearance of the area
    and, in Appeal B, the visual amenity of the area.
21. Policy S4 of the NPPF sets out that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects and assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the NPPF.
22. Policy HC4 of the NPPF concerns proposals for new and improved community
    facilities, public service infrastructure and development providing public health
    benefits. It finds that substantial weight should be given to the benefits where new
    or improved public service infrastructure or community facilities would be provided
    and development proposals would make a demonstrable contribution towards
    promoting good health, preventing ill health reducing health inequalities or
    supporting social interaction in the local community.
23. The proposal would deliver a range of benefits, including improved access to Wi-
    Fi, connections to public services and helplines, device charging facilities, and the
    potential for enhanced 4G and 5G coverage. It also has the potential to provide
    advertising space for local business and could help the local Council to achieve
    social and economic improvement and sustainability goals. I give those benefits
    substantial weight.
24. However, the proposal, by reason of its position and scale, would conflict with
    other policies of the NPPF, including policy DP3 which relates to design. In
    particular, this requires that substantial weight should be given to compliance with
    relevant development plan policies when assessing the design quality of
    proposals. Moreover, there is an existing freestanding hub very close to the appeal
    site which already provides many of these functions.
25. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the NPPF. As such, policy S4 of the NPPF does not point to
    permission being granted in this instance.
26. In the final balance, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of
    sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to
    all other matters raised, Appeals A and B should be dismissed.

Alice James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
