Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by C Billings BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009473
Unit 9a, Birkdale Avenue, Birmingham B29 6UB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
    the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
    amended) (GPDO).
•   The appeal is made by Olton Developments Ltd against the decision of Birmingham City Council.
•   The application Ref is 2026/00006/PA.
•   The development proposed is change of use to 15 residential apartments (Use Class C3) and
    associated internal works.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
   3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for change of use to
   15 residential apartments (Use Class C3) and associated internal works, at Unit 9a
   Birkdale Avenue, Birmingham B29 6UB, in accordance with the application ref
   2026/00006/PA and the details submitted with it, including plan nos. 06 2017-77
   Rev A (Proposed Ground Floor Plan); 07 2017-77 Rev A (Proposed First Plans); 08
   2017-77 Rev A (Proposed Floor Plans); and, 1.0 2017-77 (Existing Site Plan),
   subject to conditions in the schedule below.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of development has been amended compared from that given on
   the application form, to exclude matters that are not acts of development. This
   appropriately describes the proposal and no party would be prejudiced by this.
3. Article 3(1), Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the GPDO permits change of use of a
   building and any land within its curtilage from a use falling within Class E
   (commercial, business and service) to a use falling within Class C3
   (dwellinghouses). This is subject to limitations and conditions.
4. Article 3(9A) of the GPDO provides that Schedule 2 does not grant permission for
   any new dwellinghouse where (a) the gross internal floorspace is less than 37m2,
   or where it does not comply with the nationally described space standard issued by
   DCLG, March 2015. The Council consider the proposal would not comply with this.
5. Also, the Council considers that the proposal does not comply with paragraph
   MA(2)(d) of Class MA, in that the impacts of noise from commercial premises on
   the intended occupiers of the development would not be acceptable. The procedure
   for applications for prior approval under Part 3 sets out at paragraph W(3) that the
   local planning authority may refuse an application for prior approval where, in the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009473


     opinion of the authority (a) the proposed development does not comply with or, (b)
     the developer has provided insufficient information to enable the authority to
     establish whether the proposed development complies with any conditions,
     limitations or restrictions specified in this Part as being applicable to the
     development in question.
6. The Council asserts that an updated Noise Impact Assessment (NIA) was
   submitted with the appeal. However, from the evidence provided, I am satisfied that
   the appellant relies on the NIA submitted with the appeal application (dated 25
   November 2025) and that, the correspondence included with the appeal
   submission relating to noise impact clarifies matters set out in the original NIA,
   rather than comprise a new or updated NIA. Furthermore, the Council have had
   opportunity to comment on the correspondence and information as part of the
   appeal process. Therefore, no party would be prejudiced by me considering the
   noise information submitted with the appeal in making my decision.
7. Also, I have considered the floor plans submitted with the planning application in
   reaching my decision and not any subsequent variations to them.
Main Issue
8. The main issue is whether the proposed development would provide acceptable
   living conditions for future occupiers, in particular regard to the amount of internal
   living space (units 1-5 and 8-13) and, noise (all units) from the nearby railway and
   commercial premises.
Reasons
Internal living space
9. The Nationally Described Space Standards (NDSS) (2015) require a minimum
   gross internal floor area of 39sqm for a 1 storey 1 bedroom 1 person dwelling, or
   37sqm if it includes a shower room as opposed to a bathroom. Also, the NDSS
   require for a 1 bedroom, 2 person unit, a minimum of 50sqm for a 1-storey dwelling
   and 58sqm if 2-storey.
10. All of the proposed studio apartments would have a shower room and a total
    internal floor area exceeding 37sqm. Also, the proposed 4 units with a separate
    bedroom, would have a floor area of between 51sqm and 66sqm, including that the
    2-storey unit would have a floor area of more than 58sqm. Therefore, the relevant
    space standards would be met for all of the proposed units.
11. While the proposed layout plan of the studio apartments shows a double bed in
    each unit, it is unlikely that these would typically be occupied by more than 1-
    person, as the sleeping area would be within the shared open plan
    lounge/kitchen/bedroom. Also, as set out in the schedule of accommodation in the
    Planning Statement, the studio units 1-5 and 8-13 would be 1 bed, 1 person units,
    rather than 2 person units. Furthermore, it is possible and not unusual for a single
    person to choose to sleep in a double bed as opposed to a single bed and, even if
    the floor plan showed a single bed, as opposed to a double bed, it would be
    unreasonable and difficult to enforce a condition that only a single bed is used in
    the proposed dwelling units.
12. Therefore, based on the proposed internal layouts and evidence provided, the
    proposed development would comply with the NDSS and so, would provide

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009473


     appropriate living conditions for future occupiers of units 1-5 and 8-13, in particular
     regard to the amount of internal living space. Consequently, the proposal would
     comply with Article 3(9A) of the GPDO and would be permitted development under
     Schedule 2, Part 3 Class MA of the GPDO, subject to satisfying the relevant
     conditions and procedures under paragraphs MA.2 and W of Schedule 2, Part 3 of
     the GPDO.
Noise
13. The appeal property is within an industrial estate, with industrial and commercial
    units close by. Also, there is a railway line to the rear of the appeal building, which
    has regular passenger trains running along it, between 05.30 and midnight and rail
    freight traffic during the night.
14. While previous applications to change the use of the building to residential have
    been rejected due to noise concerns, a noise assessment has been submitted with
    the appeal proposal. Additionally, the proposed floor plan at ground and first floor
    includes a corridor at the rear to separate most of the proposed dwelling units from
    the rear elevation windows. The noise impact assessment report includes the
    consideration of commercial noise from nearby retail and commercial premises,
    including from equipment, HGV traffic and operating hours and activities at these
    premises. It also considers noise from the railway line.
15. The noise assessment sets out that with the incorporation of appropriate acoustic
    mitigation, including enhanced glazing and appropriate mechanical ventilation, the
    future occupiers of the units would not experience harmful noise disturbance from
    commercial or railway noise sources. This is a view shared by the Council’s
    Environmental Protection Officer. Therefore, despite the existing building fabric,
    without any substantive evidence to the contrary, and subject to conditions, the
    proposal would provide appropriate living conditions for its future occupiers in terms
    of noise.
16. While the appellant asserts that railway noise should not be considered as part of
    the impacts of noise from commercial premises, the interpretation of Part 3 does
    not define commercial premises. Furthermore, for the purposes of conditions MA.2
    (d) of Class MA, paragraph W.(10)(b) of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO, regard
    must be had to the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework), so far as
    relevant to the subject matter for the prior approval as if the application were a
    planning application.
17. Policy P3 of the Framework, sets out that consideration should be given to the
    sensitivity of the site and its intended occupiers, so that healthy living conditions are
    provided for future occupiers, avoiding exposure to levels of noise or other sources
    of pollution which could have an unacceptable adverse effect on health and the
    quality of life. Therefore, it is appropriate to consider the effects of noise from
    preexisting conditions in the vicinity of the site, including from the adjacent railway,
    to ensure future residents have healthy living conditions.
18. However, unlike the impacts of noise, the impact of ground based vibration from
    other uses or development nearby is not a consideration required under condition
    MA.2 (2).
19. In view of the above, subject to conditions, the proposed development would
    provide acceptable living conditions for future occupiers, in regard to noise (all

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009473


     units) from the nearby railway and commercial premises. Therefore, the proposal
     would comply with MA(2)(d) of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO.
Conditions
20. Prior approvals and permission granted for development under Schedule 2, Part 3,
    Class MA of the GPDO are subject to conditions under MA.2, including (5) that the
    development must be completed within a period of 3 years starting with the prior
    approval date and (6), that the building is to remain in use as a dwellinghouse
    within the meaning of Class C3 of Schedule 1 to the Use Classes Order and for no
    other purpose, except to the extent that the other purpose is ancillary to the use as
    a dwellinghouse. Furthermore, as set out under Schedule 2, Part 3, paragraph W
    (13) of the GPDO, the local planning authority may grant prior approval
    unconditionally or subject to conditions reasonably related to the subject matter of
    the prior approval.
21. It would be reasonably related to the subject matter and necessary to require
    details of noise mitigation and mechanical ventilation to be submitted, agreed,
    implemented and retained, to ensure healthy living conditions would be provided for
    future occupiers of the development. The appellant sets out in their statement of
    case, that they are agreeable to the noise and ventilation conditions, as
    recommended by the Council’s Environmental Pollution Control Officer. Although, I
    have amended the wording of the suggested conditions, to ensure the measures
    are implemented and retained as agreed for the lifetime of the development.
    However, this does not change the overall requirements of the condition.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above and subject to conditions, I conclude that the appeal
    should be allowed and prior approval is granted.



C Billings
INSPECTOR


                                           Condition Schedule


    1. Prior to the occupation of any of the dwellings, a scheme of noise insulation shall
       be submitted to and agreed in writing by the local planning authority. The design
       and specification for the proposed noise mitigation from glazing, building
       components, acoustic barriers and ventilation provision shall be based on a
       composite noise reduction calculation in accordance with BS8233 and BS EN
       12354:3 to ensure the internal noise environment to habitable rooms within the
       development meets the following:
       • the criteria provided in Section 7.7.2 of BS8233, and,
       • no more than 5% of the LAFmax values between 23:00 - 07:00 hours exceed
           45 dB(A). Internal noise levels should be calculated using the methods
           provided in BS8233:2014 and/or BS EN 12354:3.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
Appeal Decision 6009473


         The approved scheme of noise insulation shall be implemented prior to the first
         occupation of the development and thereafter retained for the lifetime of the
         development.

    2. Prior to the first occupation of any dwelling, a full assessment of potential
       overheating shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
       authority. Such assessment should assume that windows remain closed. All
       assumptions made in the overheating assessment should be included in the
       noise mitigation scheme, submitted in accordance with condition 1. If any
       mechanical ventilation is required, the design and specification for any
       mechanical ventilation system to any habitable room, other than kitchen or
       bathroom extraction, shall include an assessment of the combined impact of the
       noise break-through from the building structure (including glazing) and the noise
       generated by the mechanical ventilation within the habitable room. The scheme
       should include details of plans and elevations to be used during the construction
       phase. The approved mechanical ventilation shall be implemented prior to the
       first occupation of any dwelling it is to serve and, thereafter retained for the
       lifetime of the development.

                                           End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     5
