Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009626
54 Meltham Road, Huddersfield HD1 3UP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Bilal Altaf against the decision of Kirklees Metropolitan Council.
•   The application Ref is 2026/62/90733/W.
•   The development proposed is a change of use from dwelling (C3 use) to form 2no residential
    apartments (C3 use).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. A Revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. I am however satisfied that, having reviewed the relevant
   changes, they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main issue or
   indeed the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since they would not therefore
   be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
   future occupiers with particular regard to daylight, outlook and floorspace.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal property is a mid-terraced dwelling with a basement level. It is
   proposed to subdivide of the existing dwelling to create two self-contained
   apartments, each over two levels with separate accesses.
6. As well as expressing concern about the floor space of the flats against the
   Nationally Described Space Standards (NDSS) which I shall come onto, I take it
   from the Council’s evidence that their other concerns translate to a lack of an
   acceptable level of daylight and poor standard of outlook to the basement living
   accommodation for Apartment 1. This area would rely on a single window in the
   front elevation as its only source of natural daylight. The submitted plans indicate


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009626


     that this window would also be positioned behind a porch structure, meaning that
     any daylight entering the room would be filtered through that space.
7. Furthermore, due to the basement's subterranean position, the outlook from this
   window would face onto the retaining brick wall of the front garden. This would
   further restrict the amount of daylight capable of reaching the window and the living
   accommodation it would serve. Consequently, the main living area would receive a
   very limited level of natural daylight and would appear enclosed, with a poor
   outlook. The occupiers of Apartment 1 would likely have to rely heavily on artificial
   lighting throughout much of the day.
8. The NDSS does not form part of the adopted development plan policies but is
   referenced in the Housebuilders Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document,
   2021 (SPD), which is guidance only. Moreover, the Council's assessment for each
   apartment is based upon occupation by two persons. Whilst it is possible that the
   accommodation could provide an acceptable amount of space for a single
   occupant, the proposal before me does not specify or secure such an arrangement,
   and there would be no effective mechanism to ensure that occupation remained
   limited in that way.
9. Nevertheless, even if I were to reach a favourable conclusion regarding the amount
   of floorspace provided and the application of the NDSS, this would not overcome
   my concerns regarding the poor levels of natural daylight and outlook afforded to
   the occupiers of Apartment 1. Those shortcomings would remain and would, in
   themselves, result in unacceptable living conditions for future occupiers.
10. Accordingly, the proposal would fail to provide a satisfactory standard of
    accommodation for future occupiers, contrary to Policy LP24 of the Kirklees Local
    Plan, Strategy and Policies, 2019 and guidance in the SPD, which amongst other
    things seek to ensure development provides a high standard of amenity for future
    occupiers.
Other Matters
11. Whilst the apparent lack of engagement from the Council has caused frustration,
    these matters are between the main parties and do not affect my consideration of
    the main issue. Any concerns relating to conduct are best addressed through direct
    engagement with the Council, utilising any complaints procedure that it may have.
    The absence of neighbour objections is a neutral matter.
Planning Balance, Conclusion and Recommendation
12. Policy S4 of the Framework indicates that, development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
13. Whilst adding housing in an apparent undersupply situation, the appeal scheme
    would provide only one additional unit in net terms. The benefits associated
    therewith would therefore be limited in their scope and scale. I would accordingly
    give the benefits of the proposals moderate weight. The proposals would provide
    poor living conditions for future occupiers due to the inadequate levels of natural
    daylight and outlook. Consequently, it would conflict with Policies L2 and P3 of the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009626


     Framework, and its objectives of ensuring healthy living conditions. Given the
     permanent and enduring nature of that harm, I attach substantial weight to it.
14. The limited benefits arising from the provision of one additional dwelling would be
    substantially outweighed by the identified adverse effects. Accordingly, the
    proposal does not satisfy the requirements of Policy S4 and the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development does not indicate that planning permission
    should be granted.
15. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan and there are no sufficiently weighty material considerations to
    indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
