Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Jonathan Edwards BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal A: Appeal Ref: 6008639
5 Road Running Through Nuneham Courtenay, Nuneham Courtenay, Oxford,
Oxfordshire OX44 9NX
•   The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
    1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•   The appeal is made by Jungho Shin against the decision of South Oxfordshire District Council.
•   The application Ref is P25/S3898/LB.
•   The works proposed are the formation of a new dropped kerb to facilitate safe vehicular access.
    Within the front garden, a modest driveway surfaced in permeable gravel is proposed.

Appeal B: Appeal Ref: 6009013
5 Road Running Through Nuneham Courtenay, Nuneham Courtenay, Oxford,
Oxfordshire OX44 9NX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Jungho Shin against the decision of South Oxfordshire District Council.
•   The application Ref is P25/S3897/HH.
•   The development proposed is the formation of a new dropped kerb to facilitate safe vehicular access.
    Within the front garden, a modest driveway surfaced in permeable gravel is proposed.


Decisions
Appeal A
1. Appeal A is allowed and listed building consent is granted for the formation of a
   new dropped kerb to facilitate safe vehicular access. Within the front garden, a
   modest driveway surfaced in permeable gravel is proposed at 5 Road Running
   Through Nuneham Courtenay, Nuneham Courtenay, Oxford, Oxfordshire
   OX44 9NX in accordance with the terms of the application Ref P25/S3898/LB,
   subject to the following conditions:-
     1)       The works authorised by this consent shall begin not later than 3 years from
              the date of this consent.
     2)       The works hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with the
              details shown on the following approved plans: Existing site plan numbered
              S258-001, Proposed site plan also numbered S258-001, CellPave 40
              Product Leaflet, LOC-002 and S258-006 Rev D.
Appeal B
2. Appeal B is allowed and planning permission is granted for formation of a new
   dropped kerb to facilitate safe vehicular access. Within the front garden, a modest
   driveway surfaced in permeable gravel is proposed at 5 Road Running Through

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6008639 and 6009013


     Nuneham Courtenay, Nuneham Courtenay, Oxford, Oxfordshire OX44 9NX in
     accordance with the terms of the application Ref P25/S3897/HH, subject to the
     following conditions:-

     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
             details shown on the following approved plans: Existing site plan numbered
             S258-001, Proposed site plan also numbered S258-001, CellPave 40 Product
             Leaflet, LOC-002 and S258-006 Rev D.
Preliminary Matters
3. The appeals concern the same site and the same scheme. The remit of the
   regimes for planning permission (Appeal B) and listed building consent (Appeal A)
   are different. However, I have dealt with both appeals together in a single decision
   letter to avoid repetition.
4. The dwelling at the appeal site forms one half of a grade II listed building, 5 and 6,
   A423 (hereafter referred to as the LB). The site also lies within the Nuneham
   Courtenay Conservation Area (the CA). In reaching my decisions, I have attached
   considerable importance to the statutory duties under sections 16(2), 66(1) and
   72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
5. Since the LB was listed, the road outside the appeal property has been renamed
   from the A423 to the A4074. From here onwards, I refer to the road as the A4074.
6. Plans originally submitted with the applications leading to these appeals show the
   provision of a new tarmac driveway across the roadside grass verge to the edge of
   the appeal property. However, the Council has based its decisions on a revised
   plan that show instead the provision of 2 access strips with retained grass in
   between. My assessment of these appeals is made on the same basis.
7. For both appeals, I have been provided with a drawing numbered S258-006
   revision D that shows the proposed elevations of the house at the appeal site. This
   plan shows the erection of a new fence and gates across the proposed access.
   Like the Council, I have treated this as part of the proposed development and
   works. The same drawing also indicates new windows and new French doors in the
   rear or west facing elevation of the house. The appellant has explained that the
   works to provide these windows do not form part of the development or the works
   subject to these appeals. My assessments are made on this basis and my
   decisions relate only to the development and the works subject of these appeals.
8. I am advised that a Joint Local Plan for South Oxfordshire and the Vale of White
   Horse is currently being prepared. However, this does not form part of the current
   development plan and from the submissions I am uncertain whether its policies are
   subject to outstanding objections. Therefore, the emerging document attracts very
   limited weight in my consideration of these appeals.
9. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been issued since the appeal was lodged. The provisions of the new version of the
   Framework on conserving and enhancing the historic environment are similar to



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6008639 and 6009013


     those in the previous version. As such, no injustice would be caused by
     determining these appeals without seeking the parties’ views on the Framework.
Main Issues
10. Having regard to the Council’s refusal reasons, the main issues for appeal B are
    (i) whether the development would preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA, and (ii) whether it would preserve the setting and
    significance of the LB. For appeal A, the main issue is whether the proposed works
    would preserve the LB, its setting or any features of special architectural or historic
    interest that it possesses.
Reasons
The effect on the character and appearance of the CA (appeal B).
11. The CA covers an area centred around Nuneham Estate. The appeal property lies
    towards the edge of the CA within the village of Nuneham Courtenay. The village
    has an interesting history as it replaced a previous medieval village that was
    removed to allow the 1st Earl Harcourt to create a private landscaped setting to a
    mansion. The settlement as a whole has been deliberately designed with significant
    input from the Earl. Nuneham Courtenay is of significant historical importance as it
    is one of only two remaining examples in England of a completely planned
    Georgian village.
12. The houses on both sides of the road are largely pairs of semi-detached cottages
    with gardens to the side and the rear. The layout and design of the dwellings
    contain a significant level of symmetry and consistency that illustrate the planned
    background to the village. This is readily apparent as you travel along the A4074 as
    the houses tend to be built on the edge of the pavement without front gardens.
    Also, the road is straight and it is fairly open with pavements, grassed verges and
    parking or bus stop laybys on both sides. Therefore, the CA’s significance is also
    partly derived from the visual attractiveness of the village and the appreciation from
    the highway of the original form and architectural features of many of the houses.
13. The appeal property is semi-detached and closely reflects the street appearance of
    the attached dwelling. The house has been extended to the rear but the side
    garden space and a large part of the rear garden remains undeveloped. Therefore,
    the appeal property contributes positively to the character and appearance of the
    CA as it appears consistent with the style and pattern of other residences. It also
    helps illustrate the unusual history and development of the village.
14. The ribbon tracks across the grass verge to the front of the appeal property would
    be constructed from a grass reinforced cellular system. Nonetheless, they would be
    clearly seen when on the road and from nearby properties. However, the tracks
    would maintain the openness of the verge as well as views of the appeal property
    and other residences along the street. The crossover would be a new feature that
    was not included as part of the original design of the village. However, several
    vehicular accesses across the verges already exist at other places along the road.
    These include the crossovers in front of the house that adjoins the appeal property
    and to the house directly opposite the appeal site. Consequently, the proposed
    vehicular access across the verge would not be unusual.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6008639 and 6009013


15. Also, the grass verge along the street is fragmented due to the presence of laybys.
    A bus stop pull in area on the same side of the road already causes a marked gap
    in the verge near to the appeal site. In light of this immediate context, the minor
    loss of greenery as a result of the proposed ribbon tracks would have a negligible
    effect on the visual qualities and historic interest of the street scene.
16. The proposed gates and fence to the front of the side garden would be low key in
    appearance. They would also be similar to the existing pedestrian gate at the front
    of the appeal property and to boundary features at other nearby dwellings. As
    such, the fence and gates would be compatible with the locality. Moreover, the
    proposed side gravel drive would be similar to that at the residence attached to the
    appeal property and so it would reinforce a sense of symmetry in the pair of
    houses. The gravel area to the side and rear would replace an area of paving
    slabs and bare ground rather than any planted areas and so the proposal would
    not reduce the level of greenery on the appeal site.
17. The properties in the village are all subject to a legal agreement that restricts works
    such as the laying of hardstanding and erecting fences and gates. The Council’s
    guide on this legal agreement states that the rigorous protection of the uniformity of
    the historic village is a guiding principle. At the same time, the guide states
    permission will not be unreasonably withheld and it recognises the village is a living
    community which needs to adapt to modern life. In this case, the development
    would not undermine the appeal property’s contribution to the uniformity of the
    buildings within the village nor its street scene. In light of existing nearby features,
    the proposal would cause no meaningful harm to the integrity of the historic
    planned village and how this is appreciated from the road.
18. Therefore, I conclude the development would preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA. In these regards, it would accord with section 72(1) of the
    Act and policies DES1, DES2, ENV6 and ENV8 of the South Oxfordshire District
    Council Local Plan 2020 (the LP). Amongst other things, these policies seek to
    ensure development respects the local context and conserves the special interest
    of conservation areas.
Effects on the LB (both appeals)
19. The LB consists of a pair of semi-detached cottages dating from the
    mid-17th century. It is of historic interest as it formed part of the original planned
    village. The front elevations of the houses also retain a significant degree of
    symmetry in form and design that is attractive and consistent with the other
    properties in the village. Therefore, the significance of the LB is partly derived from
    its architectural and aesthetic values as well as its contribution towards the village
    houses as a group of historic buildings of a similar age and design.
20. The proposed drop kerb and ribbon tracks would be seen from the street in front of
    the LB and so they would affect its setting. However, these new features would be
    at ground level and would be seen in the same context as the busy A4074 and the
    nearby bus layby. Therefore, they would not harm the appreciation of the LB nor
    detract from its significance.
21. The proposed fence and gates would also be seen alongside the LB and so they
    would affect its setting. However, these would be low-key and maintain clear sight
    of the side elevation of the appeal property. Also, the fence and gates would
    provide an appropriate and sympathetic demarcation of the boundaries to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6008639 and 6009013


     appeal site. As such, the effect of these features on the setting of the LB would
     avoid harm to its significance.
22. The proposed gravel areas to the side and rear of the appeal property would not
    obstruct views of the LB but they would change the appearance of its immediate
    setting. A significant part of the garden would be affected but I saw the gravel
    would replace square concrete paving slabs and bare earth rather than areas of
    vegetation or surfacing of any historic or aesthetic value. Therefore, the gravel
    areas would preserve the setting and the significance of the LB.
23. The plans indicate the removal of an existing pedestrian gate that is attached to the
    side of the house. The gate is of no particular architectural or historic interest,
    although it is of an appropriate height and style for its context. The new gates and
    fence would adjoin the LB and would be similar in appearance to the existing gate.
    The works to the LB would be minor in nature and they would not affect any
    architectural features of note on the building.
24. For these reasons, I conclude the development proposed under appeal B, and that
    the works proposed under appeal A, would not harm the setting nor the significance
    of the LB nor any features of special architectural and historic interest that it
    possesses. In these regards, the development would accord with LP policies ENV6
    and ENV7 which together look to ensure that development within the setting of a
    listed building is sympathetic and retains its special interest. Moreover, I find the
    proposed works would not conflict with sections 16(2) and 66(1) of the Act.
    Reference is made to LP policy ENV8 in the Council’s refusal reason for the listed
    building consent application but this contains no provisions relevant to this matter.
Conditions
25. I have had regard to the conditions suggested by the Council. I have imposed
    conditions that specify the approved plans for reasons of clarity. I have amended
    the list to omit reference to plans that have been superseded by revised drawings
    to ensure the list reflects the plans that formed the basis of the Council’s and my
    decisions. There is no need for separate conditions on materials to be used as
    information on these is set out on the specified plans and documents.
Conclusion – for both appeals
26. For the above reasons, I conclude that appeal A and appeal B should be allowed.

Jonathan Edwards
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
