Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by E Fawcett BA (Jt Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009979
2A Park Road, Barnoldswick, Lancashire BB18 5BG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Danielle Kay of Nature’s Way Herbal Clinic and Dispensary against the
     decision of Pendle Borough Council.
•    The application Ref 25/0779/FUL was approved on 26 March 2026 and planning permission was
     granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is Full: Replacement of windows and the alteration of an existing door to
     add a window to front elevation.
•    The condition in dispute is No 3 which states that: Notwithstanding any indication on the approved
     plans, or other documents comprising the application submission, no permission is given for new
     UPVC windows or door frames to the ground floor of the premises.
•    The reason given for the condition is: In the interests of protecting the character and appearance of
     the Conservation Area.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Preliminary Matters
2.    Planning permission has been granted for the works outlined above. Whilst the
      approved plans indicated the use of uPVC for the window and door frames, a
      condition was included to clarify that permission was not given for the use of uPVC
      at ground floor level. The Council considers the condition to be necessary to
      ensure that the materials used for the ground floor window and door protect the
      character and appearance of the Barnoldswick Conservation Area (the CA). The
      appellant, however, objects to the condition as they do not consider it to be
      reasonable or necessary.
3.    The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
      opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
      in my decision. Framework references hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
4.    The main issue is whether condition 3 is reasonable and necessary to preserve or
      enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
Reasons
5.    The statutory duty set out in Section 72(1) Planning (Listed Buildings and
      Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires special attention to be paid to the
      desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009979


      conservation area. The significance of the CA is derived from, amongst other
      factors, its cohesive townscape of predominantly 2 and 3-storey 19th century
      buildings which, collectively rather than individually, make a positive contribution to
      its character and appearance. In the vicinity of the appeal site, the commercial
      frontage along Rainhall Road is characterised by small-scale, vernacular buildings,
      including rows of 2-storey cottages that were subsequently adapted for
      commercial use. This historic evolution is readily legible in the built environment.
      The largely timber shopfronts, with their traditional detailing and consistent vertical
      proportions, make an important contribution to the visual quality of the street scene
      and reinforce the distinctive character, appearance and significance of this part of
      the CA.
6.    The appeal property is positioned at the edge of the CA and the town’s commercial
      centre. Due to its modest scale, simple vernacular form, ground-floor commercial
      use and timber shopfront, it has a much stronger visual and historic relationship
      with the commercial properties along Rainhall Road than with the predominantly
      residential buildings on Park Road. Whilst the appeal property's shopfront is not
      original, its simple timber construction and slender framing reflect many of the
      traditional shopfront characteristics that contribute to the historic character of the
      town centre. Together with the building's other traditional features and materials,
      the shopfront makes a positive contribution to the significance of the CA by
      preserving the legibility of its historic commercial development, maintaining the
      continuity of its traditional built form, and reinforcing the established character and
      appearance of the CA.
7.    The fenestration and materials of a building are important components in defining
      its architectural quality. The Council’s Conservation Area Design and Development
      Guidance Supplementary Planning Document (2008) (the SPD) advises that uPVC
      windows cannot replicate the proportions, detailing and pleasing aesthetic qualities
      of timber windows, and that the use of uPVC for any elements of a shopfront will
      not be appropriate. The use of uPVC for both the shop window and the door
      therefore raises conflict with the SPD.
8.    Whilst precise details are not before me, uPVC window frames would likely be
      noticeably bulkier than the existing slim timber frame. The material would have an
      engineered and artificial texture, and a more uniform and smooth finish, in
      comparison to painted timber windows and doors. Furthermore, it would not
      weather or age in a similar manner to timber and, given the position at street level,
      this modern material would be clearly perceptible. Although the appellant has
      indicated a willingness to agree detailed design amendments to ensure that the
      replacement shopfront reflects traditional detailing, I am not satisfied that the use
      of uPVC could successfully replicate the characteristics of a traditional timber
      shopfront. Consequently, the use of uPVC for the proposed windows and door
      would relate poorly to the traditional appearance of the building and the prevailing
      character of this part of the CA.
9.    Having regard to the character of the appeal property, the contribution made by
      traditional shopfront detailing to this part of the CA, and the physical characteristics
      of uPVC, I find that the proposed material would fail to preserve or enhance the
      character or appearance of the CA. Based on the information before me, the
      magnitude of this harm would be towards the lower end of the spectrum.
      Nevertheless, having regard to my statutory duty, I attach considerable importance
      and weight to that harm.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009979


10. Policy HE4 of the Framework sets out that any harm to, or loss of, the significance
    of a designated heritage asset should have a clear and convincing justification.
    Policy HE6 goes on to state that the effect on the asset and its significance should
    be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
11. The removal of the white uPVC cladding at first-floor level and replacement with
    uPVC windows, which forms part of the planning permission, would provide some
    improvements to the appearance of the building. However, these improvements
    would not be dependent on the use of uPVC for the ground-floor shopfront and
    could equally be achieved through the use of a more appropriate alternative
    material. Whilst the use of uPVC for the door would allow the existing door to be
    re-used and thereby reduce waste, the environmental benefits arising from this are
    likely to be small. The introduction of glazing and a darker finish would also reduce
    its incongruous, domesticated appearance, however any resulting visual benefit
    would be modest. There is also uncertainty regarding the lawfulness of the existing
    door. I therefore afford only limited weight to these benefits.
12. The external works to the building may help to support its continued use, providing
    some local economic benefits, facilitating an improvement to its appearance, and
    reducing the likelihood of vandalism. However, there is no substantive evidence
    that these benefits are dependent upon the use of uPVC. Furthermore, on my site
    visit I noted evidence that some improvement works had been undertaken and the
    building had been brought back into use. I therefore give these benefits limited
    weight.
13. Taking these matters together, I find that the public benefits of the use of uPVC for
    the shopfront would not outweigh the considerable importance and weight that
    should be attached to the identified harm to the CA and the substantial weight that
    should be given to its conservation, irrespective of the level of harm.
14. I therefore conclude that condition 3 is reasonable and necessary to preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the CA. It is consistent with the aims and
    objectives of Policies SP11, DM16 and DM18 of the Pendle Local Plan Fourth
    Edition (2021-2040) (2025) which collectively seek to ensure that proposals
    conserve the historic environment by sustaining and enhancing the significance of
    heritage assets, considering elements of built form such as materials and
    architectural details, and make a positive contribution to local character and
    distinctiveness. The condition is also consistent with the requirements of the Act as
    well as the Framework.
Other Matters
15. Whilst the planning permission includes the use of uPVC for new windows at the
    upper floor level, the existing white plastic boarding detracts from the simple
    vernacular character of the building and that of the character and appearance of
    the CA. Therefore, the removal of this and replacement with darker uPVC windows
    would result in a small improvement to the appearance of the building and to the
    contribution it makes to the character and appearance of the CA. Consequently,
    the approval of the use of uPVC for this element of the scheme, does not justify
    the harm to the significance of the CA from the replacement of a timber shop
    window and door with uPVC, particularly as it would be located at street level and
    therefore be more visible and prominent to pedestrians.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009979


16. The appellant has set out that other properties in the CA have installed uPVC
    without planning permission. However, I have not been directed to any examples
    other than the doctor’s surgery which lies opposite the appeal property. The
    Council has indicated that these alterations are likely to have existed for many
    years and are therefore immune from enforcement action. Nevertheless, the scale
    and design of this building is not comparable to the predominantly small-scale
    shopfronts along Rainhall Road and to which the character and appearance of the
    appeal property more closely relates. Their appearance also highlights the
    limitations of uPVC in terms of successfully replicating the detailing and finish of
    traditional timber windows and doors. This does not therefore provide justification
    for the harm that would result from the use of uPVC for the windows and door at
    the ground floor of the appeal property, and it does not alter my conclusion on the
    main issue.
17. The use of an alternative material to uPVC may have a cost implication for the
    appellant that would jeopardise their business. However, no substantive evidence
    has been provided in this regard, and it does not outweigh the harm identified.
18. Whilst there may be some local support for the proposal as a whole, this does not
    justify the removal of a condition that I have found to be reasonable and
    necessary.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above, the disputed condition is necessary to ensure that
    the character or appearance of the CA is preserved or enhanced. Therefore, the
    appeal should be dismissed.

E Fawcett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
