Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by A Knight BA PG Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009769
Land Adjacent to 4 Callis Way, Parkwood, Gillingham, Medway ME8 9PA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by William Fountain of F & B Builders against the decision of Medway Council.
•    The application Ref is MC/26/0213.
•    The development proposed is construction of a self-build, two-bedroom residential bungalow.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.     An application for an award of costs against the Council is the subject of a
       separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     In the banner heading above I have used the site address and description of
       development from the Council’s decision notice, as the versions on the application
       form describe the location less accurately and include terms that do not comprise
       development.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. The main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
       any implications for the appeal, and I have taken their responses into account in
       reaching my decision.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
          •    the effect of the proposed development on the provision of open space;
          •    whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living
               conditions for its future occupiers with particular regard to the size and
               quality of external amenity areas and to outlook; and
          •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
               the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009769


Reasons
Open space
6.     The appeal site is a portion of undeveloped land in a residential area. It is
       bordered on three sides by pavements and on the other by the boundary fence of
       an adjacent dwelling. It is essentially open grassland, upon which are found two
       telegraph poles and a dog waste bin.
7.     Policy L3 of the Medway Local Plan (2003) (the Local Plan) defines “open space”
       as “existing formal open space, informal open space, allotments or amenity land”,
       and prohibits its loss save for in circumstances listed thereafter. These include, at
       (ii), that alternative open space provision can be made within the same catchment
       area.
8.     The appellant draws my attention to a range of alternative local open spaces (the
       other spaces). All of them, however, exist already. As the appeal scheme does not
       involve the making of open space, it does not have the support of exception (ii).
       The other exceptions are not applicable to the appeal. The scheme conflicts,
       therefore, with Local Plan Policy L3.
9.     Policy HC7 of the Framework states that development proposals should not result
       in the loss of existing open space, save for in circumstances listed thereafter. Of
       these, only (a) is potentially applicable; That an assessment has been undertaken
       which has clearly shown the open space or land to be surplus to requirements.
10. I see no reason why the presence of the other spaces should make the appeal site
    surplus to requirements, as I have no evidence that the total amount of open
    space is an over-provision for the area. Whilst the appellant describes the site as
    underutilised, I have little explanation of how he has attempted to measure this,
    and little indication that his conclusion represents more than his personal opinion.
11. The appellant describes the site as being used by local residents for walking their
    dogs. The Council cuts the grass and empties the bin. None of this suggests,
    much less clearly shows, that the site is surplus to requirements as an open
    space. The scheme conflicts with Framework Policy HC7.
12. Whilst a public open space assessment undertaken in 2024 states that sites below
    0.2 hectares in size are likely to be of lesser or limited recreational value to
    residents, it does not indicate that all sites of that size are surplus to requirements.
    Indeed, it goes on to say that they may still make a wider contribution to local
    areas. I have no reason to find that the appeal fails to do so.
13. The proposed development would involve an unjustified loss of open space,
    contrary to Policy L3 of the Local Plan and to Policy HC7 of the Framework which,
    amongst other things, seek to prevent open spaces from being built on.
Living conditions
14. The proposed dwelling would rely upon its rear garden for private outdoor amenity
    space. The garden would be large enough to satisfy the expectations of the
    Medway Housing Standards (interim) guidance document (2011), and I do not
    doubt that it would be a large enough area to meet the needs of future occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009769


15. However, the scheme involves a single parking space located in the centre of the
    garden. This would interrupt the usable space, creating separate areas on either
    side that would be too small to serve most of the functions of a domestic garden.
    This would be exacerbated by the need to accommodate bicycles; Whilst a final
    location for a cycle store could be agreed as a post-permission matter, I see little
    to suggest it could go anywhere other than to the rear of the dwelling, further
    reducing the usable space.
16. The dwelling would incorporate glazed doors on its southernmost elevation,
    creating a close visual and functional relationship between house and garden.
    Indeed, the doors would be the only source of outlook for the dwelling’s living area.
17. A car parked on the proposed space would dominate both the outlook from the
    dwelling and the experience of being in the garden. Indeed, a parked car
    positioned so close to the doors and so centrally within the garden would have a
    highly intrusive, overpowering presence that occupiers would have little respite
    from.
18. The appellant informs me that the proposed arrangement reflects the needs of a
    disabled person. I shall return to that later but, for the purposes of considering this
    main issue, see no reason why it should justify a design that would result in
    harmful living conditions, including for the person in question.
19. The proposed development would provide unacceptable living conditions for its
    future occupiers in terms of the operative size and the quality of its external
    amenity areas, and in terms of outlook. It would conflict with Local Plan Policies
    BNE2 and H4 in that it would not provide well structured, practical and attractive
    areas of open space, or a clear improvement in the local environment.
Character and appearance
20. The proposed dwelling would take a broad design lead from the existing
    bungalows to the west of the site on Callis Way, though it would be narrower and
    deeper, and have a different roof shape. In addition, the existing bungalows have
    reasonably generous rear gardens which do not include parking areas, resulting in
    a more spacious arrangement to the rear than would be found at the proposed
    dwelling.
21. There is enough variation in the local housing stock that the absence of strict
    uniformity between the appeal scheme and the neighbouring bungalows would
    not, in itself, be harmful.
22. That said, the comparative narrowness of the proposed dwelling and the locally
    unusual rear access point would be discernible from the public sphere. The rear
    garden of the dwelling would be visible when the gates were open. It would be
    apparent that the development involved insufficient garden space and a parked car
    harmfully close to the dwelling.
23. In this context, the relatively narrow shape of the dwelling and the presence of the
    rear vehicular access would appear characteristic, and the direct consequence, of
    a strikingly tight and congested layout. This would be exacerbated by comparison
    with the relatively spacious arrangements to the rear of the neighbouring
    bungalows, and by the loss of the existing open space which is typical of the open



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009769


       layout of the wider estate. Altogether, the proposed development would appear
       harmfully at odds with the local setting.
24. The proposed development would have a harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, contrary to the general principles for built development set
    out in Local Plan Policy BNE1. It would also conflict with Policy H4 in that it would
    not provide a clear improvement in the local environment.
Other Considerations
25. The proposed development is described as a self-build project, and the appellant
    informs me that it is intended to support a disabled person. However, I have not
    been informed of any mechanism by which either aspect of the scheme could be
    ensured.
26. I also have no evidence of the needs of the disabled person, and so it is not
    apparent that the proposal is the only or best way that those needs could be met.
    Overall, I attach minimal weight to these purported aspects.
27. The appellant has drawn my attention to eight other developments approved by
    the Council which he considers to demonstrate an inconsistent approach. The
    issue of open space was considered in four. Of these, the Council found the
    schemes ref MC/18/2553, MC/15/0335, and MC/17/2767 to comply with Policy L3.
28. The appellant argues that the first scheme did not demonstrate the site to be
    surplus to requirements as open space, but that is not the basis upon which the
    scheme was found to achieve policy compliance. Rather, it was found to benefit
    from the first exception in the policy. The second scheme was found to benefit
    from the second exception, and the third scheme to benefit from the third
    exception.
29. Scheme ref MC/19/3106 was found to conflict with Policy L3. The benefits of that
    scheme, which are very different and far greater than those of the appeal scheme,
    were found to outweigh that conflict in the planning balance.
30. On the evidence before me, the Council applied Policy L3 to each proposal as
    applicable. Each fared differently against the tests of that policy depending upon
    the circumstances, none of which are comparable to those of the appeal scheme. I
    see no evidence of an inconsistent application of Policy L3.
31. I have found the appeal scheme rear garden to be acceptable in terms of its
    overall size, and so need not consider whether the eight schemes resulted in
    gardens smaller than expected by the Medway Housing Standards document. I
    have no evidence that any of the schemes included a layout comparable to that
    proposed in the appeal, which I have found would result in harm. Overall, the eight
    schemes carry minimal weight in my determination.
32. The appellant questions “what will happen when Medway stop maintaining the site
    should ratepayers suggest Medway have no legal powers to do so”. However, I
    have no evidence that such an outcome is likely. Whilst the scheme would include
    a front garden area and could accommodate planting and measures to support
    wildlife, I have no evidence that these are anything more than expectations of
    development, rather than benefits of the scheme. I attribute minimal weight to
    these considerations.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009769


Planning Balance
33. I recognise the extent of the shortfall in housing land supply. The Council does not
    contest the appellant’s description of this as being at some 3.1 years. The
    proposed development would make a positive contribution towards the shortfall,
    albeit a modest one. The dwelling would be sustainably located.
34. Notwithstanding the absence of certainty that the development would meet the
    needs of a disabled person, I recognise that a bungalow has the potential to
    provide accommodation for those who are older or less able. Economic benefits
    would accrue in the construction phase and thereafter. Given the scale of the
    proposal, these would be modest benefits.
35. The Council would no longer have to bear the costs of maintaining the land, and
    any prospect of the land being used for “social, substance related gatherings”
    would be removed. However, I have no evidence of the maintenance costs or that
    there is any history of antisocial behaviour on the site, and so can attribute very
    little weight to these cited benefits.
36. The Framework states that development proposals within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework. This is likely to include, though not be limited to, circumstances
    where the development would have a substantial adverse impact in relation to the
    application of the policies in the Framework for existing recreational land and
    facilities (Framework Policy HC7) or fails to comply with one of the national
    decision-making policies which state that development proposals should be
    refused in specific circumstances.
37. I have found the proposed development to conflict with Policy HC7, which states
    that development proposals should not result in the loss of existing open space. As
    the whole of the existing open space would be lost the adverse impact would, in
    that respect, be substantial.
38. I have also found the scheme would cause harm to the character and appearance
    of the area. Framework Policy DP3 states that proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they do not respond to their context so that they
    integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
39. Given this, I find that the modest benefits of the proposed development, even in
    the context of the housing land shortfall, would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework. That I have also found the proposal would provide unacceptable
    living conditions for its future occupiers confirms me in this view.
Conclusion
40. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
41. The appeal is dismissed.

A Knight
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
