Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 June 2026 by A Morrison MTCP MRTPI
Decision by H Marriott MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009256
Drive Thru, Malton Road, Stockton On The Forest, York YO32 9TW
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Gary Taylor of The Starbucks Coffee Company against the decision of
    City of York Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00228/ADV.
•   The advertisement proposed is described as ‘(1) 9m totem’.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for display of 1no. internally
   illuminated totem sign at Drive Thru, Malton Road, Stockton On The Forest, York
   TO32 9TW in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00228/ADV. The
   consent is for five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five
   standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations and the following
   additional conditions:-
     1) The illumination of the advertisement permitted by this consent shall be no
        greater than 100cd/m2 during hours of darkness and 300cd/m2 in the hours of
        daylight.
     2) The advertisement permitted by this consent shall only be illuminated during the
        opening hours of the premises to which it relates.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. At the time of my site visit, I observed that the advertisement has been installed.
   Nevertheless, my assessment has been undertaken on the basis of the plans
   before me.
4. The original application form describes the advertisement as (1) ‘9m totem’.
   However, the description used in the decision above has been taken from the
   Council’s decision notice, as it more appropriately describes the appeal scheme.
   However, I have omitted the word ‘retrospective’, as referred to in the Council’s
   decision, as this relates to the procedural status of the application rather than
   forming part of the description of the advertisement itself.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009256


5. The Council’s decision has drawn my attention to a development plan policy it
   considers relevant and refers to the previous version of the National Planning
   Policy Framework (the Framework). A revised version of the Framework was
   published in August 2026. The Town and Country Planning (Control of
   Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) limits
   considerations to matters relating to amenity and public safety. Accordingly, while I
   have had regard to the policy and revised Framework as material considerations,
   they have not, by themselves been decisive. I am therefore satisfied that there is no
   requirement to seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no
   party would be disadvantaged by this.
6. Neither the Council nor any other party has raised any objection to the
   advertisement from a public safety perspective, and I see no reason to disagree. I
   have therefore defined the main issue on this basis.
Main Issue
7. The main issue is the effect of the advertisement upon amenity.
Reasons for the Recommendation
8. The Planning Practice Guidance sets out that in practice ‘amenity’ is usually
   understood to mean the effect on visual and aural amenity in the immediate
   neighbourhood of an advertisement, and the local characteristics of the
   neighbourhood should always be considered.
9. The appeal advertisement comprises an internally illuminated totem installation
   sited on a grassed strip between a drive-thru coffee shop and the A64 on the
   outskirts of York. Measuring 9 metres height, it takes the form of a circular logo
   display and rectangular directional text panel mounted atop a circular pole. A
   limited amount of associated business signage is also displayed on the coffee shop
   building itself.
10. Prior to its recent conversion to the current use, the evidence before me indicates
    that the site operated for many years as a public house which included the display
    of freestanding signage along its frontage adjacent to the highway. The commercial
    character of the site, with associated advertisements, is therefore well-established.
    More widely, it forms part of a series of road-side business uses along this side and
    busy section of the A64. Advertisements and installations associated with these
    premises include free-standing and fence-mounted display boards, flagpoles and
    floodlights. The existence of these features, alongside a prominent
    telecommunications mast and various items of highway signage and street
    furniture, creates a context which, although rural in its setting, is strongly influenced
    by commercial and transportation-related activity.
11. The totem is conspicuously positioned and substantial in height, reflecting its
    primary function of identifying the business to motorists travelling at speed along
    the A64. Nevertheless, its visual impact is moderated by the relatively slender
    profile of the supporting pole, which constitutes most of its length, and by its design
    and limited degree of illumination, which are consistent with the site's other
    signage. As a result, when viewed from either approach, the installation stands
    subordinate to and complementary with the adjacent taller host building and
    neighbouring mature tree canopies. Furthermore, its siting between the building
    and the highway has no material effect on openness, while its overall appearance

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009256


     appropriately integrates with both the character of the site and the wider
     commercially influenced context of the section of the road corridor.
12. The Council contends that the installation is unnecessary in light of existing signage
    on the building. However, a belt of trees partially screens the premises from
    motorists approaching from the south-west. Given the speed of traffic along this
    section of the road, I observed that the totem sign alone enables the premises to be
    identified at a suitable distance in advance, thereby assisting drivers in making a
    safe manoeuvre into the site. Moreover, the building signage is modest in scale and
    extent, meaning that the addition of the totem does not give rise to an excessive or
    harmful proliferation of advertisements associated with the business.
13. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that the advertisement appears as an obtrusive or
    dominant feature within the street scene. I therefore conclude that the
    advertisement has an acceptable effect upon amenity.
14. In reaching this decision I have had regard to Policy D13 of the City of York Local
    Plan 2017- 2033 which, amongst other things, sets out that the scale, design,
    material, finish, position and number of advertisements should not cause harm to
    visual amenity and respect the character and appearance of a building or the street
    scene.
Conditions
15. The Council has suggested the imposition of a single condition over and above the
    five standard conditions, relating to a restriction over the illumination of the sign
    during trading hours only. The Council’s Public Protection officer also
    recommended a condition in relation to illuminance levels being in accordance with
    the Institute of Lighting Professionals – Professional Lighting Guidance
    (PLG 05 2015). The Appellant’s Lighting Assessment indicates that the guidance
    levels are not exceeded and the appellant has suggested conditions on this basis. I
    agree that restrictions relating to both levels and hours of illumination are
    necessary in the interests of amenity and have imposed suitably worded conditions
    to this effect.
Conclusion and Recommendation
16. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all matters raised, I
    conclude that the advertisement is not detrimental to the interests of amenity and
    therefore recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

A Morrison
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
17. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

H Marriott
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
