    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 10 September 2026
    by L Gardner MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009974
Uplands Farm, Meggett Lane, Alkham, Kent CT15 7DG
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the
       Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•      The appeal is made by Stuart Mann against the decision of Dover District Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/00144.
•      The development proposed is 1 number 30.5m x 15.225m agricultural barn for the purpose of caring
       for ewes in lamb and care of sheep.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
         3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General
         Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for 1 number 30.5m
         x 15.225m agricultural barn for the purpose of caring for ewes in lamb and care of
         sheep at Uplands Farm, Meggett Lane, Alkham, Kent CT15 7DG in accordance
         with the application 26/00144 and the details submitted with it including plan nos:
         001 and 003 D.
Applications for Costs
2.       An application for costs was made by Stuart Mann against Dover District Council.
         This is the subject of a separate decision.
Background and Main Issues
3.       Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the Town and Country Planning
         (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the Order)
         sets out that on agricultural land comprised in an agricultural unit of 5 hectares or
         more, the erection of a building reasonably necessary for the purposes of
         agriculture within that unit is permitted development, subject to limitations and
         conditions.
4.       Based on the reasons for refusal cited by the Council, it follows that the main
         issues in this appeal are:
           • whether the proposed development would be permitted development through
             Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the Order, and
           • if so, the effect of the siting, design and external appearance of the proposed
             building, with particular regard to the character and appearance of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009974


Reasons
Permitted development
5.       The appeal site relates to approximately 13 hectares of land situated to the east of
         Meggett Lane and the south of Alkham Valley Road. The site is mostly permanent
         grassland which is agricultural in character. There are existing barns and a
         bungalow in a broadly linear arrangement, accessed from Meggett Lane.
6.       Paragraph D.1 of the Order stipulates that agricultural land means land which is in
         use for agriculture and which is so used for the purposes of a trade or business.
         Nevertheless, the Order does not set stringent or prescriptive tests as to what
         constitutes a trade or business. It is reasonable that a judgement on this matter will
         rest on several factors.
7.       I understand that Uplands Farm was relatively recently purchased by the appellant
         who intends to develop and expand the agricultural activities associated with the
         land. In line with these intentions, the appellant has entered into an environmental
         stewardship scheme with Natural England. Lower grazing fields have been seeded
         and subdivided by agricultural fencing, with the intention of rotating smaller
         pastures of grazing and cutting of silage.
8.       It is not unreasonable that there would be a time lapse between a crop being taken
         from land which has been seeded. The invoices to purchase additional ewes
         shows a clear intention for the aspirations of use of the land and I accept that the
         absence of suitable accommodation for the ewes would in some respect limit the
         opportunities for growth in the numbers of sheep in the short term. I observed
         several sheep on the land at the time of my site visit. I have also been presented
         with an extensive list of agricultural vehicles and plant which are stored on the
         wider appeal site in relation to the use of the land, some of which I also observed
         during my site visit.
9.       Even in the absence of commercial information on profitability, the evidence before
         me is persuasive that the appeal proposal relates to agricultural development on
         agricultural land. The evidence goes beyond responses to questions on an
         application form, and therefore I find the Council’s reference to the Smolas V
         Herefordshire Council judgement1 to be of limited relevance to my determination.
10. It is also necessary to assess whether the building is reasonably necessary for the
    purposes of agriculture within the unit. Within the Order, there is no requirement
    that the proposed building must be intended to accommodate the existing
    agricultural activity on the site. It follows therefore that the size and scale of a
    proposed building can be based in part on the anticipated growth of agricultural
    practices on the site.
11. The appellant has justified the size and scale of the proposed building, based in
    part on the size requirements for a pregnant ewe and her lamb as outlined by
    DEFRA2 guidelines. Other factors such as specific areas for bonding after birth,
    quarantine zones for new or sick animals, and space to store straw have been
    taken into account. The Council has not provided any compelling evidence to
    dispute the calculations presented. Based on the intentions for the number of


1
    Smolas v Herefordshire Council [2021] EWHC 1663 (Admin)
2
    DEFRA Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of livestock : Sheep, updated 15 August 2023


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6009974


       sheep, I am satisfied that the calculations for the size and scale of the building
       demonstrate that it would be reasonably necessary for agricultural purposes.
12. The proposed building would be within 400 metres of dwellings known as Bramhall
    and Hogbrook Farm. One of the conditions set out in paragraph A.2 of the Order is
    that, where development is carried out within 400 metres of the curtilage of a
    protected building, any building, structure, excavation or works resulting from the
    development are not used for the accommodation of livestock except in the
    circumstances described in paragraph D.1(3).
13. Paragraph D.1(3) of the Order sets out that, for the purposes of interpretation of
    Class A, the above circumstances are where there are no other suitable buildings or
    structure, 400 metres or more away from the protected building that are capable of
    accommodating the livestock, and, amongst other exceptions, that the building is
    required for giving birth and newly born. The main parties agree that the existing
    buildings are not suitable for livestock accommodation. Given the intended purpose
    of the building, I am therefore satisfied that paragraph D.1(3) of the Order applies in
    this case.
14. There is no dispute between the main parties that the appeal proposal adheres to the
    remainder of the criteria listed within paragraph A.1 of the Order. I see no reason to
    come to a different conclusion on these matters. In relation to this main issue, I
    therefore conclude that the proposed development would be permitted development
    through Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the Order.
Siting, design and external appearance
15. The conditions within paragraph A.2 of the Order require, amongst other things,
    that where the erection of a building is proposed, development is permitted subject
    to the condition that before beginning the development, the developer must apply
    to the local planning authority for a determination as to whether prior approval of
    the authority will be required in relation to the siting, design and external
    appearance of the building.
16. There is a notable gradient within the appeal site. The proposed siting of the
    appeal building would be on flatter land close to Alkham Valley Road. The
    roadside features a dense mature and hedged boundary, which even in the winter
    months, would screen the proposed development and subsequently reduce its
    visual prominence.
17. The proposed use of natural timber cladding would ensure that the building would
    be sympathetic to its rural location, in which I observed a variety of materials close
    to the appeal site. Despite the proximity to the road, I find that the siting, design
    and external appearance of the building would be appropriate to the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area.
Other Matters
18. The appeal site lies within the Kent Downs National Landscape (KDNL). The
    KDNL is recognised in part for its chalk downland, ancient woodland, and
    sweeping views. I am required, under Section 85 of The Countryside and Rights of
    Way Act 2000 as amended, to seek to further the purpose of conserving and
    enhancing the natural beauty of National Landscapes when performing my



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009974


         function in determining this appeal. Taking the above into account, I find that the
         proposal would impose no harm to the distinctive landscape of the KDNL.
19. The Council has drawn my attention to appeal decisions in which previous
    Inspectors have considered similar matters to that presented in the appeal
    scheme. In relation to a prior approval proposal for a new agricultural barn in
    Chesire East3, the Inspector found that there was no substantive evidence to
    demonstrate that the activities on the land formed a trade or business.
    Notwithstanding that I do not have the full details of that case before me, the
    Inspector was clear in that decision that no livestock was observed on the land.
20. In respect to the decision referred to in St Albans4, the Inspector outlined that there
    was a lack of detailed evidence such as business or financial records to establish
    the existence of a trade or business. Whilst there are similarities to the appeal
    scheme, in which I equally do not have business accounts or profits, in this case I
    have other persuasive forms of evidence such as the invoices and grazing tenancy
    agreement. I therefore cannot be satisfied that either of the cases referred to by
    the Council are so directly comparable to the appeal scheme that they would lead
    me to alter my overall conclusions above.
Conditions
21. The proposal is subject to the conditions set out in paragraphs A.2 of the Order.
    Amongst other matters, these specify that development must, except to the extent
    that the local planning authority otherwise agree in writing, be carried out in
    accordance with the details approved. It is also stated that development must be
    carried out within a period of 5 years from the date on which the local planning
    authority were given the information referred to in paragraph A.2(d)(ii) of the Order.
    It is not required for me to separately impose these conditions.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed, and
    prior approval is deemed to be granted.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




3
    APP/R0660/W/25/3365300 decision dated 3 September 2025
4
    APP/B1930/W/23/3325019 decision dated 8 March 2024


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
