Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by M Harrison BA(Hons) DipTP LLM MIoL MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009910
12 Victoria Road, Whetstone, LE8 6JX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ashley Kershaw against the decision of Blaby District Council.
•    The application ref is 25/0987/FUL.
•    The development proposed is erection of a 2-bedroom dwelling to the rear of 12 Victoria Road.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development on the application form was for “Erection of 1no.
       new two-storey self and custom housebuilding dwelling, to the rear of 12 Victoria
       Road”. The description was subsequently amended during the application process
       to that which is set out in the banner above, with confirmation of the appellant’s
       agreement to that change provided at Appendix 3 of the Council’s Statement of
       Case.
3.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026 and forms a material consideration for decision making purposes
       from the date of its publication to which I have had regard in making this decision. I
       have not sought the views of the main parties on the revised Framework as the
       policies relating to the main issues of this appeal have not significantly changed.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are the effect of the development on:
     •     the character and appearance of the area; and
     •     the living conditions of neighbouring properties and future occupants.
Reasons
       Character and appearance
5.     The appeal site is located in an area that is characterised by semi-detached and
       terraced dwellings. No.12 Victoria Road forms the left-hand half of a pair of two-
       storey semi-detached houses. It is part of a long row of semi-detached dwellings
       on this side of Victoria Road of similar design and layout, set back from the
       pavement to create a small front garden, with space to the side to access a
       generous rear garden. These characteristics give the street scene a strong rhythm

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009910


       and rather spacious feel. Whilst there are some structures within the rear gardens
       of properties, they are single storey outbuildings. The entrance to Charnwood
       Avenue is next to the appeal site.
6.     The proposed development comprises a two-storey dwelling and a detached
       double garage within the rear garden of the appeal site. It would conflict with the
       pattern of development on this side of Victoria Road, which is characterised by
       semi-detached dwellings fronting the street and long rear gardens. A two-storey
       dwelling together with a double garage would fill a significant proportion of the rear
       garden of No.12 with development, harming the existing sense of space around
       dwellings. As the appeal site is a corner plot, the proposed dwelling would be
       particularly visible and disrupt the established rhythm of the street scene.
7.     Whilst the proposed dwelling has been oriented with its front elevation and front
       door facing towards Charnwood Avenue, it would not read as being part of that
       group of existing dwellings. The existing hedgerow and proposed timber fence,
       together with the driveway access off Victoria Road, would make it visually clear
       that the dwelling is not functionally a part of Charnwood Avenue.
8.     Consequently, I find that the proposed development would cause significant harm
       to the character and appearance of the area, contrary to Policy CS2 of the Blaby
       District Local Plan (Core Strategy) Development Plan Document (2013) and Policy
       DM1 of the Blaby District Local Plan (Delivery) Development Plan Document
       (2019) (the Delivery DPD) which require, amongst other things, that proposals are
       in keeping with the character and appearance of the area and do not result in the
       overdevelopment of the site.
       Living conditions
9.     Due to the constrained nature of the site and consequently the close proximity of
       the proposed dwelling to its boundaries, in order to maintain the privacy of
       neighbouring dwellings all first-floor windows, except for the front elevation, would
       be obscure glazed and non-opening.
10. Whilst this helps to protect the living conditions of neighbouring properties, it would
    adversely affect the living conditions of future occupants. Only having clear glazing
    and opening first floor windows on the front elevation with no outlook to the sides
    or rear of the property would provide a sub-standard experience for occupiers of
    the property.
11. In addition, the private outdoor spaces that would be created for both the new
    dwelling and for No.12 are very small. The small nature of these garden spaces
    would contrast significantly with the generous rear gardens of neighbouring
    properties.
12. I therefore find that the proposed development would cause harm to the living
    conditions of future occupants, contrary to Policy DM1 of the Delivery DPD which
    requires, amongst other things, proposals to not be significantly detrimental to the
    amenities enjoyed by the existing or new occupiers.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
13. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development within settlements, such as
    this appeal proposal, should be approved unless the benefits would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009910


14. The benefit of this scheme would be the delivery of one dwelling within an area
    where the Council is currently unable to demonstrate a 5-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites. However, the adverse effects of the appeal proposal that
    I have identified are significant. The addition of one dwelling would be limited in
    this context and is therefore substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
15. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.




M Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
