Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by E Fawcett BA (Jt Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009313
486 Blackburn Road, Bolton BL1 8PE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Ibrahim Moorad Rasul against the decision of Bolton Metropolitan
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 00256/26.
•    The development proposed is described on the application form as “retrospective erection of single
     storey extension at front and relocation of signage”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The application form indicates that the development had been completed at the
       time of submission and the Council determined the application retrospectively.
       My site visit confirmed that the extension is in place. Therefore, I have also
       determined the appeal retrospectively. Whilst not referenced in the description of
       the development, the proposal also includes alterations to the opening hours of the
       restaurant, and this was considered by the Council when it made its decision.
3.     The description refers to the relocation of signage, however advertisements are
       covered by separate legislation, and no advertisement appeal is before me.
       As such, my decision relates to those parts of the scheme which constitute an act
       of development, namely the single storey extension to the front of the property.
4.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision. Framework references hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
       of the appeal property, a non-designated heritage asset, and the surrounding area.
Reasons
6.     The appeal property is situated within a mixed-use commercial area. Much of the
       surrounding development along Blackburn Road comprises 2-storey terraced
       buildings with commercial premises at ground-floor level, positioned directly
       adjacent to the pavement. The variety of shopfront designs, signage and
       advertisements creates a visually busy and, in places, cluttered street scene.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009313


7.     In contrast, the appeal property is readily distinguishable from the surrounding
       commercial development by virtue of its larger scale, expansive unpainted natural
       stonework, high-quality architectural detailing, and its setback from the highway.
       These characteristics give the building a strong and attractive visual presence
       within the street scene and enable it to make a positive contribution to the
       character and appearance of the area. The building also provides an important
       element of visual relief within an otherwise densely developed and commercially
       dominated streetscape.
8.     The Council has identified the appeal property as a non-designated heritage asset
       (NDHA), reflecting its historical and aesthetic value as a former school dating from
       1903, as evidenced by the datestone, which contributes to its significance.
       Designed in the Gothic style, the building incorporates a number of distinctive
       architectural features, including steeply pitched slate roofs, pointed arched
       mullioned windows, several of which are particularly tall, and hood mouldings with
       decorative end stops. Although the building is not listed, the Framework is clear
       that heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource and proposals should avoid
       harm to their significance. Policy HE7 of the Framework sets out that harm to the
       significance of a NDHA should be weighed against the benefits of a proposal, and
       a balanced judgement made, having regard to the scale of any harm and the
       significance of the NDHA.
9.     The extension occupies a prominent corner position on the principal elevation of
       the building. Whilst only a modest increase to the building’s footprint, and retaining
       the underlying wall within the mostly transparent glazed structure, the extension
       covers a substantial proportion of the frontage at ground-floor level. As a result,
       architectural features that contribute to the building's significance remain physically
       intact but are, to a large extent, obscured from public view. Furthermore, two of the
       tall arched windows, that contribute to the rhythm and vertical emphasis of the
       façade, are severed by the extension.
10. The proposal therefore diminishes the legibility of the building's coherent Gothic
    design and harms the appreciation of its significance, as well as the positive
    contribution its appearance makes to the wider street scene. In this respect, the
    extension competes with, rather than complements, the architectural qualities that
    underpin the building's significance as a NDHA.
11. The extension incorporates relatively slim dark grey metal-framed glazing panels
    which, together with the largely transparent design, reduce its visual bulk to some
    degree. However, these contemporary detailing elements do not successfully
    integrate the extension with the host building. Its flat-roofed design, substantial
    projection and broad frontage create an overall horizontal emphasis that contrasts
    sharply with the building's strong vertical character, expressed through its steeply
    pitched roofs and narrow arched windows. Furthermore, particularly at its edges,
    the roof material to the extension appears utilitarian and jars against the aesthetics
    of the façade. Given that the principal elevation is where the building's
    architectural qualities are most readily appreciated, these effects result in a
    moderate degree of harm.
12. Accordingly, whilst the extension is single storey and leaves the roofline and most
    upper-floor detailing intact, it nevertheless dominates the ground floor of the
    principal elevation and interrupts the appreciation of the building's overall
    composition. The result is an incongruous addition that detracts from the appeal

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009313


       property’s distinctive character and appearance and diminishes the positive
       contribution it makes to the street scene, particularly given its prominent corner
       location.
13. I therefore conclude that the development harms the character and appearance of
    the appeal property, a NDHA, and the surrounding area. It therefore conflicts with
    Policy RA1 of Bolton’s Core Strategy (2011) and JP-P1 and JP-P2 of the Places
    for Everyone Joint Development Plan Document 2022 to 2039 (2024). Collectively
    these seek to ensure that, amongst other things, development conserves and
    enhances historic environments, and respects the character and identity of the
    locality in terms of design, siting, scale, massing and materials used.
Other Considerations
14. Social benefits arise from improved accessibility to the restaurant and enhanced
    circulation, and the proposal therefore attracts some support from Policy DP3 of
    the Framework insofar as it seeks to support healthy, mixed, vibrant and integrated
    communities. There are also likely to be modest economic benefits to the business
    arising from the enlarged ground-floor seating area, including through increased
    customer appeal and operational efficiency.
15. However, the evidence before me indicates that the upper floor has previously
    been used to provide a dining area, and there is an alternative ground floor area
    where accessible seating could be provided. Furthermore, the development relates
    to an established business and there is no substantive evidence demonstrating
    that the extension is necessary to ensure its viability or that the continued
    operation of the restaurant, or the contribution it makes to the local community and
    the economy, would be jeopardised in the absence of the extension.
    Consequently, I afford only a small amount of weight to the social and economic
    benefits of the proposal.
16. Contemporary extensions can, in some circumstances, be an appropriate means
    of extending historic buildings by clearly distinguishing an addition from the original
    fabric. However, their acceptability depends on several factors, including the
    significance of the heritage asset, the design of the extension, and the wider site
    context. It does not follow that a contemporary extension would be acceptable in
    all cases. Whilst little detail has been provided in relation to the examples cited,
    from the evidence before me these are not directly comparable to the appeal
    proposal in terms of their design, context, or the character and appearance of the
    host building. Accordingly, they do not provide justification for the extension at the
    appeal property, which, for the reasons given above, I have found would harm the
    significance of the NDHA.
17. Whilst the extension could theoretically be removed in the future, it is a substantial
    structure and there is no evidence before me to suggest that its removal is likely.
    Therefore, this does not lead me to a different conclusion on the main issue.
18. The Council raised no objections in respect of highway impacts, residential
    amenity or drainage. However, these matters are neutral in the planning balance.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009313


Planning Balance and Conclusion
19. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
20. The development would not have a positive effect on the NDHA and therefore
    does not gain support from Policy HE7 of the Framework. Furthermore, Policy DP3
    indicates that proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they fail to
    respond to the history, character and features of their site and its setting and
    therefore fail to integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
21. Taken together, and making a balanced judgement, the benefits of the proposal
    identified above would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies of the Framework. As
    such, neither Policy HE7 nor S4 of the Framework point to permission being
    granted in this instance.
22. The proposal conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole and there are
    no material considerations, including the Framework, to suggest the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given,
    and having regard to all relevant matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.

E Fawcett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
