Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by David Cross BA(Hons) PgDip(Dist) TechIOA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009400
95 Otley Road, Harrogate, HG2 0DU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Craig Taylor against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00212/FUL.
•    The development proposed is two storey side extension, first floor rear extension and ground floor
     link to annex.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for two storey side
       extension, first floor rear extension and ground floor link to annex at 95 Otley
       Road, Harrogate, HG2 0DU in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       26/00212/FUL, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location Plan; Block Plan Revision E;
              Proposed Elevations Revision AA; and Proposed Plans Revision AA.
     3)       Before the development hereby permitted is brought into use, the window on
              the rear elevation - south shall be fitted with obscured glazing, details of
              which shall first be submitted to and agreed in writing by the local planning
              authority. The window shall be permanently retained in that condition
              thereafter.
     4)       Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
              Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and
              reenacting that Order), no windows shall be inserted in the side elevation -
              west of the extension hereby approved, without the prior written approval of
              the Local Planning Authority.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of the development given with the appeal differs from that given on
       the planning application form and decision notice. I have used the description as
       given in the planning application documents as this accurately reflects the
       proposal.
3.     The Council requested that I view the appeal site from 1 Hill Rise Avenue, and I
       was able to do so at my visit. I also viewed the appeal site from 3 Hill Rise Avenue.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009400


4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026 but
       there are no material changes relevant to the substance of the appeal.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of nearby
       residents in respect of outlook and privacy.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site consists of a semi-detached dwelling, with a side elevation that
       faces onto the rear of properties on Hill Rise Avenue. Planning permission has
       previously been granted for a development including a single storey side
       extension, first floor rear extension and ground floor link to existing annex,
       amongst other things. The evidence suggests that the previous planning
       permission had been amended to remove a 2-storey side extension due to
       concerns about the proximity with the boundary and windows to the rear of 1 Hill
       Rise Avenue.
7.     The submitted plans which form the basis of this appeal reflect the previously
       approved scheme, albeit that the proposal includes a 2-storey extension of a
       reduced scale compared to the extension that was removed from the previous
       scheme. The Council remains concerned about the separation distance of the
       extension from the rear of No 1, and specify that the separation distance would not
       comply with its House Extensions and Garages Design Guide 2005 (HEGDG)
       regarding the separation distance from bedroom windows.
8.     However, the dwelling at No 1 is set higher than the appeal site. The appeal
       proposal also includes a hipped roof which reduces the scale and massing of the
       side extension in relation to No 1 due to the slope of the roof down towards the
       boundary. Due to the design of the proposal and the elevated position of No 1,
       particularly the elevated outlook provided by the upper rear windows, the proposal
       would not be an obtrusive or overdominant feature in views from the upper
       windows of No 1.
9.     The proposal would also be apparent from the rear external amenity area and
       ground floor windows of No 1, particularly from windows serving a kitchen/utility
       room. However, that room is also served by windows on 2 other elevations which
       do not face onto the appeal site. The impact of the proposal on the outlook from
       ground floor windows and the amenity area is further mitigated by the elevated
       position of No 1, the design of the proposal and an intervening outbuilding. The
       proposal would therefore not harm the outlook from the ground floor rooms or
       amenity areas of No 1.
10. There are no windows or other openings on the proposal facing towards No 1, and
    the proposal would therefore not harm the privacy of residents of No 1.
11. The occupant of 3 Hill Rise Avenue has also expressed concern about the
    proposal, including in respect of overbearing impact, sense of enclosure and loss
    of privacy. However, there is a significant separation distance between the
    proposed 2-storey side extension and No 3, which would mitigate any overbearing
    or enclosing impacts. There are other elements of the appeal proposal which are
    located closer to No 3 than the side extension, but these reflect the extensions
    previously approved and do not therefore weigh against the appeal proposal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009400


       There is a window on the rear elevation which would face towards No 3, but this is
       indicated as having obscured glazing and this can be ensured by condition. Due to
       the separation distance, site history and the use of obscured glazing the proposal
       would not materially harm the privacy or outlook of residents of No 3.
12. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not harm the living conditions of
    nearby residents in respect of outlook and privacy. The proposal would therefore
    not be contrary to the amenity requirements of Policies HP4 and HS8 of the
    Harrogate District Local Plan 2020. Although the proposal would not strictly comply
    with the separation distances recommended by the HEGDG regarding No 1, this
    does not represent sufficient reason to withhold planning permission due to the
    mitigating effects of the design of the proposal and the relative height of No 1.
Other Matters
13. A third party has submitted that the proposal represents a regression from the
    previously approved scheme. However, I must determine this appeal on the basis
    of the submitted plans. Although a 2-storey extension had been removed from a
    previous proposal, the appeal proposal is of a smaller scale than the previously
    proposed 2-storey side extension and based on its own merits I consider that the
    appeal scheme is acceptable. The proposal would increase the amount of
    accommodation at the appeal site. However, this increase would be limited and
    the Council has concluded that there would be sufficient parking and that it does
    not represent a significant intensification of the use of the site. Based on what I
    have seen and read I have no reason to disagree.
Conditions
14. In addition to the standard 3 year time limitation for commencement, I have
    imposed a condition requiring the development to be carried out in accordance
    with the submitted plans in the interests of certainty. Due to the nature of the room
    served by the window on the rear elevation, a condition requiring the installation of
    obscured glazing is necessary in the interests of privacy. Exceptionally, due to the
    proximity to No 1, a condition removing permitted development rights for windows
    on the side elevation is necessary in the interests of the privacy of neighbouring
    residents.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

David Cross
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
