 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 10 August 2026
 by R C Shrimplin MA(Cantab) DipArch RIBA FRTPI FCIArb MCIL
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:08 September 2026


 Appeal Reference: 6009787
 60 Second Avenue, Billericay, Essex CM12 9PP
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr. T. Knight against the decision of Basildon Borough Council.
 •   The application reference is 25/01268/FULL.
 •   The development proposed is described in the application form as follows: “Extend and convert
     existing double garage to form a detached annexe subservient and in association to the main
     dwelling”.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary points
2. The ‘National Planning Policy Framework’ was revised in August 2026. I requested
   comments on the revised version from the main parties and I have taken account of
   the comments received. In this appeal, I have had regard to the most recent
   version of the Framework, of course.
Main issue
3. The main issue to be determined in this appeal is the effect of the proposed
   development on the character and appearance of the surroundings.
Reasons
4. The appeal site is located at the southern edge of Billericay, in a residential suburb.
   The properties in Second Avenue are typically in the form of detached and semi-
   detached bungalows or chalet bungalows with accommodation in the roof space, lit
   by dormers in some cases, as well as some two-storey houses. The homes are set
   back from the road, with front gardens that also allow for some off-street parking,
   and they sit on good-sized plots, with generous back gardens by modern
   standards.
5. The plots on the southern frontage of Second Avenue back on to a golf course (to
   the south), while the land to the north continues the residential area at First
   Avenue. Number 60 Second Avenue is located at the junction with Frithwood
   Lane, which effectively continues along the side boundary of the appeal site, and
   beyond, as a public footpath providing access to an area of publicly accessible
   woodland.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6009787


6. To the east of Frithwood Lane, and the residential area at Second Avenue and First
   Avenue, there is a large open field, bounded by a dense hedgerow on its Frithwood
   Lane frontage. It has been pointed out that this field is soon to be developed by the
   construction of new housing and I am aware that this will change the nature of the
   wider surrounding area.
7. The existing dwelling on the appeal site is a large bungalow in a traditional style,
   with accommodation in the roof at first floor level lit by dormers and a rooflight on
   the front elevation. It has a larger plot than others in the Avenue and is well
   screened by mature trees and shrubs. There is space for off-street parking on the
   front of the plot but, in addition, a large detached garage (with a double width door)
   is located behind the dwelling. The garage is reached from Frithwood Lane on the
   side boundary, by means of a concrete surfaced access area.
8. It is now proposed to extend and convert the existing double garage to form a
   detached annexe. The application is made on the basis that the finished building
   would be a “subservient” annexe, “in association to the main dwelling”.
9. Development Plan Policies include an emphasis on the importance of good design.
   Specifically, Policy BE12 of the ‘Basildon Local Plan Saved Policies Document’
   (dated September 2007) is intended to protect “the character of the surrounding
   area”, among other things.
10. This approach is reflected by provisions in the revised version of the ‘National
    Planning Policy Framework’ which, like its predecessor, aims at “achieving well-
    designed places”. Nonetheless, the revised Framework places an additional
    emphasis on the need to make good use of land within settlements (for example at
    Policy S4).
11. In this case the proposed development would have the effect of radically changing
    the existing garage building and it is necessary to consider the impact that the
    finished building would have. The building would be dominated by a pitched roof
    structure with large flat roofed dormers to both the front and rear elevations. A
    gable wall facing Frithwood Lane would also contain windows at first floor level,
    although the half-hipped gable on the opposite flank would be a plain brick wall,
    dominating this part of the back garden.
12. The finished building would, in practice, be likely to function as a detached dwelling,
    with two bedrooms and a w.c. on the first floor, as well as a bathroom, kitchen and
    living room on the ground floor. It would be located close to the rear of the existing
    house, making use of the existing access from Frithwood Lane. The large garden
    could readily be subdivided to reinforce the separateness of the new building,
    although the outlook from the rear of the building would be dominated by an
    existing oak tree, since it is explained in the submissions that the existing tree
    would be unaffected by the proposed works.
13. Thus, the finished building would amount to a form of backland development that
    would be out of character with the surroundings in Second Avenue. The nature of
    the building, as a chalet bungalow, would be similar to other buildings, but the
    pattern of development would be uncharacteristic and awkward, as presented, and
    it would fail to respect the character, urban grain and spatial quality of the
    surrounding area. The application is made on the basis that the finished building
    would be no more than an ancillary “annexe” but, as such, it would be awkward and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision: 6009787


     out of character with its surroundings, even taking account of the change to the
     area that will result from the development of nearby open land.
14. Evidently, the appeal site lies within an established urban area, which is
    “sustainable” in planning terms, and the proposed development would make a
    useful addition to the existing house. Nevertheless, I have concluded that the
    scheme would be clearly contrary to the aim of achieving well-designed places that
    is established in both Development Plan Policy and in the ‘National Planning Policy
    Framework’. In my view, the harm to the character of the surroundings
    substantially outweighs the benefits of the proposals.
15. I am convinced, therefore, that this appeal must fail and, although I have
    considered all the matters that have been raised in the representations, I have
    found nothing to cause me to alter my decision.
16. In reaching these conclusions I have considered whether the appeal could be
    allowed but subject to conditions to address the concerns that I have identified. I
    have formed the opinion, however, that any such condition or set of conditions
    would be so complex and onerous as to be unreasonable and that therefore the
    appeal must be dismissed.



Roger C. Shrimplin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
