Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009452
Three Manors Retail Park, Rockingham Road, Market Harborough LE16 7BA
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. Matthew Tunstall of InstaVolt Ltd against the decision of Harborough
    District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00070/ADV.
•   The advertisement proposed is for a free standing totem signage at the entrance to InstaVolt's EV
    charging site.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of the free
   standing totem signage at the entrance to InstaVolt's EV charging site at Three
   Manors Retail Park, Rockingham Road, Market Harborough LE16 7BA in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00070/ADV. The consent is for
   five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five standard
   conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations and the following
   additional condition:
     1) The advertisement hereby permitted relates to the following approved plans,
        drawing references: 10861 - 0001_05 – Revision A (Location Plan); 10861 -
        0001_04 – Revision A (Advertising Consent Plan); and 001_61-01 – Revision D
        (Signage – Small Totem).
Appeal Procedure, Preliminary Matters and Main Issue
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal scheme. It is clear from the cases of the main parties and my
   site visit that retrospective consent is sought. I have considered the appeal
   accordingly.
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issue in
   the appeal, given that there are no applicable national decision-making policies for
   advertisements. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded
   without further consultation with the main parties.
4. The new Harborough Local Plan is at an advanced stage of preparation. The
   Council has identified emerging policies relevant to this appeal. However, these are
   not materially changed to the adopted versions in terms of advertisement and
   design considerations. Consequently, and whilst I have taken these into account,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009452


     this appeal will be determined under the adopted development plan at the time. The
     policies are, in any case, material considerations relevant to the main issue.
5. Power to control advertisements may be exercised only in the interests of amenity
   and public safety so they have not been decisive. The Council do not have
   concerns regarding public safety, and I have no reason to disagree. My
   recommendation therefore focuses on the main issue, which is the effect of the
   advertisement on amenity.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal site is situated within a grass verge forming part of a landscaped strip,
   containing generously spaced mature trees. It lies adjacent a car park serving the
   Three Manors Retail Park. The surrounding area is characterised by a mix of uses,
   including retail, office and light industrial units to the same side as the appeal site,
   with residential properties located opposite. Within the retail park and the
   immediate surroundings there is a range of advertisements and street furniture,
   including large fascia signs, poster displays, freestanding signs, street lighting
   columns, hoop barriers, traffic signs and a totem sign.
7. The totem sign stands alone and is visible in both directions along Rockingham
   Road. However, it is viewed within the context of the wider retail park, which hosts
   extensive signage and street furniture. Whilst totem signs are not prevalent in the
   area, advertisements are a common feature of this commercial environment.
   Consequently, the sign does not appear incongruous or visually discordant and
   does not give rise to visual clutter.
8.   The sign is non-illuminated, modest in scale, slim in profile, and is visually
     contained by the large retail units to its rear and an adjacent mature tree. Whilst it is
     positioned forward of the retail park, its prominence is reduced by the site's sloping
     topography, with the sign positioned at a lower level than the adjoining footpath. Its
     setback position and the surrounding trees may diminish its directional value, but
     they also reduce its visual presence in the street scene. Moreover, existing
     freestanding signs in the area occupy more prominent positions than the appeal
     scheme. Allowing this scheme would not automatically set a precedent for similar
     totem advertisements, as they would likely require consent and would be assessed
     on their own merits.
9. The advertisement is therefore acceptable in amenity terms and, taking the above
   into account, complies with the 2007 Regulations. It also aligns with the aims, as a
   material consideration, of Policies GD8 and RT3 of the Harborough Local Plan
   2019 and Chapter 11 of the Development Management Supplementary Planning
   Document 2021. Amongst other things, these policies support applications for
   advertisement consents provided there is no unacceptable harm to amenity.
Conditions
10. The standard conditions are applicable to the consent as per Schedule 2 of the
    2007 Regulations. No further conditions are necessary. To provide certainty and for
    enforcement purposes, it is necessary to impose a condition to specify the
    approved plans the advertisement relates to.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009452


Conclusion and Recommendation
11. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme should be allowed in these
    circumstances subject to the conditions set out.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed in the circumstances explained and subject to the
    conditions referred to.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
