Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by Jane Smith MA MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10th September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009593
 Land East of Spring Gardens, Washington, Nr Pulborough RH20 3BP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Ripley against the decision of Horsham District Council.
 •    The application Ref is DC/26/0035.
 •    The development proposed is single detached two storey dwelling & associated landscaping
      together with the relocation of the existing stable building.

 Decision
 1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for single detached two
        storey dwelling & associated landscaping together with the relocation of the
        existing stable building at Land East of Spring Gardens, Washington, Nr
        Pulborough RH20 3BP in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
        DC/26/0035, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
 Preliminary Matters
 2.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on
        17 August 2026 and is a material consideration in this appeal. Both main parties
        have commented on its implications for their cases, and I have taken those
        additional representations into account.
 3.     I also sought the parties’ comments regarding whether the provision of self-build
        housing, as specified on the application form, and the associated exemption from
        biodiversity net gain (BNG) would be adequately secured. In response, the
        appellant initially submitted a Unilateral Undertaking (UU) dated 31 July 2026, as a
        mechanism to secure the provision of self-build housing. However, that has been
        superseded by a bilateral legal agreement under s106 of the Town and Country
        Planning Act 1990, dated 2 September 2026 (the legal agreement). That includes
        additional planning obligations and revisions, addressing comments made by the
        Council on the effectiveness of the UU.
 4.     An emerging Local Plan is under preparation and the Examination in Public is
        ongoing at the time of making this decision. The Council’s evidence for this appeal
        indicates that policies in the emerging Local Plan should be given limited weight at
        this point, taking account of the stage reached in the plan-making process and
        unresolved objections to many of the policies. I have no reason to take a different
        view and have considered the appeal on that basis.




 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009593


Main Issue
5.     The main issue is whether the proposed development would provide a suitable
       location for housing, having regard to the development plan, the provisions of the
       Framework and access to services and facilities.
Reasons
6.     The appeal concerns a long, narrow parcel of land accessed from Spring Gardens,
       just off the A24 dual carriageway. Currently, it includes a stable building and gravel
       hardstanding within a fenced area near the road, with a larger grass paddock
       beyond that. There is existing housing to either side of the site, including several
       dwellings along the length of Spring Gardens. There is also a nursery with farm
       shop and café just beyond those houses, as well as several large commercial
       premises including business park units, an auctioneers’ premises and a
       caravan/motorhome outlet. All of those uses are accessed via the existing junction
       with the northbound A24 at Spring Gardens.
7.     The village of Ashington is further to the north and the main village of Washington
       is further to the south. There are other groups of houses, a garden centre and
       other sporadic development strung out along the A24. However, the wider
       surroundings are rural, and the area is outside any built-up area boundary (BUAB),
       within an area defined as countryside in the Horsham District Planning Framework
       (HDPF) 2015.
Relevant policies
8.     Policy 1 of the HDPF sets out a presumption in favour of sustainable development,
       reflecting the wording in an earlier version of the Framework. Policy 2 articulates
       the Council’s spatial strategy, distributing growth in accordance with a settlement
       hierarchy. Policy 2 also includes some encouragement for reuse of previously
       developed land, but with no clear indication that should in principle override other
       locational considerations.
9.     Policy 4 allows for some expansion of settlements outside BUABs but specifies
       that such development should adjoin the settlement edge. That approach is
       maintained in the Council’s Shaping Development in Horsham District Planning
       Advice Note. Since the appeal site would be well outside any defined BUAB, it
       does not benefit from the slightly increased flexibility for development on
       unallocated sites in the Shaping Development document. Within the countryside,
       Policy 26 of the HDPF restricts development to proposals which are essential to
       their countryside location, with a focus on protecting the rural character and
       undeveloped nature of the countryside.
10. In the Storrington, Sullington and Washington Neighbourhood Plan (2019) (the
    NP), Policy 1 is supportive of development outside the Washington BUAB in
    certain circumstances, subject to compliance with other policies in the
    development plan. That includes support for proposals resulting in reuse of
    previously developed land (PDL).
11. National decision-making policies S3 to S5 of the Framework collectively define a
    revised presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S5 applies to
    development outside settlements and part 1 lists forms of development which
    should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009593


       outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
       making policies in the Framework. As has been highlighted by both parties, that list
       includes redevelopment of previously developed land (PDL) and development
       which would address an evidenced unmet need.
12. The Council has not disputed that the appeal site is PDL, by virtue of the stable
    building and hardstanding. To that extent, its redevelopment is supported in
    principle by both Policy S5 (part 1d) and NP Policy 1. However, the plans confirm
    that the proposed development would also extend into the separate paddock area,
    which does not clearly fall within the definition of PDL.
13. There is no dispute that the Council currently has a significant shortfall in housing
    land supply, so Policy S5 part 1j is also relevant. However, that requires that the
    development would be physically well-related to an existing settlement. As defined
    in the Framework, relevant settlements exclude hamlets and scattered groups of
    houses located outside predominantly built-up areas, where they are not
    specifically defined as a settlement in the development plan. The nearest
    settlements which would clearly fall within the Framework’s definition are all some
    distance away, and the site is not physically well-related to them.
14. However, Policy S5 also provides in part 1e for limited infilling within groups of
    houses outside settlements. While neither party has directed me specifically to that
    clause, they have both acknowledged that Policy S5 as a whole is applicable.
    Furthermore, Part 1e is clearly of some relevance, in light of the appellant’s
    argument that the proposed dwelling would be viewed in the context of the
    surrounding built form, with adjacent residential development on either side.
15. The substantial cluster of built development around the appeal site includes a
    cohesive group of houses along Spring Gardens and next to the A24. The part of
    the site which would be developed is sandwiched between existing dwellings to
    either side. Like its neighbours, the proposed dwelling would front Spring Gardens,
    occupying a gap between 1 Spring Gardens and The Orchard and it would be on a
    plot of broadly comparable extent. It would be embedded within the established
    group of houses, in a position where a single additional dwelling could reasonably
    be classified as limited infilling, notwithstanding any encroachment beyond the
    existing extent of PDL.
16. Policy S5 does not require that proposals for redevelopment of PDL and/or limited
    infilling within groups of houses are physically well-related to a settlement, since
    that requirement only appears within parts 1h and 1j, with no indication that it is to
    be applied to the other forms of development listed. On that basis, the proposed
    development is consistent with the forms of development which Policy S5 states
    may in principle be approved outside settlements, subject to weighing up the
    benefits against any adverse effects.
Access to services and facilities
17. While I have concluded that the site is not physically well-related to an existing
    settlement, there are some modest services and facilities nearby. Occupiers of the
    dwelling could easily walk to the farm shop and café further along Spring Gardens
    and they could also use the existing footpath to walk to the garden centre. They
    would, therefore, have opportunities to buy fresh produce and other items, as well
    as socialising very locally, providing some modest support for the services which
    do exist within this small rural community. Some of those very local services were

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009593


       acknowledged in positive terms when the Council permitted the nearby dwelling at
       Chanctonview.
18. It would, nevertheless, be necessary to travel further to meet the majority of daily
    needs. The village of Ashington is a relatively short distance away but it could not
    realistically be reached on foot or by cycling, given the nature of the intervening
    dual carriageway. It does, however, provide a range of essential services including
    education, medical and convenience shopping. There is also a much wider range
    of services in Storrington, which is further away but still a convenient distance by
    road. There are bus stops very close to the appeal site, at the Business Park, with
    what appears to be a useful service along the A24. Therefore, while there would
    be some harm arising from the need to travel by car, future occupiers would be
    able to access services and facilities without travelling significant distances and
    they would also have some sustainable transport options.
19. Framework Policy TR3 guides development towards sustainable locations, to limit
    the need to travel by private car. In this case, however, the development would not
    generate a significant amount of movement, given its small scale and the relatively
    short travel distances to a suitable range of services and facilities. A public
    transport service is also available. When assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework, while there would be some adverse effects
    arising from increased travel by car, in my judgement that should be given no more
    than moderate weight.
20. Limited details have been provided of the Lancasters Cottage and Clockhouse
    Cottage appeal decisions mentioned in the officer report. It is clear that both
    concluded that those sites were not suitably located, but less clear how the
    availability of any local services, or the distance to others, compared with this
    case. The appeal decisions provided by the appellant also encompass a range of
    site-specific circumstances, including conversion of existing buildings and larger
    scale developments, which are not directly comparable. I have considered all the
    other decisions mentioned, but none of them outweighs the conclusions I have
    reached in the particular circumstances of this site and location.
Planning balance and conclusion on main issue
21. Policy HO7 of the Framework makes clear that substantial weight should be given
    to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the
    evidenced accommodation needs of the community. That includes, but is not
    limited to, homes needed for different groups. While only a single dwelling is
    proposed, it would make a modest contribution towards addressing an
    acknowledged and sizable shortfall in housing land supply. Since a self-build
    dwelling is proposed, there would be a small contribution towards the supply of
    land for people wishing to build their own homes. The proposal would also offer
    some potential for modest benefit to the vitality of local rural services.
22. For the reasons previously given, Policy S5 of the Framework is supportive of the
    proposal in principle, notwithstanding its location outside a settlement. The
    adverse effects in terms of accessibility to services and facilities carry no more
    than moderate weight. When considered collectively, the benefits of the
    development would not be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects. In
    those circumstances, Policy S5 states that the development should be approved.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009593


23. Having had regard to the development plan, the provisions of the Framework and
    access to services and facilities, I conclude that the proposed development
    provides a suitable location for housing. While there would be a conflict with
    Policies 2, 4 and 26 of the HDPF, due to its location outside the defined BUAB,
    any conflict with Policy 1 of the NP is limited by the fact that the proposal would
    include reuse of PDL. There is, nevertheless, conflict with the development plan as
    a whole. However, in the circumstances of this particular case, that is outweighed
    by other considerations, notably the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development as defined in national decision-making policies S3 and S5.
Legal Agreement
24. Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is a mandatory requirement of Schedule 7A of the
    Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (TCPA). However, certain planning
    permissions including for self-build and custom build development are exempt.
    The application form specifies that the proposed dwelling would be self-build and
    exemption from BNG was claimed and accepted as valid by the Council. However,
    in order to ensure the delivery of a dwelling meeting the definition of self-build or
    custom housebuilding in section 1(A1) of the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding
    Act 2015 (SBCHA), a suitable legal mechanism is required.
25. The UU dated 31 July 2026 purported to secure the provision of self-build housing
    qualifying for the BNG exemption. However, it did not include a mechanism to
    secure BNG in the event that the dwelling is occupied in a manner which falls
    outside the definition of self-build housing. That could arise if there was evidence
    the initial occupier of the dwelling had not had primary input into its final design
    and layout, as required in Planning Practice Guidance.
26. The legal agreement completed on 2 September 2026 does include a mechanism
    for BNG to be delivered in those circumstances, along with provisions for
    monitoring and dispute resolution. It would therefore be effective in ensuring that
    the development is acceptable in planning terms, having regard to the statutory
    BNG requirements. I have therefore taken the 2 September legal agreement into
    account for purposes of this appeal and have not given the earlier UU any weight.
27. The planning obligations in the legal agreement are necessary to make the
    development acceptable in planning terms. They are directly related to the
    proposed development of a single self-build dwelling and fairly and reasonably
    related to it in scale and kind, since they simply ensure its delivery as proposed in
    the application and in accordance with relevant statutory requirements. I therefore
    conclude that the legal agreement would be consistent with the requirements of
    Regulation 122(2) of the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 and that
    it would be effective in ensuring that statutory BNG requirements are addressed.
Other Matters
28. Access would be via the existing junction with the A24, which already serves
    several dwellings and some large commercial premises. Whether or not the site
    access has been relocated, its position is clearly detailed on the plans, and the
    Highways Authority raised no concern about its proposed use for this
    development. There would be off-street parking to the Council’s standards,
    reducing the risk of any spillover parking near the junction. Since buses and other
    large vehicles already use the junction, there is no clear reason to assume that the
    movement of construction traffic would present any specific highway risks and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009593


       there would be space within the site for them to enter and park. As such, there is
       no substantive evidence that one additional dwelling in this location would have
       any unacceptable impact on highway safety.
29. Based on the ecological evidence provided with the application, the site is of
    limited ecological value at present, with no requirement for any further surveys or
    ecological mitigation measures. A soft landscaping scheme is proposed, which can
    be secured by condition, along with tree protection measures to ensure that the
    existing boundary vegetation is retained. There is no evidence before me to
    suggest that any earlier removal of trees or hedges was contrary to any relevant
    protection orders or otherwise unauthorised.
30. The proposed design adopts building materials and features which are generally
    typical of existing housing in the environs, including the sporadic housing within
    the rural areas. While the appeal site currently has an open and rural character, for
    the reasons previously given it also relates closely to the surrounding built
    development, and the Council did not allege that there would be any harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. Taking into account the proposed design
    approach and additional soft landscaping, the proposal could be accommodated
    without harm to the wider countryside or the character and appearance of its more
    immediate surroundings.
31. The dwelling would be sufficiently separated from its neighbours to avoid any
    unacceptable impact on sunlight or daylight. Window openings would be
    predominantly to the front and rear, with no first-floor windows on the side
    elevation facing Spring Gardens. While the dwelling would no doubt be visible from
    neighbouring properties, it would not unacceptably affect living condition for the
    occupiers.
32. Any unauthorised use or unsociable activities on the site would be less likely to
    persist after the site has been developed and occupied. If they did, that would
    remain subject to control by the relevant planning or statutory nuisance regimes.
    Disruption during construction would be temporary in nature and is not a reason to
    prevent development taking place.
33. Some specific concerns have been raised by interested parties about drainage of
    surface water, following implementation of the stable development. Other specific
    concerns have been raised by Southern Water regarding protection of the foul
    sewer from the effect of new tree planting. In light of those concerns, the
    arrangements for foul and surface water drainage should be subject to further
    review, but that would be addressed by the planning conditions set out below.
34. Given the modest size of the development, there is no clear evidence that there
    would be unacceptable pressure on existing infrastructure. The current
    Neighbourhood Plan does not define this particular site or its surroundings as
    undevelopable, in light of the partial support provided by Policy 1.
35. Based on the details in the Officer Report, and Natural England standing advice
    referred to therein, there is no evidence before me to suggest that the
    development would have a likely significant effect on relevant Arun Valley Habitats
    Sites, either alone or in combination with other development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009593


Conditions
36. The Council suggested a number of conditions which I have considered against
    advice in the Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. I have made some
    amendments for precision and clarity and have imposed one additional condition,
    having first invited comments from the parties. The appellant’s agreement to the
    imposition of pre-commencement conditions has been obtained, where relevant.
37. I have imposed a condition to secure compliance with the approved plans, in the
    interests of certainty.
38. A condition is required to secure further details of the arrangements for surface
    and foul water drainage, to avoid increased risk of surface water flooding and
    ensure protection of the public sewers from any adverse effects of new tree
    planting. Conditions are also necessary to secure a programme of archaeological
    monitoring and tree protection measures. In all three cases, the required details
    and measures need to be properly secured prior to any ground disturbance, so
    pre-commencement conditions are necessary.
39. Mitigation measures are necessary to protect future occupiers from road noise and
    vibration. Recommendations are made in the Anderson Acoustics Noise Impact
    Assessment, and I have imposed a condition to secure consideration and approval
    of a detailed scheme in line with those recommendations, together with its
    implementation, retention and maintenance.
40. Notwithstanding the exemption from BNG, a requirement for measures to improve
    biodiversity on the site would accord with Policy N2 of the Framework, which
    includes that development proposals should contribute positively to the natural
    environment, taking opportunities to conserve and enhance existing habitats and
    natural features of nature conservation value. I have therefore imposed a condition
    to that effect. There is no clear need for a condition to secure ecological mitigation
    measures during construction, since none are identified as being necessary in the
    Preliminary Ecological Appraisal. Nevertheless, construction activities would
    remain subject to relevant legislation to safeguard protected species, should any
    unexpected impacts arise.
41. Notwithstanding the details on the plans, I have imposed a condition to secure the
    soft landscaping details, in the interests of the appearance of the area and so that
    the position of new tree planting can be confirmed in line with the requirements
    outlined in Southern Water’s advice on the application.
42. A condition to ensure that access, parking and turning facilities are available prior
    to occupation is also necessary in the interests of highway safety. Conditions to
    secure broadband infrastructure and water efficiency measures are also
    reasonable and necessary given the specific requirements in Policy 37 of the
    HDPF. However, there is no clear need to secure further details of the refuse and
    recycling arrangements, which are already shown on the plans. Nor is it necessary
    to secure EV charging by condition, as that is now incorporated in the Building
    Regulations.
43. The external materials are specified on the plans, and I have imposed a condition
    to secure those details, in the interests of the character and appearance of the
    area. I have also imposed the Council’s recommended condition limiting hours of
    work, in light of the close relationship between the appeal site and neighbouring

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009593


       dwellings. However, the proposed dwelling would be on a generous plot, and the
       Council did not raise any specific concerns about its scale or design, so there is no
       clear justification for a condition restricting permitted development rights.
Conclusion
44. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan, but material
    considerations indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with it. Therefore, the appeal should be allowed.



Jane Smith
INSPECTOR


Schedule of Conditions

1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
       date of this decision.
2)     With the exception of any alternative details approved pursuant to the conditions
       which follow, the development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance
       with the following approved plans:
        • 684-01 Rev A: Location Plan
        • 684-02 Rev A: Site Plan
        • 684-03 Rev A: Plan as Existing
        • 684-04 Rev B: G.F. Plan as Proposed
        • 684-05 Rev C: F.F. / Roof Plan as Proposed
        • 6784-06 Rev A (sic): Proposed Dwelling Relocation of Existing Stable
        • 684-07 Rev A: Entrance to Site Visibility Splays
        • 684-08 Rev C: Landscape Plan as Proposed
        • 684-09 Rev A: Arboriculture/Root Protection Plan
        • 684-10 Rev B: Proposed Dwelling
        • 684-11: Plans as Proposed Entrance to Site
        • 684-12: Acoustic Plan
3)     No development shall commence until a drainage strategy detailing the proposed
       means of foul and surface water disposal, incorporating any measures required by
       Southern Water for protection of the public sewers, has been submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be
       carried out in accordance with the approved scheme.
4)     No development shall commence until a programme of archaeological monitoring
       during construction has been secured in accordance with a Written Scheme of
       Investigation which has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
       Planning Authority. The development shall thereafter proceed in full accordance
       with the approved Written Scheme of Investigation.
5)     All the trees and hedges shown on drawing no. 684-09 A as to be retained shall
       be protected by strong fencing, in accordance with the tree protection fencing
       alignment and specification detailed on that drawing. The fencing shall be erected


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6009593


       in accordance with the approved details before any equipment, machinery or
       materials are brought onto the site for the purposes of the development, and shall
       be maintained until all equipment, machinery and surplus materials have been
       removed from the site. Nothing shall be stored or placed within any fenced area,
       and the ground levels within those areas shall not be altered, nor shall any
       excavation be made.
6)     No development shall take place above ground level until a scheme of noise and
       vibration attenuation and ventilation sufficient to prevent overheating and maintain
       thermal comfort has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
       planning authority. The scheme shall include acoustic performance details of the
       building facades and glazing and shall incorporate the recommendations detailed
       in the Anderson Acoustics Noise Impact Assessment dated 17 March 2026.

       All works to implement the scheme, once approved, shall be carried out by
       suitably qualified persons. Prior to occupation of the dwelling, evidence shall be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority to
       demonstrate that the development has been carried out in accordance with the
       approved noise, vibration attenuation and ventilation measures. The approved
       measures shall thereafter be retained and maintained for the duration of the use
       in accordance with the approved details.
7)     Prior to any works above slab level, a Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy
       prepared by a suitably qualified ecologist, shall be submitted to and approved in
       writing by the local planning authority. The content of the Biodiversity
       Enhancement Strategy shall include the following:
       (a)     purpose and conservation objectives for the proposed enhancement
               measures;
       (b)     detailed designs or product descriptions to achieve stated objectives;
       (c)     locations of proposed enhancement measures by appropriate maps and
               plans (where relevant);
       (d)     persons responsible for implementing the enhancement measures; and
       (e)     details of initial aftercare and long-term maintenance (where relevant).
       The Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy shall be implemented prior to occupation
       of the dwelling, in accordance with the approved details, and shall be retained in
       that manner thereafter.
8)     Notwithstanding the landscaping details included on the application drawings, the
       development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a scheme of
       landscaping has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
       authority. The scheme shall include details of all proposed tree and hedge
       planting, incorporating any measures required by Southern Water for protection of
       the public sewers from the effects of such planting. The landscaping scheme shall
       thereafter be carried out in accordance with the approved details before any part
       of the development is first occupied.
9)     No part of the development hereby permitted shall be occupied until the parking,
       turning and access facilities necessary to serve the dwelling have been
       implemented in accordance with the approved details as shown on drawing 684-
       08, REV C and shall be thereafter retained as such.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6009593


10) Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted, the necessary in-
       building physical infrastructure and external site-wide infrastructure to enable
       superfast broadband speeds of 30 megabits per second through full fibre
       broadband connection shall be provided to the premises.
11) The dwelling hereby permitted shall meet the optional requirement of Building
       Regulation G2 to limit the water usage of the dwelling to no more than 110 litres
       per person per day. The subsequently installed water limiting measures shall
       thereafter be retained.
12) The materials to be used in the development hereby permitted shall strictly accord
       with those indicated on the application form and approved plans.
13) No works for the implementation of the development hereby approved shall take
       place outside of 08:00 hours to 18:00 hours Mondays to Fridays and 08:00 hours
       to 13:00 hours on Saturdays nor at any time on Sundays, Bank or public Holidays.
END of conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
