Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by K Dryden BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009503
Leapman House, 59 Primrose Gardens, London NW3 4UL
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Josh Watts against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
       Camden.
•      The application reference is 2025/4625/P.
•      The development proposed is demolition of existing building and erection of part single, part two-
       storey detached dwelling and associated works.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Subsequent to the Council’s decision on the application to which this appeal
   relates, the Government published a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published
   in December 2024, and all other iterations. Both the appellant and the Council were
   given the opportunity to comment on any changes relevant to the main issues in
   this appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching this
   decision.
3. The appeal site lies within the Belsize Park Conservation Area (CA). I am therefore
   vigilant of my duty imposed under Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
   Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to pay special attention to the desirability of
   preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
4. At the time of my site visit, I observed that the site had been cleared of the existing
   artist’s studio structure and several trees had been removed. Whilst there was a
   difference with the existing plans considered by the Council in the determination of
   the planning application, I am mindful from the evidence submitted that the site
   benefits from an extant planning permission1 for ‘the erection of detached, single
   storey, 3-bedroom dwelling (C3) following demolition of existing artist's studio (Sui
   Generis)’.
Background and Main Issue
5. The Council has sought contributions towards affordable housing, in line with Policy
   H4 of the Camden Local Plan (2017) (CLP), and the costs of amending a Traffic
   Regulation Order to secure car-free development in the Controlled Parking Zone,
   compliant with CLP Policies T1 and T2. The Council has also sought obligations to
1
    Application reference 2022/3470/P

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009503


        secure a construction management plan (CMP), together with associated
        contributions to support the implementation of a bond and an impact bond, in
        accordance with CLP Policies A1, T4 and DM1. The appellant has submitted an
        executed Unilateral Undertaking (UU)2 with the appeal, which provides for these
        contributions in full. Whilst the Council has not commented further on this matter, I
        am satisfied that the contributions would mitigate the impacts of the development in
        regard to these matters.
6. The Council has raised no concerns regarding the effect of the proposed
   development on the living conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers. Based
   on my observations at the site visit and the evidence provided, I have no reason to
   take a different view.
7. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the surrounding area, with particular regard to whether it would
   preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
Reasons
8. The appeal site is situated towards the east of the CA. The significance of the CA
   derives from the historic interest and architectural quality of its buildings. The
   Belsize Conservation Area Statement (BCAS) (2002) states that the character of
   Belsize is largely derived from the mid-19th century Italianate villas, whilst there are
   a number of distinct areas of varying character and appearance. The site is located
   within the BCAS sub-area five, identified as Primrose Gardens/ Antrim Road
   (including Antrim Grove and the Haverstock Hill frontage), where the properties
   along Primrose Gardens adjoining the site are identified as making a positive
   contribution to the character and appearance of the CA. Furthermore, within BCAS
   sub-area one, the properties along Belsize Grove and Belsize Park Gardens that
   border the site to the west and south are also identified as making a positive
   contribution to the CA.
9. Whilst the appeal site comprises a backland site accessed via a narrow footpath
   from Primrose Gardens, it is highly visible from a number of surrounding properties
   whose rear elevations face towards the land. The BCAS explains that the closely
   spaced villas, including those in Belsize Grove and Belsize Park Gardens, provide
   important, glimpsed views. I noted at my site visit, notwithstanding the presence of
   mature trees within the rear gardens of properties along Belsize Grove, glimpsed
   views of the site, and an appreciation of the surrounding townscape and openness
   of the rear garden environment, were possible from the street scene between No 2
   Belsize Grove and No 50 Belsize Park Gardens, contributing to the significance of
   the CA. The trees most prominent in these views are identified on the submitted
   plans as Norway Maples, which are deciduous. Consequently, views of the site
   would be more readily available during the autumn and winter months when the
   trees are not in leaf.
10. The proposed development comprises part single-storey, and part two-storey
    elements, including a first-floor section positioned close to the western boundary of
    the site, presenting a largely rectilinear form with a double-pitched roof profile.
    Given its size, scale and siting, it is likely that the development would be visible in
    the aforementioned views, particularly during the autumn and winter months. As
    such, it would appear as a bulky and visually intrusive addition to the built form of
2
    Under Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6009503


     the area, which is otherwise largely characterised by subordinate backland
     development and a sense of openness derived from the spaces between buildings,
     a feature that contributes positively to the character and significance of the CA.
     Furthermore, given the constrained nature of the appeal site, the two, separate
     elevated two-storey elements would also be clearly visible from surrounding rear-
     facing properties and garden areas, including those along Belsize Park Gardens,
     Belsize Grove and Primrose Gardens. This would further erode the appreciation of
     the spatial qualities that contribute to the character and significance of the CA.
11. Whilst the appellant contends that the rear garden areas make a limited, not a
    fundamental, contribution to the significance of the CA, CLP Policy D2 states that
    garden spaces can contribute positively to the character and appearance of a
    conservation area and provide an important setting for Camden’s architectural
    heritage. In this case, I find that the openness of the garden areas surrounding the
    site contributes positively to the significance of the CA.
12. By reason of its size, scale, siting and design, the eye would be drawn
    unfavourably to the resultant built form. Policy HE5 of the Framework requires
    development proposals affecting heritage assets to be accompanied by an
    assessment of the significance of the assets affected and the potential effect of the
    proposal on their significance. In making this assessment, it is the effect on a
    heritage asset’s significance rather than the scale of the development itself that
    should be considered. Policy HE9 of the Framework recognises that not all
    elements of a conservation area will necessarily contribute to its significance.
    Nevertheless, the development would detract from the character and appearance
    of the area and would undermine the contribution made by the neighbouring
    properties identified in the BCAS as making a positive contribution to the CA.
    Consequently, it would cause harm to the significance of the CA.
13. Whilst the appellant states that the proposal would extend only 1.43m above the
    highest point of the former artist’s studio previously occupying the site, that the
    separation of the two first floor elements would allow permeability across the site,
    and that the incorporation of a green roof, additional landscaping and recessive
    materials would reduce its perceived mass and visibility, I find that these matters
    would not overcome the harm arising from the additional height, bulk and physical
    presence of the development in this location. Furthermore, whilst the site lies at a
    lower level than the properties at Belsize Park Gardens, the additional height and
    bulk associated with the two storey elements would nevertheless be readily visible
    within the local context.
14. Given the relatively modest scale of the proposal, the proposed development
    would, under the terms of the Framework, result in a moderate level of harm to the
    significance of the CA. It is noteworthy that even a moderate level of harm to the
    significance of a designated heritage asset carries considerable importance and
    weight. Policy HE6 of the Framework establishes that when considering the
    potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
    Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
15. I have had regard to the benefits identified by the appellant, including the creation
    of a functional four-bedroom family home through increased living space and the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009503


      intended provision of a self-build dwelling for the appellant and his family. I also
      accept that the proposal would incorporate climate change mitigation measures,
      sustainability credentials and biodiversity enhancements and seeks to deliver a
      contemporary, high-quality design. In addition, I acknowledge the economic and
      social benefits associated with the construction and occupation of the development,
      as well as the agreed contributions relating to affordable housing, the provision of a
      car-free development and CMP measures. However, any such benefits would be
      countered, and in my judgment, comfortably outweighed by the harm that I have
      identified to the significance of the CA.
16. In addition, I have been provided with insufficient information to demonstrate that
    the claimed benefits of the development could not be achieved in a less harmful
    manner, particularly given that planning permission for a single storey dwelling
    remains extant on the site. Whilst I have given careful consideration to the public
    benefits advanced by the appellant, it is nevertheless my judgement that, when
    considered cumulatively, they would not outweigh the moderate harm that I have
    identified to the significance of the CA. Conflict therefore arises with the historic
    environment conservation and enhancement policies contained within the
    Framework.
17. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the development would have a
    harmful effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding area and would
    fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. The
    development is contrary to CLP Policy D2 which requires development to preserve
    and, where appropriate, enhance heritage assets, including conservation areas.
Other Matters
18. Whilst I note that, at the opposite corner of Primrose Gardens, an artist’s studio at
    10B Elizabeth Mews has been converted into a part two-storey dwelling, I have not
    been provided with the full details of that proposal to enable a meaningful
    comparison with the development before me. In any event, the site does not share
    the same context as the appeal site and, in any case, each proposal must be
    assessed on its own merits and site-specific circumstances.
19. Furthermore, whilst there are examples of alterations and additions within the wider
    locality,3 I have not been provided with the full details of those developments,
    including whether they are lawful, the approved plans, or the officer reports
    associated with their determination. In any event, each proposal must be
    considered on its own merits and site circumstances, having regard to the adopted
    development plan policies. Moreover, based on my observations during the site
    visit, the extensions and alterations to which I was referred were not visually
    intrusive within their context and did not diminish the sense of openness
    experienced in the area.
20. The appellant has provided details of an appeal decision4 relating to 38 Belsize
    Avenue, Camden, London NW3 4AH, where a retrospective application for a
    pergola in the rear garden was allowed. However, whilst that development is
    located within the CA, I note that the Inspector concluded that, owing to its lower-
    level siting and the presence of intervening vegetation from certain viewpoints, the

3
  Rear of 52/50 Belsize Park Gardens, rear of 10-14 Belsize Grove, rear of 58/60 Belsize Park Gardens, Rear of west side of
Primrose Gardens and rear of east side of Primrose Gardens.
4
  APP/X5210/W/24/3350002


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6009503


       pergola did not interrupt significant views or have an overly imposing presence
       within the CA. As such, I do not consider the circumstances of that appeal to be
       directly comparable to those before me.
21. Furthermore, the appellant has drawn my attention to an allowed appeal decision 5
    at Land adjacent to 110 Ribchester Road, Clayton Le Dale, Blackburn, Lancashire,
    BB1 9HQ as an example of the substantial weight that may be attributed to the
    delivery of a self -build dwelling. However, that site does not share the same
    context, heritage considerations or development plan policy framework as the
    appeal proposal before me. Consequently, the decision does not overcome the
    harm I have identified in my reasoning above, nor does it alter my findings.
    Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. The proposed development would provide a self-build, car-free residential dwelling,
    in addition to contributions towards affordable housing and CMP matters. However,
    it would have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding
    area, and would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
    The proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan, taken as a whole.
23. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
24. Policy L2 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the creation
    of additional homes or floorspace within settlements through additional
    development within existing plots, in order to make effective use of land. Whilst I
    acknowledge that the proposal would provide additional residential
    accommodation, the Framework Policy L2 1.d)i. requires such development not to
    be visible from the street frontage. For the reasons given above, I have found that
    the proposal would result in unacceptable harm to the character and appearance of
    the surrounding area and would fail to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA. Furthermore, the public benefits advanced by the appellant
    would not outweigh the moderate harm identified to the significance of the CA.
25. Furthermore, Policy DP3 1. of the Framework requires development proposals to
    respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
    Whilst this should not preclude innovation or change where appropriate, I have
    found that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the
    surrounding area and the significance of the CA. Consequently, it conflicts with the
    Framework’s policies relating to the conservation and enhancement of the historic
    environment.
26. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence.
    The appellant has contended that there is an erosion of housing delivery test (HDT)
    performance, where the latest score (in the 2023 HDT) indicates that the Council
    has delivered only 53% of the housing required over the previous three years
    (down from 76% in 2021). I have not been provided evidence to dispute this

5
    APP/T2350/W/23/3335737


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009503


     position, and I accept that the development would make a modest contribution to
     the overall supply of housing in accordance with the aims of the Framework.
27. However, there is an extant consent for a smaller residential dwelling on the appeal
    site which is a material consideration in this appeal. I also note that the Council has
    indicated that the provision of larger, four-bedroom dwellings is identified as a low
    priority for the purposes of meeting local needs.
28. Nevertheless, whilst the proposal would contribute to local housing supply, the
    benefits arising from the development do not outweigh the harm identified, nor the
    conflict with other policies of the Framework, including those relating to the
    conservation and enhancement of the historic environment.
29. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework does not
    point to permission being granted in this instance.
30. In the final balance, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of
    sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to
    all other matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.




K Dryden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
