Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026 by E Clifford BA (Hons) MA
Decision by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009133
1 Westwood Road, Perry Barr, Birmingham B6 7DX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Happy Children Care against the decision of Birmingham City Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/04233/PA.
•   The development proposed is conversion of house (C3) into children’s home (C2).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion of house
   (C3) into children home (C2) at 1 Westwood Road, Perry Barr, Birmingham B6 7DX
   in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 2025/04233/PA, subject to the
   following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
        drawing no: PL04 (proposed floor plans).
     3) The home shall be used for the accommodation of no more than one child at
        any one time.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary matters
3. The Councils third Reason for Refusal on the Decision Notice, with respect to
   parking provision, identifies conflict with policy TP15 of the Birmingham
   Development Plan Document (DPD) (2021). However, this document does not
   contain a policy TP15, rather policy DM15 refers to parking provision. As such, I
   have disregarded any reference to policy TP15 and instead assessed the scheme
   in consideration of DPD policy DM15.




Main Issue

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009133


4. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
     •    the living conditions of future occupiers having particular regard to space and
          the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers having particular regard to noise;
          and
     •    parking and highway safety.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Living Conditions
5. DPD policy DM12 provides support for the change of use to a care home provided
   it complies with a set of listed criteria. This includes with respect to it; a) preventing
   an adverse effect on the amenity, character, parking in the area, b) make suitable
   provision of internal and external space and at d) be of an acceptable scale and
   intensity of use. The appeal property is a modest two-bedroom house with a small
   yard to the rear. It is currently used as a It has two reception rooms, with a kitchen
   to the rear and bathroom upstairs. It is the end property in a short row of terraces.
6. The proposed use of the property is for one child, with up to two members of staff
   present during the day and two overnight. The proposed bedroom for the child,
   whilst modest, is above the Nationally Described Space Standards and therefore
   would be suitable for this use. The absence of on-site parking is noted, but this is
   similar to most properties in the area which rely on on-street parking to meet
   demands. The site has good access to public transport, and its parking needs
   would be no greater than that required for a single-family dwelling.
7. The rear yard is small, as is typical of terraced houses of this age and style.
   Furthermore, I note that the city centre location of the site means that there is easy
   access to extensive parks and green spaces, providing a reasonable alternative to
   outdoor space at the dwelling. Accordingly, the proposal would provide an
   acceptable provision of both external amenity space and parking provision for the
   scale of the proposed use.
8. Furthermore, the comings and goings associated with the proposed use would be
   comparable to a typical household undertaking daily life. There is little before me to
   indicate that there would be a significant increase in movement compared to its
   current use which would have a harmful or disruptive effect on neighbouring
   occupiers. Additionally, being of modest scale I am unconvinced that the use would
   materially increase parking pressure in the area. Consequently, the proposal would
   not result in an adverse effect on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
   with respect to neighbour’s amenities or the availability of parking.
9. Therefore, the proposed development would have an acceptable effect on the living
   conditions of the future occupiers of the appeal dwelling and on those of the
   occupiers of the neighbouring properties. It therefore complies with DPD Policy
   DM2 and DM12 and the Birmingham Design Guide [2023]. These seeks, among
   other matters, for development to have consideration for noise and access to high
   quality and useable amenity space and for development to not lead to an
   unacceptable adverse impact on the amenity of the area.


Parking and Highway Safety

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009133


10. The appeal site is located on a road which offers on-street parking. Due to its
    proximity to the Villa Park football stadium, there are some limitations which allow
    permit holders only to park along the street; this is limited to match days only.
11. On my site visit, I observed that there was a high-level of on-street parking present.
    I also observed that there were numerous available spaces within the immediate
    vicinity of the appeal site.
12. The proposed change of use for the site would mean that a therapist would visit
    weekly and a social worker would visit, approximately, once every six weeks and
    would likely make use of the available off-street parking. Whilst this list is not
    exhaustive and it is reasonable to expect that there may be other visitors to the site,
    this is not a significant difference in the number of visitors that a private dwelling
    may expect to receive. I also note that the site is well-serviced by public transport.
13. Furthermore, the local authority transportation consultee raised no objections
    related to parking provision given that the home is intended for the provision of one
    child only.
14. Overall, the proposal would have an acceptable effect on the level of availability of
    on-street parking. It thereby complies with DPD Policies DM2, DM12 and DM15
    regarding the proposal having an adverse impact on parking and to protect the
    local amenity and character of the area. It also complies with Policy DM2 requiring
    development proposals to consider the compatibility of adjacent uses and the
    impacts on amenity in the vicinity.
15. The proposal would also align with the design principles in the Birmingham Design
    Guide (2022) regarding high-quality homes and the aims of the Birmingham
    Parking Supplementary Planning Document (2021) seeking development to provide
    an appropriate quantity, quality, and type of parking.
Other Matters
16. The Council has not provided a list of suggested conditions, although the appellant
    offers the imposition of five conditions that it suggests would be acceptable to be
    imposed. I have taken these suggested conditions into consideration. Other than
    the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to ensure that the development is
    carried out in accordance with the approved plans for the reason of certainty.
    Furthermore, a condition limiting the level of occupation would be necessary to
    manage the intensity of the operation.
Conditions
17. The Council has not provided a list of suggested conditions, although the appellant
    offers the imposition of five conditions that it suggests would be acceptable to be
    imposed. I have taken these suggested conditions into consideration. Other than
    the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to ensure that the development is
    carried out in accordance with the approved plans for the reason of certainty.
    Furthermore, a condition limiting the level of occupation would be necessary to
    manage the intensity of the operation.


Conclusion and Recommendation



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009133


18. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

E Clifford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
19. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
