Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6009042
The Old Rectory, Road From A4538 Pershore Lane To Bredicot Village, Bredicot,
Worcestershire WR7 4QA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Clive Strange against the decision of Wychavon District Council.
•    The application Ref is W/25/00613/FUL.
•    The development proposed is conversion and extension of 3 derelict barns to create a separate
     dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The South Worcestershire Development Plan Review (the SWDPR 2026) was
       adopted by the Council on 25 March 2026 and replaces, in full, the South
       Worcestershire Development Plan, 2016 (the SWDP 2016). This appeal was
       received before the adoption of SWDPR 2026 and as such, at that time it was
       emerging policy and Policies from the SWDP 2016 were referred to in the
       Council’s decision notice.
3.     I have received copies of the relevant adopted SWDPR 2026 policies and both
       main parties have had an opportunity to comment on them. I have, therefore,
       determined the appeal against the recently adopted policies.
4.     Any reference to the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) in this
       decision, unless otherwise specified, will be in relation to the August 2026 version.
5.     The appeal site is within the setting of The Old Rectory (list entry number
       1117085) and the Church of St James (list entry number 1117084), both of which
       are Grade II Listed Buildings. I have had regard to section 66(1) of the Planning
       (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (‘the Act’), which requires me
       to have special regard to the desirability of preserving a listed building or its setting
       or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses.
6.     Two signed Unilateral Undertakings have been submitted with the appeal in
       respect of providing a financial contribution towards affordable housing and in
       respect of ensuring the proposed dwelling is provided as a self-build unit. I have
       addressed these in my reasoning below.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009042


Main Issues
7.     The main issues are:
     •     the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area,
           including the effect on heritage assets;

     •     whether the appeal site is an appropriate location for the proposed
           development, having regard to the development strategy for the area and the
           accessibility of services and facilities;
     •     whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living conditions
           for the future occupants of the property, with particular regard to the provision
           of garden area;

     •     the effect of the development on the route of the Public Right of Way; and
     •     whether suitable mechanisms are available to secure a contribution towards
           affordable housing and to secure the proposal as a self-build dwelling.
Reasons
Character and appearance
8.     The appeal site comprises three brick barns with associated timber lean-to
       structures. The proposal seeks to convert the brick buildings, remove the timber
       structures and erect two new extensions, one timber clad and one metal framed
       and predominately glazed structure, to provide a single, self-build, dwelling.
9.     The buildings are located near to the two Grade II listed buildings referred to
       above. These, and the appeal buildings, form a small cluster which is outside of
       any defined settlement and separated from the other buildings in Bredicot by the
       railway line and cutting. For planning purposes, the appeal site is within the open
       countryside.
10. The Old Rectory is, according to the list description and the appellant’s Heritage
    Statement, a late-18th century, Georgian, former rectory which has classical
    proportions and features. Even if it was built in the early 19th century it is still a
    listed building. Its significance is derived, in part, from its architectural and
    historical importance, its contextual interest as a representative example of clergy
    housing of the period, and through its association with the church.
11. The setting in which The Old Rectory is currently experienced includes the
    driveway to the property, its garden and the surrounding rural area. Even if I
    accept that the appeal buildings were previously part of a neighbouring farm, in
    terms of ownership and use, and even with the mature trees and hedges, the
    buildings are situated on, and are prominent in views from, the access driveway to
    The Old Rectory.
12. Contrary to the appellant’s assertions the appeal buildings do have visual
    connections with The Old Rectory and the presence of the converted kennel
    building, which is on the opposite side of the driveway, would not diminish this
    connection. The appeal buildings are appreciated in the same views and context
    as The Old Rectory. In my judgement, the appeal buildings are within the setting of
    The Old Rectory. Moreover, even in their current state of disrepair, they are


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009042


       positive in the setting of the listed building as they contribute to the rural character.
       The appeal buildings are part of the significance of the setting of The Old Rectory.
13. The Church of St James is also Grade II Listed. It is a small medieval parish
    church. Its significance lies in part in the simplicity of the building, its architectural
    Gothic style and its rural setting. The listing description notes that it is listed as a
    small rural church with medieval fabric and that it retains its architectural character
    and some of its interior detail. The immediate setting of the Church is enclosed
    with well-established trees and hedges which limit views into and out of the
    immediate grounds. In that regard the appeal buildings do not contribute
    significantly to the setting of the Church. Nevertheless, the Church has a wider
    setting including the surrounding rural area and through the historic association
    with The Old Rectory. The appeal buildings contribute positively to that setting.
14. The Church and The Old Rectory also have group value due to the historic
    relationship between the buildings and that they illustrate the typical English village
    tableau of church and rectory together. The appeal buildings form part of this
    group but have a limited benefit to the significance of the group in that they are not
    directly related to either the church or the Rectory use.
15. The principle of timber clad and glazed extensions to link the three brick buildings,
    to enable the provision of a dwelling, would likely be appropriate and would ensure
    that the older buildings can still be read as such. However, by extending beyond
    the outermost rear elevation of the existing buildings, and with a roof height that is
    almost as tall as the top of the ridge of the lowest brick building, the glazed
    extension would go beyond what could be considered as a linking structure and
    beyond infilling between the existing buildings. Although it is not as long as the
    smaller brick building, the forward projection, beyond all the brick buildings on the
    west elevation, would result in this part of the proposal dominating the smaller
    brick buildings and would mean that it would not be visually or physically
    subordinate to the original structures.
16. Moreover, the glazed extension would result in the smaller brick building being
    obscured from views near the church. Any views through the glazed structure
    would be limited and would be influenced by furniture within the extension. The
    large, glazed extension would, therefore, dominate the brick buildings when
    viewed from the Public Right of Way (PROW) which runs parallel to the buildings,
    especially as viewed from the point where the PROW leaves the church grounds.
    It would be a dominant structure from at least two directions, even though it would
    be subservient from the other two. Even if I accept that the proposal would not
    result in a suburban building, the large extension would be a dominant structure
    which would not be visually recessive and would be intrusive and harmful to the
    character and appearance of the brick buildings and to the character and
    appearance of the wider area. It would, therefore, result in a disproportionate
    increase in size compared to the existing building and not comply with Policy
    S5:1(c) or Policy DP3:1 of the Framework.
17. The smaller, timber clad, extension, providing a bedroom, would be subservient in
    that it replaces a timber lean-to, would be below the ridge of the smaller brick
    building, fits under the eaves of the larger brick building, and would be set in from
    the outermost walls of all of the brick buildings. The proposed works to replace the
    roof slates and repair external walls would also all be appropriate.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009042


18. Nevertheless, the suitability of the smaller extension and other works would not
    justify the scale of the larger extension. I accept that some form of extensions and
    linking would be required to enable the three brick buildings to be converted to
    residential use and to enable efficient use of the existing buildings. Nevertheless, I
    do not have compelling evidence that the proposal is the most appropriate means
    to ensure that the brick buildings are retained, restored and brought back into use
    or that the proposal is the best way to provide functional living space.
19. Although the extensions are designed to be reversable or removable, given that
    some form of linking extension would be required to enable the brick buildings to
    be used as a dwelling, the reversibility of the design would not outweigh the harm I
    have identified from the scale of the larger extension. Moreover, there is no
    compelling evidence that the extensions would be reversed or removed. Even if I
    accept that residential use of the brick buildings would be a viable use and would
    ensure that protected species are not adversely affected, the proposed extensions,
    which are more than minimal external alterations, are not justified by these
    benefits.
20. Given the appeal buildings only form a group of buildings with one other dwelling I
    find that the site is isolated in the countryside for the purposes of Policy HO11 of
    the Framework. Although the proposed development would result in some
    enhancements, by reason of removing general rubbish and repairing the buildings,
    due to the scale of the larger extension I also find that the development would be
    harmful to its immediate setting. Subsequently, the appeal proposal would not, as
    a whole, enhance the immediate setting of the building. For these reasons, I find
    that the development would not fall within the exception set out at Policy HO11(c)
    of the Framework.
21. The appeal proposal involves a large extension and significant alterations.
    Furthermore, for the above reasons, the larger extension would not take its
    precedent from, nor respect the original design, features or materials of the brick
    buildings and would be harmful to the character and appearance of the area. The
    proposal would, therefore, be contrary to the requirements of subsections iii), iv)
    and v) of Policy SWDPR 26 of the SWDPR 2026. Although the appeal submission
    did not include a structural survey the existing brick buildings would be retained
    and repaired, the replacement of the roofs and the repair works would not amount
    to rebuilding works. Furthermore, I have no compelling evidence that the appeal
    proposal would not be capable of being serviced by existing utilities given that it is
    located close to an existing dwelling. Nevertheless, the proposal would fail to
    comply with SWDPR 26 of the SWDPR 2026.
22. Due to the prominence, scale and dominance of the larger extension, the proposal
    would alter how The Old Rectory and the Church are both appreciated in their rural
    settings. This would be harmful to the significance of the setting and not preserve,
    nor enhance, the setting of either listed building. In the context of the revised
    Framework there would be harm to the significance of the setting of both listed
    buildings. Any harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset is a matter
    of considerable importance and weight. Where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits.
23. The public benefits include the restoration and re-use of the buildings. This would
    make more effective and efficient use of the land and buildings, as supported by

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009042


       Policy L2 of the Framework and would have a lesser effect on carbon emissions
       than a new dwelling. However, these benefits are limited and I, therefore, only give
       them moderate weight. The provision of a self-build dwelling is a matter to which I
       also give moderate weight. Overall, the public benefits would not be to such an
       extent that they would outweigh the harm that I have identified to the significance
       of the setting of the heritage assets.
24. For the above reasons, the proposed development, due to the scale of the larger
    extension, would adversely affect the character and appearance of the area,
    including the significance of the setting of heritage assets. It would, therefore, be
    contrary to Policies SWDPR 26, SWDPR 09, SWDPR 33, SWDPR 28 and
    SWDPR 34 of the SWDPR 2026. Collectively these policies seek to ensure that
    development that reuses or converts traditional rural buildings are capable of
    conversion without the need for considerable extension or significant alteration,
    are of high quality and take precedent from and have regard to (as much as
    possible) the original design, features and materials that contribute to the
    architectural character and significance of the building and its surroundings, that
    there would be no adverse effects on the historical environment, the character of
    the landscape and its setting, ensure that development proposals are supported
    where they conserve or enhance the significance of heritage assets, including their
    setting, and require development affecting heritage assets to be sympathetic, seek
    high quality design that integrates effectively with its surroundings character, and
    landscape setting, and only support new and contemporary designs where they
    enhance the overall quality of the built environment.
Location
25. As I have found that the appeal proposal would not fall within the exception set out
    under Policy HO11(c) of the Framework it would be an isolated dwelling in the
    countryside. Although the proposal would not have a severe effect on highway
    safety, and even if I accept that the nearest town, including the park and ride/stride
    facility on the edge of town, is within a short drive the site is in a rural area and the
    Framework advises that opportunities to improve walking, wheeling, cycling and
    public transport should be taken. Considering the rural area and the lack of
    opportunities for sustainable transport modes, the proposal would rely heavily on
    the private car, or home deliveries. As such the scheme would not promote
    sustainable modes of transport or contribute towards reducing carbon emissions.
    Moreover, the proposal would not support the sustainability of the rural area.
26. For the above reasons the proposal would not be an appropriate location for the
    development, having regard to the development strategy for the area and the
    accessibility of services and facilities. The proposal is therefore contrary to Policies
    SWDPR 03 and SWDPR 06 of the SWDPR 2026 which, collectively, seek to
    restrict development in areas of open countryside and seek to ensure that
    development would minimise the need to travel by car.

Living conditions of future occupants
27. The proposed floor plan only shows a small patio area to the front of the proposed
    dwelling. However, the submitted block plan indicates all of the land between the
    buildings and the access off the public highway as garden area. This area of land
    is already fenced off from the adjacent field and would provide sufficient private
    garden space for the proposed dwelling. It would be capable of being made private

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009042


       through the planting of hedges along the boundaries. As it is within the red edge of
       the application site it is clearly part of the appeal and the proposed dwelling would
       not be wholly reliant on the small patio.
28. For these reasons, I find that the proposal would provide acceptable living
    conditions for the future occupants of the property, with particular regard to the
    provision of garden area and would, therefore, accord with the requirements of
    Policy SWDPR 35 of the SWDPR 2026 which, amongst other matters, requires
    development to be designed to create a high standard of amenity for existing and
    future occupiers.
Effect on Public Right of Way
29. The proposed block plan identifies a route for the PROW and the appellant has
    provided the title plan with the appeal submission, which also shows the route.
30. Although the larger extension proposed would be close to the PROW the Council
    has now withdrawn the fifth reason for refusal and I have no compelling evidence
    that the proposed extension would adversely affect the PROW.
Affordable Housing and self-build
31. Although the Court of Appeal ruled in 2016 that affordable housing should not be
    sought for developments of fewer than 5 units this has since been superseded by
    Policy HO5:1(a)(i) of the Framework which allows policies to set affordable
    housing requirements for residential developments which are not major
    developments.
32. Policy SWDPR 19 of the SWDPR 2026 sets thresholds for where residential
    development would be required to contribute to the provision of affordable
    housing. Within Designated Rural Areas, such as the appeal site, a financial
    contribution is required on sites of less than five dwellings. The recently adopted
    local plan provides a policy that sets a lower threshold in line with Policy HO5 of
    the Framework.
33. The appellant has submitted a completed Unilateral Undertaking (UU) which would
    secure the payment of a financial contribution towards affordable housing to
    comply with the requirements of Policy SWDPR 19 of the SWDPR 2026.
34. With regard to Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) the recent changes to the Planning
    Practice Guidance advise that, from August 2026, development on sites no larger
    than 0.2 hectares are exempt from the provision of BNG. However, the appellant’s
    statement of case indicates that the appeal site exceeds that limited site area.
    Moreover, this exception only applies for applications for planning permission
    made on or after the 6 August 2026.
35. The appeal site would still be required to provide BNG. Nevertheless, the
    submitted UU, in securing the property as a self-build dwelling, would meet one of
    the other exemptions. Notwithstanding this, the development would provide
    enhancements on site for biodiversity and mitigation to overcome the harm to the
    brown long-eared bat roost, that would be adversely affected by the proposed
    works. This would, therefore, comply with Policy SWDPR 29 of the SWDPR 2026.
36. The Council has raised some concerns regarding the detail in the Affordable
    Housing UU. If I were to allow the appeal, I would need to consider such

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009042


       obligations against the regulatory tests of 122 of the CIL Regulations. However, as
       I have determined to dismiss the appeal on the grounds set out above, I need not
       address this matter further.
Planning balance
37. Following the adoption of the SWDPR 2026 the Council are now able to show a
    five year housing land supply and the evidence submitted confirms that this
    includes the 20% buffer required under paragraph 9(c) of Annex D of the
    Framework. The appellant has not provided any compelling evidence to the
    contrary.
38. Nevertheless, the proposal would contribute towards housing in the local authority
    area and the Framework seeks to boost the supply of housing. Moreover, the most
    appropriate policy relevant to this appeal decision, specifically Policy SWDPR 26
    of the SWDPR 2026, does not seek to restrict conversion schemes, even in the
    countryside. The Policy is, therefore, consistent with the Framework.
39. As I have found that the proposal would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area and the setting of the listed buildings the development
    would conflict with Policy SWDPR 26 of the SWDPR 2026 and others within the
    development plan. I have given the conflict with these policies significant weight in
    this appeal.
40. The proposal would provide economic benefits both during and post construction.
    It is also designed to reduce water use, improve biodiversity, reduce embodied
    carbon, and provide for renewable energy systems such as battery storage and
    photovoltaic panels. These would be moderate environmental benefits.
41. Nevertheless, these benefits would not outweigh the harm I have identified to the
    character and appearance of the buildings, the area, and the setting of the Listed
    Buildings and, subsequently, the harm from the location of the development.
    Collectively the adverse impacts of the proposed development would significantly
    and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the
    Framework, taken as a whole.
Conclusion
42. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
