Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 July 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009127
286 Great North Road, Woodlands, Doncaster DN6 7HN
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr Igor Prokasovs of AP South Yorkshire Investments against the decision of
  City of Doncaster Council.
• The application Ref is 25/02200/COU.
• The development proposed is the change of use of first floor and attic to two flats (Class C3) and
  installation of rooflights on the front and rear roof slopes.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. On visiting the site, I observed that internal alterations to facilitate the change of
   use had begun. Although the alterations were not complete, and there was no
   evidence of residential occupation, I have dealt with the appeal on the basis that
   development has commenced. This does not alter that planning permission is
   sought for the development described on the application form and the plans before
   me. For the avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeal on the basis of the
   plans before me.
3. During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. The amendments to the
   Framework have incurred a change in national planning policy which are material
   considerations to this appeal proposal. For this reason, and in the interests of
   natural justice, I have provided both main parties an opportunity to comment on the
   Framework in relation to their case.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions
       of the future occupiers of the property, with particular regard to outlook, the
       adequacy and functionality of the internal living space and the adequacy,
       functionality and location of the waste storage area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site is a mid-terrace property comprising a residential flat at the first
       floor and an attic above within the pitched roof space. The site is accessed on foot
       from the ground floor of its principal elevation facing the Great North Road. There
       is no direct access available to the narrow yard at the rear of the property.
       However, it can be accessed from the alleyway that runs parallel to the rear.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009127


6.     The proposed development seeks a change in the use of the first floor and attic to
       create two, one-bedroom flats. These dwellings would be served by a bin store
       and cycle store in the rear yard, with external alterations limited to four rooflights,
       two in each roof slope.
       Outlook
7.     The rooflights would provide daylight to the kitchen/lounge of Flat 1 as well as the
       stairwell below. They would be the only windows serving the kitchen and lounge
       room and would sit at a raised angle high above its internal floor level. This
       arrangement would allow only limited skyward views, preventing decent outlook
       and failing to create a high quality residential environment. As individuals would be
       expected to spend significant time in the kitchen and lounge, given it would
       function as the main living space. Poor outlook from this room would therefore be
       harmful to the living conditions of future occupiers.
8.     Acceptable outlook may be available from the window serving the single bedroom
       below, and it may also be able to provide multi-functionality by accommodating
       some of the domestic functions expected in the kitchen and lounge. Nevertheless,
       the primary function of a bedroom is sleeping. As this would typically occur
       overnight, it is essential for decent outlook to be provided from the main living
       space where domestic functions would typically occur during the daytime. In this
       context, the outlook available from the bedroom window does not overcome the
       harm I have identified from the lack of satisfactory outlook from the kitchen and
       lounge.
       The adequacy and functionality of the internal living space
9.     Policy 45 of the Doncaster Local Plan 2015-2035 (2021) (DLP) states that, in order
       to ensure homes are large enough for the intended number of inhabitants, all new
       housing should meet the Technical housing standards - nationally described space
       standard (2015) (NDSS) as a minimum.
10. The subdivision of the property would result in Flat 1 extending over two storeys
    with a single bedroom that is restricted in size to one person. I have sought the
    views of both parties on this matter. It is noteworthy that the NDSS does not
    provide a size for a one bedroom, one person, two storey dwelling, indicating that
    the minimum floorspace for a one bed unit over two storeys should be 58m 2 . From
    this, and notwithstanding the Council’s Statement of Case, it is evident that the
    size and layout of a one-bedroom dwelling set over two storeys would only comply
    with the NDSS where it would have both a minimum internal area of 58m 2 and a
    bedroom of sufficient size to accommodate at least two persons. In this case, Flat
    1 would provide approximately 49m2 of internal floorspace, and its bedroom would
    not be sufficiently large to accommodate two persons. The proposed dwelling
    would therefore fail to meet the minimum standards set out in the NDSS, resulting
    in inadequate internal living accommodation for future occupiers.
11. Flat 2 would achieve the minimum standards set out in the NDSS for its size and
    layout. However, compliance with the NDSS would be expected of all new housing
    proposals in the city in order to be acceptable, therefore the compliance of Flat 2
    with the NDSS is a neutral factor in the appeal.
12. To aid their assessment, the Council may have relied upon the internal furniture
    layout of the dwellings indicated on the proposed floor plans. However, as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009127


        furnished layouts are not required to demonstrate compliance with the NDSS, it
        does not change my assessment of the proposed development, which has been
        based on the merits of the case as well as the plans and evidence before me.
        The adequacy, functionality and location of the waste storage area
13. The lack of a direct access to the rear yard would require occupiers to carry their
    domestic waste a significant distance from their respective dwellings to the bin
    store. The walk, although flat, would span across three separate streets and be
    more than 100 metres in length in one direction. This would make the location of
    the bin store not only functionally distant, but inconvenient, especially when
    considering the almost daily frequency that occupiers would need to deposit their
    waste. In this context, the location of the bin store would not result in an easily
    accessible or satisfactory arrangement for future occupiers.
14. Whilst occupiers of the existing flats in the wider terrace may undertake similar
    routes to their bin stores, I am not persuaded that the layout of further such
    development, particularly through intensification of a residential use, should be
    supported. Moreover, the location of both flats at the first floor would not
    necessarily preclude users from having restricted mobility or developing such
    issues whilst they occupied either dwelling.
15. I note the appellant’s calculation in respect of the volume of waste generated by
    occupiers. However, as the generation of waste is difficult to calculate and will vary
    dependent on the consumption of occupiers, it does not outweigh the harm I have
    identified in respect of the functionality and location of the waste storage area. The
    Council have confirmed that they consider the issues relating to the location of
    waste storage as a key, standalone issue in refusing planning permission. From
    the plans and evidence before me, I see no reason to reach a different conclusion.
16. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would have a harmful
    effect on the living conditions of the future occupiers of the property, with
    particular regard to outlook, the adequacy and functionality of the internal living
    space and the adequacy, functionality and location of the waste storage area.
    Conflict therefore arises with Policies 44 and 45 of the DLP. These policies seek
    development that is designed to result in a decent outlook for new homes,
    satisfactory arrangements for the storage and collection of refuse, adequate
    privacy and good access to daylight and sunlight and sufficient space for the
    intended number of occupants.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
17. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would fail to provide
    satisfactory living conditions for future occupiers. The proposal therefore conflicts
    with the development plan, taken as a whole.
18. The appeal site is within a settlement for the purposes of National Decision-making
    Policy1 S3 of the Framework. Consequently, NDMP S4 applies, whereby
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so,
    when assessed against NDMPs, would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects.


1
    (NDMP)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009127


19. NDMP DP3(3) states that development proposals should be refused if, without
    clear justification, they conflict with any explicit design standards set out in the
    development plan. The proposal would conflict with Policy 45 of the DLP which
    relates to housing design standards and insufficient justification exists to overturn
    this conflict. I therefore apply substantial weight to the subsequent conflict with
    NDMP DP3(3) and the adverse effect the proposal would generate in respect of
    living conditions.
20. The proposal would contribute an additional dwelling towards the accommodation
    needs of the community and to the overall housing supply. However, one dwelling
    would make only a very modest contribution to the overall supply and, in the
    absence of evidence to demonstrate what specific need it may address, it would
    only partly comply with NDMP HO7. I therefore attach moderate weight to these
    benefits.
21. NDMP L2 states that substantial weight should be given to the benefits where a
    development would make better use of vacant or underutilised land and buildings
    such as by bringing suitable buildings back into residential use or by converting
    space above shops. It has been established that the appeal site is not of sufficient
    size to suitably accommodate the number of residential units proposed. It would
    also intensify the existing residential use, not convert the space from an alternative
    land use. As such, the proposal would not make better use of the land and so
    attracts limited weight as a consideration in favour of the appeal.
22. To contribute to making efficient use of land, NDMP L3 states that within
    settlements development proposals for residential and mixed-use development
    should contribute to an increase in the density of the area in which they are
    situated. The only exception is where there is a clear justification that this is either
    inappropriate or not possible. The insufficient internal space standards of the
    proposal and the subsequent conflict with NDMP DP3(3) points to its inappropriate
    nature. Therefore, I attach limited weight to NDMP L3 as a result.
23. I accept that the proposal would also be in a sustainable location in respect of
    access to nearby transport and would support local services. It would also provide
    economic benefits through employment and the purchase of materiaIs during
    works. However, as the proposal would only generate one additional dwelling, the
    level of additional support to local services would be minor and effects on
    employment would be temporary. Together, these benefits attract limited weight.
24. Drawing these considerations together, I find the benefits of the proposal, taken
    cumulatively, would be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when
    assessed against the NDMP of the Framework. Consequently, NDMP S4(1) does
    not indicate that permission should be forthcoming and should not be approved.
25. In the final balance, material considerations in this case do not indicate that the
    decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan. For
    the reasons given, and having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal should
    be dismissed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
