Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 August 2026
by MG Garrard LLB (Hons), PGDip.LP, Solicitor
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009407
Two Oaks, Whitchurch Road, Spurstow, Cheshire East CW6 9TD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Clifford against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/2641/OUT.
•   The development proposed is three new dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. For clarity, I have taken the site address to be ‘Two Oaks’ rather than ‘Two Oakes,’
   as this appears to be incorrect on the application form.
3. I have taken the description of development proposed above from the application
   form. However, the description on the Council’s decision notice was, "Outline
   application for proposed three new dwellings with all matters reserved except for
   access, layout and scale", and it is clear that the application was submitted in
   outline with some matters reserved. The application form indicates that approval
   was sought for access, layout, and scale with matters of appearance and
   landscaping reserved for future approval. The Council dealt with the application on
   this basis and so shall I.
4. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published in August 2026. The main parties have had the opportunity to comment
   on the implications of the revised Framework for the appeal, and I have taken those
   comments into account in reaching my decision. References to the Framework in
   my decision are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
          •    whether the location of the appeal site is appropriate for the proposed
               development having regard to the Council's spatial development strategy
               and the accessibility of the site to services, facilities, and transport options.
          •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area
               including the contribution made by existing trees and woodland;
          •    the effect of the proposal on living conditions of future occupiers;



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009407


          •    whether the proposal would satisfy the requirements of the statutory
               framework for Biodiversity Net Gain; and
          •    the effect of the proposal on ecological connectivity.
Reasons
Location
6. The appeal site is associated with the dwelling known as Two Oaks and adjoins the
   A49 Whitchurch Road. Spurstow is in open countryside for the purposes of the
   development plan which comprises the Cheshire East Local Plan Strategy 2017
   (CELPS) and the Site Allocations and Development Policies Document 2022
   (SADPD).
7. Policy PG6 of the CELPS indicates that only certain types of essential development
   will be permitted in the open countryside. It also sets out when specific exceptions
   may be made. They include where there is the opportunity for limited infilling in
   villages; and the infill of a small gap with one or two dwellings in an otherwise built
   up frontage elsewhere.
8. Policy PG10 of the SADPD (2022) defines those settlements within the category of
   ‘other settlements and rural areas’ which are to be considered as infill villages,
   within which limited infilling within village infill boundaries will be supported subject
   to the criteria listed. Spurstow is not one of those defined infill villages. Therefore, in
   accordance with paragraph 4 of PG10, the proposal should not be considered as
   limited infilling in villages.
9. The CELPS Glossary defines infill development as the development of a relatively
   small gap between existing buildings, while the SADPD Glossary states infill
   development is generally the development of a relatively small gap between
   existing buildings, and defines a built-up frontage as a substantial line of buildings
   fronting a road with a fairly dense and uniform pattern of development. It adds that
   loose groupings of buildings in substantial grounds or with other spaces between
   them are not considered to be built-up frontages.
10. The appeal site lies adjacent to the heavily trafficked A49. Approaching from
    Bunbury, there are several dwellings mostly semi-detached, positioned near one
    another. Beyond them is the detached dwelling known as Two Oaks set further
    back from the road frontage. Opposite the semi-detached dwellings is a substantial
    stretch of roadside hedge which screens the rear aspects of several dwellings
    before reaching the restaurant and bar known as Panama Hattys. Beyond the
    restaurant is an area of car parking and several dwellings. These latter dwellings
    also do not front onto the A49 and are divided from it by walls and hedging. The
    only built development opposite the appeal site that directly fronts the A49 is the
    restaurant and its parking area. Within this context the appeal site appears as a
    significant undeveloped semi-wooded area providing a notable break in the
    sporadic development which exists in the immediate area.
11. The break between Two Oaks and the two dwellings beyond the site does not
    appear to be a small gap within the local context, and the existing pattern of
    development considered above does not have an otherwise built up frontage
    fronting the road. Accordingly, the proposal would not be the infill of a small gap



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009407


        with one or two dwellings in an otherwise built up frontage and as such would not
        accord with the exception in Policy PG6 in the CELPS.
12. A limited number of facilities are available in the vicinity of the appeal site, including
    the bar and restaurant directly opposite, a childcare facility, and a little further away,
    a public house and some educational transport provision. The evidence indicates
    that the majority of day-to-day services and facilities, including convenience
    shopping, healthcare, education, community facilities, and a wider range of
    employment opportunities, are located some distance away, principally in Bunbury
    and larger settlements beyond.
13. Opportunities for travel by modes other than the private car are very limited. Public
    rights of way exist nearby, but access on foot or by bicycle to local services is
    constrained by the absence of continuous footway provision in the vicinity of the
    site and the characteristics of the A49 including no apparent street lighting in the
    vicinity. Furthermore, there is no public bus service within easy walking distance of
    the appeal site.
14. The previous appeal decision1 relating to the appeal site, found that the location
    was poorly connected to services and facilities, had limited pedestrian infrastructure
    and public transport availability, and would be likely to result in a reliance on the
    private car for many day-to-day journeys. There is no substantive evidence before
    me to suggest that the locational characteristics of the site have materially changed
    since that decision.
15. For these reasons, future occupiers would be likely to depend on private vehicles
    for a significant proportion of their daily needs, and the appeal site would not
    represent a sustainable location for new residential development.
16. Drawing these matters together I conclude that the location of the appeal site is not
    appropriate for the proposed development having regard to the Council’s spatial
    development strategy and the accessibility of the site to services, facilities, and
    transport options. It would therefore conflict with Policies PG6 of CELPS and PG10
    of SADPD with regard to their restriction on development in the open countryside
    except for, amongst other things, where there is the opportunity for limited infilling
    in villages; or the infill of a small gap with one or two dwellings in an otherwise built
    up frontage elsewhere. Conflict would also arise with Policies SD1 and SD2 of the
    CELPS, which, amongst other things, seek to ensure that development is
    accessible by public transport, walking and cycling, provides access to a range of
    forms of public transport, open space and key services and amenities, and
    prioritises the most accessible and sustainable locations.
17. The first refusal reason in the Council’s decision notice referred to policy MP1 of
    the CELPS. It reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development in the
    previous version of the Framework, but its direct relevance to this issue is not
    explained and is of limited assistance to my determination of this main issue.
Character and appearance
18. The appeal is made in outline, but access, layout and scale are matters for
    determination at this stage. As defined in the Planning Practice Guidance, layout
    concerns the way in which buildings, routes and open spaces are provided,

1
    APP/R0660/W/21/3271467 – 11 August 2021


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
Appeal Decision 6009407


     situated, and orientated in relation to one another and to buildings and spaces
     outside the development. Consequently, the broad effects arising from the
     proposed disposition of the dwellings are matters that fall to be assessed as part of
     this appeal.
19. This part of the A49 is characterised by dispersed development set amongst trees,
    garden land, and open countryside, with vegetation playing an important role in
    filtering and softening the appearance of built form. The appeal site forms part of a
    vegetated gap between nearby areas of development. Whilst views into the appeal
    site are largely screened by the substantial roadside conifer hedge, the woodland
    and established tree cover in the site contribute positively to the verdant character
    of the locality. As a result, these features help to moderate the visual influence of
    surrounding development, contributing to the transition to the wider countryside and
    maintaining the area’s rural character.
20. The proposal would replace a substantial area of woodland and vegetation with
    three dwellings arranged along a shared access drive. The dwellings would be set
    behind the frontage hedge, and tree cover extends beyond the other side of the
    appeal site providing screening in views from the open countryside. However, the
    proposal would materially alter the role that the appeal site performs within the
    landscape. The introduction of a clustered group of dwellings, together with their
    associated domestic curtilages and infrastructure, would reduce the sense of
    separation provided by the site and weaken the transition between the roadside
    development and the wider countryside.
21. If proposed in a future landscape scheme, the replacement of the roadside conifer
    hedge with native planting could provide some localised landscape benefits over
    time. However, that would not overcome the significant change arising from the
    loss of established woodland cover and the introduction of a concentrated group of
    dwellings. Consequently, the proposal would diminish the appeal site's contribution
    to local landscape character and result in harm to the rural character of the area.
22. The Arboricultural evidence indicates that while the proposal would require removal
    of a number of trees, a substantial proportion of the existing tree cover could be
    retained, including through the use of protective measures and specialist
    construction techniques in some locations. The evidence also indicates that
    retained trees would remain in close proximity to proposed dwellings, hard
    surfaces, and garden areas.
23. Further details relating to drainage, levels, landscaping, and construction methods
    could be addressed at a later stage. However, those matters may influence the
    extent to which the submitted layout can be accommodated whilst retaining the
    trees presently shown for retention. In addition, the evidence does not include a
    detailed assessment of the above-ground relationship between retained trees and
    new dwellings, including the implications of shading, enclosure and the resulting
    pressure that may arise for future pruning or removal.
24. Notwithstanding the intention to retain a significant proportion of the existing tree
    cover, the evidence before me does not satisfactorily establish that the remaining
    trees could be sustainably retained and managed over the longer term as part of
    the layout of the development proposed. This uncertainty is material because the
    contribution made by the retained trees forms an important component of the
    appeal site’s existing character.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009407


25. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area, including the contribution made by existing trees and
    woodland. It would therefore conflict with Policies SD1, SD2, SE4 and SE5 of
    CELPS with regard to their advice that, among other things, development should
    contribute to protecting and enhancing the natural, and built environment,
    contribute positively to the area’s character and identity, conserve landscape
    character, and ensure the sustainable management of trees, woodland and
    hedgerows.
26. It would also conflict with Policy ENV6 of the SADPD insofar as, amongst other
    things, it expects development proposals to seek to protect and retain trees and
    ensure they are integrated and protected in the design of the development to
    ensure their long-term survival.
27. Policy ENV5 of the SADPD which requires a landscape scheme was cited in the
    Council’s reason for refusal. The retained trees and woodland would form part of
    any landscape scheme, but as landscaping is a reserved matter it is not necessary
    to reach a definitive conclusion on compliance with Policy ENV5 at this stage.
Living conditions of future occupiers
28. The submitted layout shows the proposed dwellings, gardens, and parking areas in
    close proximity to substantial retained trees and woodland. Landscaping and
    appearance are reserved matters, but the broad relationship between the proposed
    dwellings and retained tree cover is established by the layout for which approval is
    sought.
29. A retained tree group would occupy much of the available garden space serving the
    proposed dwellings. The relationship between retained trees, hard surfaces and
    built form has not been fully evaluated. The proximity of the retained trees to the
    proposed dwellings and their private amenity areas would create a sense of
    enclosure, a restricted outlook from parts of the development and limitations on the
    practical use of sections of the garden areas. This would be likely to result in a
    materially constrained living environment, with consequent pressure for future
    pruning or removal of retained trees.
30. I have noted the appellant's comments regarding the orientation of the appeal site
    and the potential effect of shading. However, the concerns do not rest solely on the
    extent of direct sunlight received by the proposed dwellings. Rather, they arise from
    the overall relationship between the retained tree cover and the living conditions
    that would be experienced by future occupiers.
31. For these reasons, I conclude that the effect of the proposal on living conditions of
    future occupiers would be unacceptable. Therefore, the proposal would conflict with
    Policies SD1, SD2, SE1, and SE5 of the CELPS in respect of their requirements
    that development should provide a high quality, sustainable, well designed and
    durable environment, use design that is appropriate to the local context and not
    result in the loss of, or threat to, the continued health and life expectancy of trees. It
    would also conflict with Policies HOU12 and ENV6 of the SADPD insofar as they
    expect development not to cause unacceptable harm to, amongst others, future
    occupiers, and that trees should be sustainably integrated and protected in the
    design of the development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009407


Biodiversity Net Gain
32. Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is a mandatory requirement under Schedule 7A of the
    Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (the 1990 Act) which operates through a
    pre‑commencement BNG condition so development cannot lawfully begin until a
    Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP) has been submitted to and approved by the Council.
    Through the BGP process the Council confirms whether the BNG objective will be
    met, including the final metric position and the delivery and maintenance
    arrangements. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) indicates that it would generally
    be inappropriate to refuse an application on the ground that the BNG objective
    would not be met but also recognises that decision‑makers may need to consider if
    the BNG condition is capable of being successfully discharged.
33. Paragraph 9 of Schedule 7A of the 1990 Act states that a significant habitat
    enhancement may only be taken into account in calculating the post‑development
    biodiversity value if it is secured through a planning condition subject to which the
    planning permission is granted, a planning obligation or conservation covenant, to
    be maintained for at least 30 years after completion of the development.
34. The Council’s ecologist advises that, although off-site biodiversity enhancements
    are proposed on land within the appellant’s control, the development would still
    result in a small hedgerow biodiversity loss and would not achieve the required net
    gain. Further off-site measures would therefore be necessary, but they would not
    represent significant delivery of habitat so could be addressed post-consent
    through the biodiversity gain condition, with a legal agreement required to secure
    the proposed habitat enhancements.
35. It is not necessary for every element of the final BGP to be resolved now, and as
    the habitat enhancement would not be significant, a condition, legal agreement, or
    conservation covenant to secure it would not be required at this stage. Therefore,
    based on the information before me, I am satisfied that the statutory BNG condition
    is capable of being discharged.
36. For these reasons, I conclude that subject to the statutory BNG condition referred
    to above, the proposal would satisfy the requirements of the statutory framework for
    Biodiversity Net Gain. Accordingly, the proposal would comply with the
    requirements of Policies SD1 and SE3 of the CELPS insofar as they expect
    development to enhance biodiversity and the natural environment.
Ecological connectivity
37. The appeal site lies within a corridor and stepping stone component of the Cheshire
    East ecological network. In those areas, Policy ENV1 of the SADPD seeks
    ecological enhancement, including increasing the size, quality or quantity of priority
    habitat and improving the connectivity of habitats for the movement of mobile
    species.
38. The Council's ecologist advises that the proposal could increase priority habitat
    through additional native hedgerow planting, although it is unlikely to improve
    habitat connectivity for mobile species. Nevertheless, the proposal would retain the
    existing boundary hedgerows and a condition requiring an ecological enhancement
    strategy could secure further biodiversity enhancements, including native planting
    and features for birds, bats, and hedgehogs. In these circumstances and bearing in
    mind that Policy ENV1 seeks proportionate ecological enhancement rather than

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009407


     precluding development, I am satisfied that the proposal would provide sufficient
     ecological enhancements within the ecological network and would not conflict with
     the aims of Policy ENV1.
39. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal’s effect on ecological connectivity
    would be acceptable. Consequently, it would not conflict with Policies SD1 and SE3
    of the CELPS insofar as they expect development to contribute to protecting and
    enhancing the natural environment and that areas of high biodiversity value will be
    protected and enhanced. It would also accord with Policy ENV1 with regard to its
    advice that within components of the ecological network, development should
    increase the size, quality, or quantity of priority habitat, and improve the
    connectivity of habitats for the movement of mobile species.
Other Matters
40. I acknowledge that interested parties have expressed support for the proposal,
    citing a need for additional housing, acceptability of the appeal site in its location,
    inclusion of sustainability measures and lack of a contextually material increase in
    highway risk. However, I have assessed the appeal on the evidence before me.
41. The appellant places significant weight on the absence of objections from a number
    of technical consultees. I have taken those responses into account in assessing the
    proposal; however, the absence of an objection is not a benefit of the proposal and
    does not weigh positively in its favour.
42. The appellant referred to Policy H06 of the Framework in relation to support for
    small sites. However, H06 is a plan-making policy and paragraph 8 of the
    Framework confirms that plan-making policies should not be used when making
    decisions on development proposals.
43. My attention has been drawn to two previous planning decisions2 taken by the
    Council. I do not have the full details of those cases before me and their
    circumstances and effects differ from the present appeal, including in relation to
    location, accessibility, policy context, and the considerations applicable to a
    permission in principle application. Whilst I observed the sites during my visit, I
    afford those decisions limited weight.
44. I have also considered the appeal decisions cited in respect of The Cottage,
    Peckforton Hall Lane3 and Radley Wood Farm4. While I have limited details of
    these cases, they are not directly comparable to the appeal site with regard to their
    location, immediate context, and layout of built development. Moreover, the appeal
    at Radley Wood Farm related to a prior approval for change of use from an existing
    agricultural building, requiring consideration of different issues to the present
    appeal. I have considered the present appeal having regard to the specific
    circumstances of the proposal and appeal site.
45. I have carefully considered the previous decision5 which dismissed an appeal for a
    permission in principle finding that the appeal site did not meet any of the
    exceptions in Policy PG6 and was not in a sustainable location. The decision is a


2
  Pheasants Hollow, Bunbury Heath (Ref: 20/2497N); Planning in Principle (Ref: 25/3507/PIP)
3
  APP/R0660/W/20/3255489 – 30 November 2020
4
  APP/R0660/W/20/3259159 – 19 January 2021
5
  APP/R0660/W/21/3271467 – 11 August 2021


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               7
Appeal Decision 6009407


     material consideration, but I have determined this appeal having regard to all the
     evidence before me, including the subsequent adoption of the SADPD in 2022.
46. The recent housing delivery test result shows delivery over the past three years has
    exceeded the number of homes required giving a result of 213% for the Council.
    Nevertheless, the Council accepts it cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable housing land with the current supply being put at 3.3 years.
Planning Balance
47. The appeal site would not be a suitable location for residential development, future
    occupiers would be likely to rely heavily on private cars, and it would cause harm to
    the character and appearance of the area and living conditions of future occupiers.
    The proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan read as a whole.
48. As a result of my findings regarding character and appearance, the proposal would
    fail to accord with Policy DP3 of the Framework insofar as development is expected
    to respond to context, including the character and features of the site and its
    setting, as well as maintaining and enhancing tree cover to create well designed
    places. Where such conflict would occur without clear justification, the Framework
    advises that development proposals should be refused.
49. For the reasons given above, the proposal would also fail to accord with Policies
    N2 and N3 of the Framework with regard to their advice that development
    proposals should consider matters including landscape character, identify
    opportunities for those qualities to be conserved or enhanced, and conserve and
    enhance existing natural features, such as established trees and hedgerows as
    well as making provision for the long-term maintenance of existing and newly
    planted trees which form part of the development.
50. Although three additional dwellings would make only a modest contribution to the
    delivery of housing, the Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of housing
    land. Therefore, in accordance with Policy HO7 of the Framework, I accord this
    substantial weight. Modest short-term economic benefits would arise from
    construction activity, and future occupiers would support such businesses and
    services as exist locally.
51. The Framework advises that, outside settlements, the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development should be applied through Policy S5. Although the appeal
    site is a significant undeveloped parcel between dispersed areas of development
    and does not form part of a predominantly built-up area, it is relatively close to
    existing development in physical terms. Therefore, in meeting some of the
    Council’s unmet need for housing, the proposal would accord with Policy S5:1.j.
    However, the Framework’s advice to refuse proposals that conflict with Policy DP3
    brings the proposal within the circumstances envisaged by Policy S5.2 where the
    benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects.
52. Drawing these matters together, I find that the benefits of approving the
    development proposal would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects of
    granting permission.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6009407


Conclusion
53. The proposal does not accord with the development plan taken as a whole, and the
    material considerations in this case are not sufficient to justify a decision other than
    in accordance with the development plan.
54. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

MG Garrard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
