Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by J Kirkaldy BSc (Hons) PGDip MRTPI
Decision by Paul Thompson DipTRP MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009698
Briar Cottage, 10 North Road West, Hythe, Kent CT21 4BD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr C Norfield against the decision of Folkestone and Hythe District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/0175/FH.
•   The development proposed is roof alterations, enlarging dormer to the front, new first floor rear
    extension and dormer.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
   and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
   latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   host dwelling.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal site comprises a detached bungalow occupying a discreet position set
   back behind other homes in North Road West and accessed from it via a single-
   track driveway. The surrounding area is predominately residential in character.
6. The existing dwelling has a modest and coherent form and appearance,
   characterised by a simple pitched hipped roof profile that has been altered over
   time through the addition of small-scale flat-roofed dormers. Whilst the proposal
   would not increase the overall height of the dwelling, it would substantially alter the
   existing roof form through the introduction of a half-hipped design and extended
   roof planes, resulting in a bulkier and more dominant roofscape.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009698


7. The proposed enlarged front dormer would comprise a partly pitched and flat roof
   addition set below the main ridge and in from the side elevations and eaves.
   Despite this, it would nevertheless occupy a significant proportion of the principal
   roof slope. This would result in a pronounced, and overly prominent feature on its
   roof. Furthermore, the substantial flat-roofed element would fail to assimilate with
   the pitched roof form of the dwelling and would appear visually discordant within
   the context of the host property.
8. The proposed first-floor rear extension would incorporate a hipped-roof gable
   projection and extend to the full ridge height of the dwelling. This would result in
   visually dominant roof form. The scale and prominence of which would be amplified
   by the changing topography within the site. As such, the extension would not
   appear as a subordinate or subservient addition to the original bungalow. Instead, it
   would appear as an incongruous enlargement that would harmfully alter the
   proportions and character of the host dwelling to a significant extent.
9. The existing pattern of fenestration with limited variations in window pane sizes
   contributes to the modest character and appearance of the dwelling. The proposed
   use of windows of varied form and sizes would contrast with this resulting in a less
   harmonious composition. Although the proposal would use a similar palette of
   materials to that of the host dwelling, it would nevertheless fail to assimilate well
   with the character and appearance of the dwelling.
10. The cumulative effect of the alterations and additions would fail to respect the
    simplicity and architectural integrity of the original dwelling and would introduce an
    overall roof form that appears overly complex and discordant in appearance.
    Consequently, the proposal would appear incongruous and unduly dominant when
    viewed as part of the overall composition of the host dwelling. As such, it would
    conflict with Policies HB1 and HB8 of the Places and Policies Local Plan (2020)
    which requires amongst other things that proposals respect the layout, scale,
    proportions, massing, roof line and detailing of the original building.
11. It would also conflict with policy DP3 of the Framework, which seeks to create well
    designed places, and specifically Policy DP3.1, which requires proposals to
    respond positively to the site’s context, character and features so they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings. While Policy DP3.1 does not preclude
    innovation or change where appropriate, it makes clear that this is particularly
    relevant where an increased scale or density of development is justified in
    accordance with policies L2 and L3. In this case, there is no substantive evidence
    before me to demonstrate that Policies L2 and L3 are applicable or that they justify
    the proposal.
Other Matters
12. The property is discreetly positioned and benefits from well-established vegetation
    that would serve to partially screen views of much of the proposal from the public
    realm and neighbouring dwellings. However, such boundary treatments are not
    permanent features and may change over time. In any event, limited visibility of a
    proposal does not negate the need to achieve a high standard of design.
    Consequently, the screening afforded by existing vegetation does not outweigh the
    harm I have identified.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009698


13. The appellant has stated that the proposal would create additional habitable
    accommodation and also refers to the existing dormers as being in a poor state of
    repair and susceptible to water ingress. Whilst I acknowledge that the proposal
    would optimise use of the roof space and improve internal accommodation, these
    benefits would not outweigh the harm I have identified to the character and
    appearance of the appeal property, and I therefore give it only limited weight in my
    decision.

14. The appellant has indicated that elements of the proposal could be undertaken
    under permitted development (PD), referring to alterations to roof form and the
    provision of dormers. The appellant therefore contends that a fallback position
    exists that would make the appeal proposal acceptable. In assessing the weight
    that can be given to the fallback position, I have to determine if there is a realistic
    possibility of the PD scheme coming forward. I note that there is no certificate of
    lawfulness, and no detailed plans/elevations of the alternatives before me relating
    to a PD proposal. Therefore, I cannot be certain whether the alternatives would
    have a lesser, equal or greater impact on the character and appearance of the
    original dwelling. The fallback position therefore has a limited bearing on the
    determination of this appeal.

15. The appellant refers to planning permission (reference: Y17/1613/SH) which
    granted permission for an increase in ridge height and the creation of additional
    first-floor accommodation. However, there is no substantive evidence before me to
    demonstrate that the permission remains extant, to enable it to constitute a fallback
    position. I therefore afford this limited weight as a notion.

16. The appellant has drawn comparisons between the appeal proposal and the
    alterations and extensions undertaken at the neighbouring dwelling, 1 St Johns
    Road (reference: Y07/0330/SH). Whilst there are some similarities between the
    schemes, I note that the neighbouring property had a different original roof form to
    that of the appeal dwelling. Consequently, although the approved development
    resulted in an increase in height, it largely reflected the established roof profile.
    Furthermore, the dormers at No 1 are notably smaller in scale than those proposed
    in this case. As such, I do not consider that scheme to represent a directly
    comparable example.

17. I have not been provided with copies of the appeal decisions cited by the appellant
    (references 3275894; 3257947; 3233119 and 3206120). Furthermore, I have been
    unable to verify the references, as they do not appear to correspond with the local
    planning authorities or the form of development identified by the appellant. In the
    absence of the decisions themselves, I am unable to determine the extent to which
    the circumstances are comparable to those of the appeal before me. In any event, I
    have assessed the proposal on its own planning merits and having regard to its
    particular own context.

18. The proposal was not refused on grounds relating to residential amenity, highway
    safety or parking provision and no objections were received by consultees including
    the Town Council. Nevertheless, these matters do not outweigh the harm I have



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009698


     identified to the character and appearance of the host dwelling. Accordingly, they
     do not alter my overall conclusion.

19. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the Framework's
    decision-making policies. In undertaking that assessment, I have had regard to
    Policy DM3(1), which requires planning matters to be considered proportionately to
    the scale, complexity and potential impacts of a proposal.

20. Whilst the appeal scheme is modest in scale, I have identified harm to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling, resulting in conflict with the
    development plan. Although the proposed extension would provide additional
    accommodation and therefore some benefit to the occupiers of the dwelling, those
    benefits would be private in nature and attract only limited weight. By contrast, the
    harm identified above would be significant and result in conflict with Framework
    Policy DP3.1 and conflict with the locally specific design policies of the
    development plan. The Framework is therefore clear that development proposals
    should be refused on this basis. Consequently, the benefits of the proposal would
    be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects and the proposal would therefore
    conflict with Policy S4 of the Framework.
Conclusion and Recommendation
21. For the reasons given, my above findings bring the proposal into conflict with the
    development plan. There are no material considerations, including the Framework
    to indicate a decision should be made otherwise than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Kirkaldy
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
22. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

Paul Thompson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
