Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009852
16 George's Street, Ovenden, Halifax HX3 5TA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Steven Bardsley against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan Borough
    Council.
•   The application Ref is 24/01271/FUL.
•   The development proposed is 1no. new build dormer bungalow.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of
   the main issue in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have
   proceeded without further consultation with the main parties
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on a) the character
   and appearance of the area; and b) the living conditions of the occupiers of Number
   10 Chapel Street North (No.10) and the occupiers of Numbers 11 (No.11) and 16
   (No.16) George’s Street, with specific regard to outlook and privacy.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
5. The appeal site comprises a small parcel of land within a former residential care
   facility, now vacant. It includes land that appears to have formed part of the
   curtilage of the adjoining semi-detached bungalow (No.16), together with an area of
   hardstanding associated with a turning head serving the former care facility. A large
   static caravan currently occupies the site. Although the buildings within the former
   care facility vary in size and scale, they share a number of common architectural
   characteristics, including materials, roof forms and the positioning of principal
   entrances. They are generally set within substantial areas of soft landscaping and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009852


     set back from site boundaries. Collectively, these features create a cohesive
     development with an open and spacious character that distinguishes it from some
     of the more closely spaced residential development nearby. The appeal site forms
     part of this open setting and contributes positively to that character.
6. The proposed dwelling would occupy much of the available plot width and would be
   positioned close to the boundaries with neighbouring dwellings. As a result, the
   existing visual separation between buildings would be significantly reduced. Due to
   the elevated position of the site, the dwelling would be prominent in views from
   George’s Street and Chapel Street North. Its siting, scale and massing, including its
   projection forward of the established building line of the former care facility, would
   result in a conspicuous form of development that would appear cramped and overly
   intensive. It would appear as an isolated dwelling inserted into a residual piece of
   land, rather than reflecting the spacious pattern of development that characterises
   the site, disrupting the established rhythm of the existing development.
7. Whilst there is some variation in architectural style within the surrounding area, the
   proposed dwelling would take little reference from the development with which it
   would be most closely associated. Its steep front gabled form and two-storey scale
   would sit uncomfortably alongside both No.16 and the otherwise cohesive
   architectural character of the former care facility, further reinforcing its incongruous
   appearance. The inclusion of numerous rooflights would add to this discordance,
   introducing features uncharacteristic of the area.
8. Consequently, the proposal would unacceptably harm the character and
   appearance of the area, contrary to Policy BT1 of the Calderdale Local Plan
   2018/19 – 2032/33, 2023 (LP) which, amongst other things, requires development
   to respect or enhance the character and appearance of existing buildings and their
   surroundings, having regard to local context and distinctiveness.
Living Conditions
9. The proposed dwelling would substantially intensify built development along the
   shared boundaries with Nos.10, 11 and 16. Owing to its height, scale, proximity to
   these boundaries and the elevated position of the appeal site, it would appear
   unduly dominant and overbearing when viewed from the rear garden of No.11 and
   from the principal ground-floor windows of No.10. As a result, it would unacceptably
   diminish the openness and quality of the outlook currently enjoyed by the occupiers
   of these properties.
10. Whilst no boundary treatment is shown on the southern and northeastern
    boundaries, it is reasonable to expect that some form of fencing may be erected to
    secure privacy and define the proposed residential curtilage. Such fencing could
    reduce the amount of daylight received by the side window of No. 10. However, no
    details of boundary treatment form part of the appeal proposal and there is
    insufficient evidence before me to conclude that fencing of a particular height,
    design or location would be provided. As such, any potential effect on daylight
    arising from future boundary treatment is speculative. Having regard to the
    separation distances and differences in ground levels, I am satisfied that the
    proposal would not result in a significant loss of privacy to the rear garden of No.10.
11. The submitted plans indicate that the proposed kitchen/diner room window would
    directly face the kitchen/dining room window of No.16 at close proximity. This would
    result in significant mutual overlooking and an unacceptable loss of privacy for both

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009852


     the occupiers of No.16 and future occupiers of the dwelling. In addition, the side
     bathroom window of No.16 would open onto and overlook the narrow passage
     between the buildings, giving rise to actual and perceived overlooking. This
     relationship would reinforce the cramped nature of the development and would fail
     to provide satisfactory living conditions for the occupiers of No.16 or the proposed
     dwelling.
12. The appeal proposals would therefore conflict with Policy BT2 of the LP which,
    amongst other things, seeks to ensure development does not result in a
    significantly adverse impact on the privacy and private amenity space of adjacent
    or prospective residents. Details of Appendix 2 of the LP have not been provided.
Other Matters
13. Whilst consistency in decision-making is an important consideration, it does not
    require different sites and proposals to be treated as though they are identical.
    No.11 was approved in the context of a larger and less constrained plot, with
    different site characteristics and relationships to neighbouring properties. Moreover,
    the concerns I have identified in respect of the appeal scheme arise not only from
    its architectural style, but from its siting, form, scale and resultant effects on the
    character and appearance of the area and living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers. The proposed swift and bat boxes would provide a small biodiversity
    benefit. However, such measures would be a very small part of the development as
    a whole and unrelated to harms it would cause against the main issues.
Planning Balance, Conclusion and Recommendation
14. Policy S4 of the Framework indicates that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
15. The proposal would deliver one additional dwelling in an undersupply situation for
    housing in the district. This would be modest and as such would attract moderate
    weight. Against this, the proposal would cause significant harm to the character and
    appearance of the area and create unacceptable living conditions for neighbouring
    occupiers. These adverse effects would conflict with Policies DP3, L2 and P3 and
    the Framework's objective of securing well-designed and healthy places. Given the
    lasting nature of the harms identified, I would afford them substantial weight.
16. The limited benefits arising from the provision of a single dwelling would be
    substantially outweighed by these adverse effects. Accordingly, the proposal fails to
    satisfy Policy S4 and the presumption in favour of sustainable development does
    not indicate that planning permission should be granted.
17. There are therefore no material considerations, including the approach of the
    Framework, that would attract sufficient weight to indicate a decision other than in
    accordance with the development plan with which the appeal scheme would conflict
    owing to my findings on the main issues. It is for these reasons that I recommend
    the appeal is dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009852


Inspector’s Decision
18. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
