Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009990
Land to the South of Park Farm, Whalley, Wiswell BB7 9LB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant permission is principle.
•   The appeal is made by Mr David Warbrick against the decision of Ribble Valley Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 3/2026/0190.
•   The development proposed is described as “permission in principle for 1 self-build dwelling.”

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. I have taken the site address from the appeal form as it is more accurate than the
   application form. Permission in principle is an alternative way of obtaining
   permission for housing, it has two stages. The first establishes the principle of
   development, the second is where the detailed proposal is assessed. This appeal
   relates to the first stage where the scope of consideration is limited to location, land
   use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are considered as
   part of a subsequent detailed application if permission in principle is granted. I have
   determined the appeal and treated the evidence provided accordingly.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
   regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. Key Statement DS1 of the Ribble Valley Core Strategy 2014 (CS) outlines the
   spatial strategy for new housing developments and directs them first to the strategic
   sites, Principal and Tier 1 settlements. This is to promote sustainable patterns of
   new development and reduce the need to travel by focussing it where it has the
   services readily available on which future occupiers would rely day to day. This is
   reinforced by CS Policy DMG2. Between it and CS Policy DMH3, specific criteria
   are set out for development and the limitation thereof outside of these areas and in
   the countryside, where the appeal site is. The scheme would not meet any of the
   exceptions for new development therein.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009990


6. Policies DMI2 and DMG3 of the CS require new development to be located to
   minimise the need to travel, with good access by foot and cycle and convenient
   links to public transport. Access to the site is via the dual carriageway, which has
   no formal footpaths and is subject to a 70 mph speed limit. The site is not well-
   related to nearby settlements, services, or public transport. Accessing Clitheroe
   Golf Club bus stop would require walking alongside and crossing the dual
   carriageway, which would not be safe for all users. Similarly, the Screwfix and
   Barrow Trade Park, Barrow Centre and Asda Express Petrol Station would require
   travelling along the bypass. Other facilities are inaccessible on foot due to the
   absence of footpaths. Therefore, accessing these facilities on foot would not
   provide safe or attractive alternatives to the private car, and future occupiers would
   be heavily reliant on private motor vehicles to meet their day-to-day needs. This is
   the least sustainable travel option.
7. DMG2 also considers that open countryside development will be required to be in
   keeping with the character of the landscape and to acknowledge the special
   qualities of the area by virtue of its size, design, use of materials, landscaping and
   siting.
8. The extent to which the dwelling would impact the countryside in terms of its design
   cannot be fully assessed, as the plans submitted are only indicative and this would
   be a matter for the technical details stage. However, an access would need to be
   formed linking the current agricultural barn to the existing access, which would
   create an semi urbanising effect on the currently open, agricultural fields and would
   have a degree of impact on the character of the area. The proposal would introduce
   a domestic building through the creation of a new access, driveway, garden and
   other features of the dwelling, resulting in an urbanising effect on the surrounding
   area. This would be at odds with the existing agricultural structure, which reflects
   the rural character of the countryside and positive aspects of the character of the
   otherwise natural, high quality and open undisturbed countryside environment.
9. With this and the above in mind, the appeal site would not be suitable for residential
   development with specific regard to those matters within the scope of a scheme for
   permission in principle. It would therefore be contrary to Policies DMI2, DMG1,
   DMG2, DMG3 and DMH3 of the CS. Amongst other things, these require
   development to be located so that the need to travel is minimised, and that it
   incorporates good access by foot and cycle so that convenient links to public
   transport reduce the need to travel by car, and that where there is the potential to
   impact the natural environment, this is avoided.
Other Matters
10. The amount of one additional dwelling would not have adverse impacts upon the
    existing access infrastructure as the Highway Authority noted. However, this would
    be a lack of harm and not make up for the scheme’s shortcomings in regard to the
    main issue.
11. I have not been provided with sufficient information to confirm that the barn on the
    appeal site that is proposed to be demolished as part of the proposal would satisfy
    the requirements of the prior approval process that it would have to go through to
    be able to be a dwelling. A submission has yet to be made. If it were to be a
    dwelling, there is a possibility it could attract and generate a similar number of



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009990


     journeys to the appeal scheme. However, and for the above reasons, I am unable
     to apportion it any more than limited weight as a fallback position.
12. Previous permission granted by the Council (3/2024/0981 and 3/2025/0895) relate
    to conversions of existing agricultural buildings, whereas the appeal proposal
    before me now would result in the existing structure being demolished and a new
    dwelling in its place. Therefore, they are not directly comparable to the appeal
    proposal. In any case, I have not been provided with any further information about
    these developments to fully assess them.
13. Whilst I have only been provided with the appeal decision relating to 6002485, the
    contents of the Inspector’s decision inform me that it was an outline proposal for up
    to 300 dwellings, and therefore I do not consider it sufficiently comparable to either
    the merits or the non strategic nature of the appeal before me now. Infill
    development is usually understood to be a small gap within groups of dwellings. In
    contrast, the site sits in a field, separate from the nearby residential plot and
    outbuildings. Therefore, it could not reasonably be described as infill.
Planning Balance
14. Policy S5 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) sets out
    certain types of development that might, in principle, be approved outside of
    settlements, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    in the Framework.
15. Relevant to the proposals, this includes development which would address an
    evidenced unmet need and in situations where the Council is unable to
    demonstrate the required supply of housing sites. Be this as it may, S5 also
    requires said development to be physically well related to a settlement. Barrow is
    not a significant distance to the south of the appeal site, but given my findings on its
    accessibility in regard thereto, I would not consider it to be physically well related.
    Even if I were to consider the weight given to new housing to meet an evidenced
    need (Policies HO1 and HO7) in the case of the scheme being for a self build
    proposal, I have no mechanism before me to ensure that would be the case.
16. The proposed development would give rise to the harms I have set out above.
    These would not only conflict with Policy S5 of the Framework, but also those
    geared around reducing the need to travel and the principles (whilst accepting that
    design is not fixed) of development responding appropriately to its context in Policy
    DP3. I would ascribe significant weight to both the harms I have found given their
    longevity and scope, as well as the associated development plan and Framework
    conflict. There would be benefits to the proposals, but these would be limited by
    the scope and scale of the scheme. Including the contribution to the supply of
    homes for the Council which would be very limited in the grand scheme. I would
    give them, collectively, limited weight.
17. As such, the benefits of granting planning permission for the appeal scheme would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009990


Conclusion and Recommendation
18. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development
    plan, and material considerations do not indicate a decision other than in
    accordance with this. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
19. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
