 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 19 August 2026
 by Ian McHugh DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 10 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009814
 18 St Ronan’s Road, Sheffield, S7 1DX
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Ramzan Idris against the decision of Sheffield City Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00230/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of a two-storey side extension and single storey rear
      extension.

Procedural Matter
1. On 17 August 2026, the Government published the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026 (NPPF). It does not contain any provisions that raise material
   issues in respect of this appeal and I have not found it necessary to seek
   comments from the main parties. Where relevant, I have made reference to the
   2026 version in my reasoning below.
Decision

2. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   streetscene.
Reasons
4. The appeal dwelling is a two-storey detached property, which is situated within a
   densely developed area of the city. Terraced houses are predominant on the side
   of the road opposite the appeal property, but on the appeal side, gaps between the
   houses, particularly at first floor level are one of the main characteristics. These
   gaps provide some visual and spatial relief to the streetscene and are a positive
   feature of the area.
5. The proposal is to construct a two-storey side extension with a single-storey
   element at the rear. It would provide additional living, storage, shower and utility
   areas on the ground floor with two bedrooms and an en-suite at first floor level.
6. The Council considers that the loss of the gap and visual separation between the
   appeal dwelling and the neighbouring property would be out of character and
   harmful to the appearance of the area. It cites a conflict with Policy CS74 of the
   Council’s Core Strategy (CS) and with Policies H14 and BE5 of the adopted Unitary
   Development Plan (UDP). Reference is also made by the Council to a conflict with

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009814


     paragraph 135 of the previous version of the NPPF. As stated above, this has now
     been superseded by the 2026 Framework.
7. Policy CS 74 of the CS requires (amongst other things) that the design of new
   development is of a high quality and that it reflects the townscape and character of
   the area. Policies H14 and BE5 of the UDP contain similar provisions. In addition,
   Policy DP3 of the NPPF 2026 states that development proposals should respond to
   their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
8. The Council also refers to its Supplementary Planning Guidance – Designing
   House Extensions, which provides detailed advice on extending residential
   properties. This also seeks to ensure that extensions are compatible with the
   character and built form of the area.
9. Although a small gap would be retained between the proposed extension and the
   neighbouring dwelling, the space would effectively be infilled and a distinctive and
   positive feature of the streetscene would be lost. I consider that the proposal would
   be unacceptably harmful to the character and appearance of the streetscene and it
   would conflict with the provisions of the Development Plan and the NPPF, as
   referred to above.
10. In reaching my decision, I have had regard to other extensions along St Ronan’s
    Road, including the development at number 32. However, I do not consider that
    other extensions should create a precedent for the appeal proposal, due to the
    harm that would result.
Conditions
11. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.



Ian McHugh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
