Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by L Gardner MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009905
271 The Drive, Cranbrook, Ilford, Redbridge IG1 3PN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Tatla against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Redbridge.
•    The application Ref is 3511/25.
•    The development proposed is erection of single storey ground floor rear extension and change of
     use of the property to a C4 HMO for 6 people.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of single
       storey ground floor rear extension and change of use of the property to a C4 HMO
       for 6 people at 271 The Drive, Cranbrook, Ilford, Redbridge IG1 3PN in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 3511/25, subject to the
       conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Despite the description of development on the Council’s decision notice referring
       to the intended change of use to a small HMO (house in multiple occupation) for
       up to 6 people, the associated reasons for refusal refer in part to three self-
       contained units. The officer report explains that the basis for this assessment was
       the submitted plans which labelled the bedrooms as ‘units’, and for three of them,
       included kitchen areas.
3.     The appellant has confirmed that the intention of the proposal was always for a
       small HMO for 6 people, as outlined in the application form, and throughout the
       planning statement. The plans which have been submitted to accompany the
       appeal have removed the indicated kitchen areas within individual bedrooms and
       changed the annotations from units to bedrooms.
4.     Whilst an appeal process is not the correct avenue to evolve a scheme, the plans
       before me depict an accurate representation of the proposed development,
       providing clarification in line with the description of development and supporting
       statement. The plans have therefore not amended the scheme upon which the
       Council made its decision. The bedrooms would remain the same size as originally
       proposed, the amendments relating purely to internal annotations. I am satisfied
       that they can be considered through the appeal process.
5.     During the course of the appeal a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009905


       with an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the
       Framework in my decision.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the supply of family housing in the borough;
           •    whether the proposal would provide adequate living conditions for future
                occupiers, with particular regard to internal space; and,
           •    whether the proposal would make adequate provision for any additional
                need for mitigation for any impact to the Epping Forest Special Area of
                Conservation arising from the proposal.
Reasons
Family housing
7.     Policy LP5 of the Redbridge Local Plan (2018) (the Local Plan) sets out that the
       Council will aim to secure homes across a range of dwelling sizes and tenures.
       The policy goes on to set a focus on the provision of larger family homes (three
       bedrooms or more), in line with the Council’s Local Housing Needs Assessment
       (updated 2023), which demonstrated that the need for homes of over three
       bedrooms, represented 68% of the overall need.
8.     The appeal proposal would represent the loss of an existing four-bedroom
       dwellinghouse, representing a loss to housing of a suitable size for family
       accommodation. However, the Council acknowledge that in the supporting text for
       Policy LP5 of the Local Plan, it is recognised as being important that the borough’s
       housing stock provides for a wide range of housing needs and offers choice.
9.     My attention has also been drawn to the London Plan (2021) (the LP), specifically
       Policy H9 which explicitly recognises that HMOs are an important part of London’s
       housing offer, reducing pressure on other elements of the housing stock. Indeed,
       the Council accept that an HMO would provide a different housing type giving
       variety for residents of the borough.
10. The evidence before me does not suggest that HMOs are particularly prevalent
    along The Drive. The appellant has presented, a point which the Council has not
    disputed, that even taking account of the proposal, the vast majority of properties
    (over 90%) along approximately half of the length of The Drive, would remain in
    use as single dwellinghouses. Thus, whilst the proposal would lead to the loss of a
    dwelling house suitable for family accommodation, the overall effect on the
    Council’s supply of family housing in this part of the borough would be marginal.
11. In the context of the overall intentions of Policy LP5 of the Local Plan, to provide a
    range of homes that will lead to the creation of mixed, inclusive and sustainable
    communities, the change of use to a small HMO in this location would not be
    contrary to the policy when read as a whole. I also find no specific conflict with
    Policy HO7 of the Framework in this respect which refers to meeting the needs of
    the community, including homes needed for various different groups.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009905


12. I have also identified no specific conflict with Policy LP26 in relation to this main
    issue, which seeks to promote high quality design, including in the context of the
    way an area functions.
Living conditions
13. The Council’s reason for refusal in relation to this main issue relates to its
    assessment of three self-contained units due to the inclusion of kitchen areas on
    the original plans. However, as above, I find this interpretation to be contrary to the
    intentions of the original application form and supporting statement. I have
    assessed the appeal proposal as being for a small HMO, in line with the intentions
    of the description of the development.
14. Each of the bedrooms would exceed the minimum 7.5m² required for a single
    bedroom. The Council’s officer report accepts that the communal facilities
    proposed to serve the HMO would comply with the relevant standards for 6
    people. I see no reason to take a different judgement on this matter.
15. Based on the evidence before me, the proposal would therefore provide adequate
    living conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to internal space. I
    have therefore identified no specific conflict with Policy LP29 of the Local Plan or
    Policy D6 of the LP, both of which seek in part for housing developments to
    provide adequately sized rooms, with comfortable and functional layouts.
Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation
16. Policy LP39 of the Local Plan seeks to protect and enhance the borough’s natural
    environment, including by not permitting development which would adversely
    affect the integrity of Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC).
17. The appeal site lies within the Epping Forest SAC Zone of Influence. The Council
    outlines that the SAC’s conservation objectives are to achieve a favourable
    conservation status of the qualifying features. It is also acknowledged that new
    dwellings are likely to result in increased recreational visits to the SAC, which in
    turn could lead to recreational disturbance such as damage to vegetation and
    soils.
18. However, the proposal would not add in numerical terms to the quantum of the
    housing stock, as it would not result in the creation of a new dwelling. On this
    basis, I find that there would be no likely significant effect on the qualifying features
    of the SAC. In line with the approach taken by the Council on a similar form of
    development1, it is not reasonable or necessary for the proposal to provide a
    financial contribution towards mitigation in relation to the Epping Forest SAC. I
    have therefore identified no conflict with Policy LP39 of the Local Plan.
Other Matters
19. Representation has been received objecting to the proposal partially on the basis
    that a HMO in this location would represent an over-intensification of use which
    would be out of keeping with the character of the area, and cause harm to the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers through noise and disturbance.


1
  Appendix B of the Appellant’s statement, relating to an application for a small HMO for up to 6 people at 42 Blackbush Avenue,
reference 2479/25


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6009905


20. The creation of a small HMO is likely to generate similar occupation to that which
    could be achieved within a four-bedroom dwelling. I therefore do not find that the
    use would be perceivable to neighbouring occupiers or have a material impact on
    their living conditions.
21. In respect to refuse, the application was accompanied by a Waste Management
    Plan, the compliance of which could be subject to condition. There is little in the
    evidence before me to suggest that there would be insufficient space within the
    appeal site to deal appropriately with refuse generated from the proposal.
22. Whilst I appreciate the concerns relating to the proposal setting a precedent for
    similar forms of development, any future applications would remain to be assessed
    on their own merits.
23. Concern has been raised that the area suffers from high levels of parking demand
    and that any additional demand would exacerbate congestion and reduce
    available parking for existing residents. The Council is satisfied that the use would
    be appropriately served by one car parking space, noting that the site is within
    walking distance to Redbridge underground station. I see no reason to disagree
    that the level of parking provision would be sufficient to serve the proposed use.
Conditions
24. I have considered the conditions put forward by the Council, where necessary I
    have amended the wording in the interests of effectiveness and precision.
25. In the interests of certainty and clarity, I have imposed the standard conditions
    relating to the commencement of development as well as the approved plans and
    documents. It is also necessary to secure the cycle parking spaces proposed as
    part of the development in the interests of sustainable travel.
26. I have imposed a condition seeking an updated management plan, in the interests
    of the living conditions of both future occupiers and existing neighbouring
    occupiers.
27. In line with the comments of the Highway Authority, a condition is suggested
    requiring the reinstatement of a dropped kerb at the highway edge, to limit the off
    street parking to space for one vehicle (and in turn ensure that space remains for
    refuse provision and pedestrian passage to the front door). I find that this condition
    is reasonable and necessary to make the development acceptable in the interests
    of visual amenity and pedestrian safety.
28. The Council has suggested a condition limiting the development to a maximum of
    6 occupants and a separate condition seeking to prevent the conversion of
    communal spaces into additional bedrooms. The accessibility of the communal
    spaces could be a matter dealt with through the wider management plan.
29. It is implicit through the description of development that the proposal is for 6
    bedrooms. Whilst I note the intentions of controlling the occupancy, it would not be
    realistically enforceable to prevent occupants from moving partners in for example.
    Moreover, the creation of additional bedrooms through the conversion of
    communal spaces would be contrary to the description of development and would
    therefore require the submission of a separate application. On this basis, I am not
    satisfied that these two suggested planning conditions would be reasonable or
    necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009905


Conclusion
30. The proposed development accords with the development plan when read as a
    whole, and there are no material considerations which indicate a decision should
    be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that the appeal
    should be allowed, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009905


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


 1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
         the date of this decision.
 2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
         drawing nos Site Location Plan; A.1 Rev C; A.7 Rev C; A.8, Rev D; A.9 Rev D;
         A.10; A.11 Rev B; A.13; A.15 Rev A; and documents titled Fire Strategy &
         Reasonable Exemption Statement and Waste Management Plan.
 3)      Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, cycle storage
         facilities shall either be implemented and made available for use in accordance
         with the details shown on the approved plan A.1 Rev C or shall be implemented
         and made available for use in full accordance with alternative cycle storage
         details which shall have previously been submitted to and approved in writing by
         the local planning authority. In either eventuality the approved cycle storage
         facilities shall be maintained thereafter for the lifetime of the development.
 4)      Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, a HMO
         Management Plan which contains detailed steps showing a process of
         reasonable measures to prevent anti-social behaviour, keep records about anti-
         social behaviour and prevent off-street parking shall be submitted to and
         approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The HMO Plan as approved
         shall then be implemented at the site prior to first use of the site as a C4 small
         HMO and shall be adhered to at the site thereafter in accordance with the
         approved Plan for the life of the development.
 5)      Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, a scheme for the
         reinstatement to the height of the adjacent pavement of the dropped kerb which
         exists directly in front of the pedestrian access shall be submitted to and
         approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved scheme shall
         thereafter be implemented in full accordance with the approved details prior to
         the development hereby approved being brought into use.


END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
