Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by H Whitfield BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009412
5 Chatterton Road, Bromley BR2 9QW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against
     a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and
     Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Leigh Lawson (Danlaw Properties Ltd) against the decision of the Council of
     the London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 26/01029/NOT.
•    The development proposed is change of use of an existing commercial storage room into residential
     rooms for the existing adjoining flat 5A Chatterton Road.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issues
2.     Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning
       (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended (the GPDO) set
       out that the change of use of a building and any land within its curtilage from a use
       falling within Class E (commercial, business and service) of Schedule 2 to the Use
       Classes Order to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of Schedule 1 to that
       Order, is permitted development, subject to certain limitations and conditions.
3.     Paragraph MA.1 sets out a list of criteria that developments must comply with in order
       to be eligible for consideration under this Class. The conditions at paragraph MA.2
       then set out that before beginning development under Class MA, the developer must
       apply to the local planning authority (LPA) for a determination as to whether the prior
       approval of the authority will be required in relation to several matters.
4.     The Council has not identified any harm in relation to the matters requiring prior
       approval listed under paragraph M.A.2.(2). However, the application was refused by
       the Council principally on the grounds that the scheme seeks to change the use of an
       existing side extension to residential use to enlarge an existing residential unit, which
       the Council considers falls outside the scope of Class MA, which seeks to create new
       self-contained residential units.
5.     Additionally, in the event that it can be considered under Class MA, the Council also
       contends that a residential use has commenced within the side extension prior to the
       application for prior approval, contrary to paragraph MA.2.(2) of Class MA, and that
       the appellant has failed to demonstrate that the use of the appeal building fell within
       those specified by sub-paragraph MA.1.(2) for a continuous period of at least 2 years
       prior to the date of the application for prior approval, contrary to paragraph
       MA.1.(1)(b).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009412


6.       Moreover, in the event that the side extension was to be considered as an
         independent dwellinghouse, the Council contends it would fail to provide adequate
         internal floor area, contrary to sub-paragraph (9A) of Article 3 of the GPDO.
7.       Based on the above, the main issues in this appeal are therefore:
        •       whether the appeal scheme falls within the scope of permitted development
                rights under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the GPDO; and
        •       if it does, whether prior approval should be granted, having regard to the matters
                listed under paragraph M.A.2.(2).
Reasons
8.       The appeal relates to a two-storey end of terrace property located on the corner of
         Chatterton Road and Addison Road, within a commercial parade and predominately
         mixed use area. The appeal building is understood to have a commercial unit at
         ground floor level within the front portion of the building, with a residential unit behind
         it and at first floor. A single-storey extension1 has recently been constructed to the
         side of the building as an extension to the existing commercial unit, and it is this
         portion of the building to which this appeal specifically relates.
9.       The proposed layout plan shows the side extension would comprise an open plan
         kitchen/lounge/dining area with a separate bedroom and bathroom. No internal
         connectivity is shown between this side extension and the adjoining building.
         Nevertheless, the description of development on the application form sets out the
         appeal scheme seeks to change the use of the existing commercial storage room (i.e.
         the single-storey side extension) into residential rooms for the existing adjoining flat,
         5A Chatterton Road.
10. The appellant’s evidence refers specifically to the incorporation of this space into the
    adjoining residential flat in order to improve the living accommodation and provide
    additional residential floor space for No 5A. The application form also states that there
    would be no net increase in the number of dwellinghouses. Accordingly, the Council
    determined the application on the basis that the scheme sought to enlarge or provide
    additional accommodation for the existing residential unit rather than to create a new
    dwelling. Based on the appellant’s evidence, which makes no reference to the
    scheme proposing the creation of an independent dwellinghouse, I see no reason to
    come to an alternative conclusion on this matter and have therefore determined the
    appeal on the same basis.
11. The primary point is therefore whether or not Class MA of the GPDO can grant prior
    approval for the enlargement of an existing dwellinghouse.
12. As set out above, Class MA allows for the change of use of a building, together with
    any land within its curtilage, from a use within Class E (commercial, business and
    service) to a use within Class C3 (dwellinghouses). The courts have held that the term
    dwellinghouse may be interpreted as either singular or plural. Consequently, applying
    the natural and ordinary meaning of the wording in the legislation, it follows that Class
    MA of the GPDO permits a change of use to one or more dwellinghouses, for which
    there is no prescribed maximum number.



1
    Council Ref. 24/03394/FULL1


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6009412


13. The Council has directed me to an appeal decision2 in which a very similar matter was
    considered. In this case the Inspector explained that the explanatory note3 to the 2021
    amendment to the GPDO sets out that the purpose of introducing Class MA, alongside
    other amendments to the GPDO, was to support more flexible and mixed-use high
    streets, assist economic recovery following the Covid-19 pandemic, and facilitate the
    delivery of additional homes more easily. The Inspector noted that the explanatory
    note repeatedly referred to the objective of delivering additional homes and makes no
    reference to the creation of new permitted development rights for extensions or
    alterations to existing dwellings. Accordingly, the Inspector concluded that had it been
    intended that Class MA should apply to alterations or extensions of an existing
    dwellinghouse, or to the provision of ancillary residential accommodation, this would
    have been expressly provided for in the legislation, and no such wording appears
    within Class MA.
14. On this basis the Inspector found that the natural and ordinary meaning of the word
    dwellinghouse refers to a dwelling or dwellings in their own right and not to an
    extended part of an existing dwelling, a conclusion they stated was reinforced by
    paragraph W.(2)(bc) of the GPDO, which requires prior approval submissions under
    this Class to indicate the total floor space of each dwellinghouse created. On this basis
    the Inspector concluded that Class MA relates only to the creation of new
    dwellinghouses and not to the extension or alteration of an existing dwellinghouse.
15. When considering the application which is the subject of this appeal, the Council
    similarly concluded that as the scheme is explicitly described as providing additional
    residential accommodation for the existing flat, with no increase in the number of
    dwellings, it would not constitute a change of use to a new Class C3 dwellinghouse
    and therefore would not comply with the provisions or intended scope of Class MA of
    the GPDO. Based on the evidence before me, I see no reason to come to an
    alternative conclusion in this respect. The appellant has not sought to dispute the
    conclusions of the Council or the previous Inspector either.
16. Instead, their case relies upon the advice from the Council’s Enforcement Officers to
    submit a retrospective planning application to regularise the change of use and the
    benefits of the scheme. However, the evidence before me indicates the Council
    advised the appellant to submit a retrospective planning application to resolve the
    alleged breach of planning control which would be subject to consideration against the
    Council’s development plan on its own merits. There is no substantive evidence before
    me which indicates the Council advised the appellant to apply for a determination as to
    whether the prior approval of the LPA would be required under Class MA, which the
    appellant accepts is a different application process. However, even if it had, this would
    not overcome the fact that the scheme does not propose the creation of a new
    dwellinghouse, but rather the change of use of an existing extension to enlarge an
    existing residential unit.
17. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal scheme would not fall
    within the scope of the permitted development rights under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class
    MA of the GPDO. Accordingly, prior approval cannot be granted.
18. As a result, it is not necessary or appropriate for me to consider the other reasons that
    the Council gave for refusing the application relating to whether a residential use had

2
 Appeal Ref. APP/U5360/W/23/3328874 dated 26th April 2024
3
 Explanatory Memorandum to the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) (Amendment) Order
2021 – 2021 No.428


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
Appeal Decision 6009412


     already commenced within the side extension prior to the application for prior
     approval, or whether the use of the appeal building has fallen within those specified by
     sub-paragraph MA.1.(2) for a continuous period of at least 2 years prior to the date of
     the application for prior approval. Nor is it necessary for me to consider whether the
     scheme would meet the requirements of sub-paragraph (9A) of Article 3 of the GPDO
     in relation to internal floor area or any other matters raised by interested parties. This
     is because even if I were to find the proposal to be acceptable in these regards, it
     could not alter my overall conclusion that the scheme would not be permitted
     development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the GPDO.
Other Matters
19. I note the Council has not identified any harm in respect of the matters requiring prior
    approval listed under paragraph M.A.2.(2). The appellant has also referred to various
    benefits they consider would flow from the appeal scheme. Nevertheless, the
    absence of any identified harm does not overcome the fact that the scheme would not
    fall within the scope of development permitted under Class MA of the GPDO. Nor
    would any associated social, economic or environmental benefits alter my
    conclusions above, having regard to the scope of what can be considered in
    applications made under this Class.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above, I conclude the appeal should be dismissed.

H Whitfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
