Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009776
Pavement outside 1b Shepherds Bush Road, London W6 7NA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Nathan Still against the Council of the London Borough of Hammersmith and
     Fulham.
•    The application Ref is 2025/03050/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the installation of a multifunctional Hub unit consisting of a free-
     standing structure featuring an integrated digital advertisement display screen on one side and
     emergency functionality including the provision of a defibrillator available for public use on the other
     side.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for the installation of a
       multifunctional Hub unit consisting of a free-standing structure featuring an
       integrated digital advertisement display screen on one side and emergency
       functionality including the provision of a defibrillator available for public use on the
       other side is refused.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Alongside the non-determination of the planning application, which is the subject of
       this appeal, I understand that a concurrent application for express consent to
       display an advertisement on the integrated screen on the proposed hub has also
       not been determined as of the date of this decision. However, the evidence before
       me indicates that an appeal has not been lodged against that application. While
       the description of development in the banner heading above references an
       integrated advertisement display screen, for the avoidance of doubt I have not
       assessed the proposal on the basis of advertisements being displayed, only that
       the screen would form part of the hub.
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published by the Government. This is a material consideration in
       the decision-making process from the day of publication. As the changes do not
       affect the main issues in this decision, it was not necessary to offer the main
       parties an opportunity to submit further information regarding the implications for
       this appeal.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues in this appeal are the effects of the proposal on the character and
       appearance of the area, including the setting of a designated heritage asset, and
       on highway safety.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009776


Reasons
Character and Appearance/Heritage Assets
5.       The appeal site is located on the footpath lining the east side of Shepherds Bush
         Road adjacent commercial units. The footpath currently includes trees, cycle racks
         and signage. The proposal would see the installation of a multimedia street hub
         and would retain a distance of 0.6 metres (m) from the road and 4.9m to the
         building line to the east.
6.       The site is within the Shepherd’s Bush Conservation Area (CA). I have therefore
         had regard to section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
         Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) which requires the decision maker to pay special
         attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance
         of that area. There is nothing before me to establish the significance of the CA as
         required by policy HE5 of the Framework.
7.       From my own observations, the significance of the CA is derived from the
         orientation around Shepherd’s Bush Green, which is an area of open green space
         within a busy and densely developed locale to which built form is orientated.
         Furthermore, the quality of built form within the CA, particularly to the northern side
         of the green along Uxbridge Road, which includes long terraces of 3 storeys with
         commercial properties at street level and brick facades above which feature fine
         detailing.
8.       The appeal site is also located adjacent two grade II listed buildings; Shepherds
         Bush Empire1 and The Grampians2. I must also therefore have regard to Section
         66(1) of the Act to have special regard to the desirability of preserving the
         buildings or their settings or any features of special architectural or historic interest
         which they possess.
9.       Shepherds Bush Empire is evidently a theatre built in 1903 by Frank Matcham in
         the Arts and Crafts style. Its special interest and significance is derived from its
         historic and architectural interests. This includes its cultural significance at the turn
         of the century, its distinctive round tower to the left hand side and retained
         detailing such as the terracotta framed windows and roughcast gabled bay.
10. The Grampians is located to the south of the appeal site and was constructed in
    the 1930s. It is of starkly imposing form and has red brick facing walls, stone
    dressings and metal casement windows. The ground level includes integrated
    shop units which are glazed in glass bricks. Its special interest and significance is
    therefore also derived from historic and architectural interests. This includes being
    a surviving example of high rise, high density housing of the interwar period, and
    its striking art deco style of its facing elevation, particularly the curved frontages of
    the shops and use of metal balconies and glazing bars across the building.
11. I am also informed of two adjacent Buildings of Merit (BoM) as identified in the
    Conservation Area Character Profile (March 2000); Granville Mansions, which is
    directly adjacent the appeal site, and a former Baptist Church which is located to
    the south of the appeal site between the Grampians and Granville Mansions. I
    have therefore had regard to policy HE7 of the Framework which advises that
    where a development proposal would harm the significance of a non-designated
1
    List Entry Number: 1358593
2
    List Entry Number: 1390753


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6009776


       heritage asset, this should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a
       balanced judgement made having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the
       significance of the asset.
12. The church is evidently the third such building on the site and is a simple gabled
    brick structure with stone quoins and window surrounds and a tiled roof. Its
    significance is thereby drawn from its history which shows the evolution of the site
    to meet the changing demographics of the area and their worshipping needs and
    its architectural interests, such as the brick tower, stone detailing and spire.
13. Granville Mansions dates from 1895 and is of 5-storey scale. Its significance is
    drawn from its historic and architectural interests including its age, surviving
    example of housing of the time and its retained detailing such as the string courses
    and decorative brick panels above windows. Its historic connection to the area
    means its setting makes a significant contribution to its significance as a BoM.
14. The proposed hub would be of 2.64 metres (m) height, 1.33m width and 0.3m
    depth with a 0.6m projecting canopy. It would seemingly be of dark grey or black
    colouration and include a touch screen to the apparent front facing side and a
    large screen to the rear, albeit there is no consent at present to display
    advertisements on the screen. The hub would appear somewhat monolithic in its
    form and given its size would be a significant and prominent addition to a street
    scene which is generally open and includes sparse furniture. This loss of space
    with an overtly modern design and incongruous appearance, particularly with the
    adjacent historic buildings, would harm the character and appearance of the local
    area. As a result of this harm, it stands to reason that it would also harm the
    significance of the CA and the Granville Mansions non-designated heritage asset.
15. However, the location of the appeal site is some distance from the Shepherds
    Bush Empire building, while the church and The Grampians are located at more
    acute angles from the proposed location of the hub. There is little visual interaction
    or association between the appeal site and any of these buildings, while the
    church already has a bus stop outside with integrated advertisement screens. As
    such, I do not consider the appeal site to be within the setting of either listed
    building or the church and would therefore not affect their respective special
    interests or significance.
16. Regardless, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the area
    and the CA, as well as the setting of the Granville Mansions as a non-designated
    heritage asset. This would conflict with policies DC1, DC8, and DC10 of the
    Hammersmith and Fulham Local Plan (adopted February 2018) (HFLP) or D8 of
    the London Plan (TLP) (adopted March 2021). Among other things, these seek to
    ensure that the siting and design of telecommunications apparatus should
    minimise impacts upon the character and appearance of the surrounding areas
    and that the significance of the borough’s historic environment is preserved by
    protecting, restoring and enhancing its heritage assets.
17. The Council has also provided policy DC9 of the HFLP and suggested that the
    proposal also be refused against this policy. However, this relates to
    advertisements and given the express consent application is not before me, I have
    disregarded this policy.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009776


Highway Safety
18. The hub would be positioned close to the edge of the footpath along Shepherds
    Bush Road. I note that the Council advises there would be adequate remaining
    clearance between the hub and the edge of the adjacent buildings to allow
    convenient pedestrian flow.
19. With regards to the useability of the hub for wheelchair users, guidance seeks a
    width of 1.5m to enable the safe manoeuvring in this scenario. I understand that
    there would be some 2.4m distance, and even with the additional reduction from a
    parked bicycle, the clearance would be some 1.75m. I see no reason why this
    would preclude the convenient use of the hub by a wheelchair user.
20. The hub would be orientated with its front and rear displays facing roughly north
    and south. Miller’s Way is a small access road to the south which joins Shepherds
    Bush Road. For drivers egressing from this road, looking to the right would involve
    looking around an existing tree which may already impact visibility in this direction.
    However, from my observations on the site visit the introduction of the hub would
    be unlikely to cause further obstruction given the set back from the edge of the
    footpath. There is reference to advice from the Council’s highway consultee
    although I have not been provided with this advice.
21. Overall, the proposal would not present difficulties for its use by wheelchair users
    nor would it obstruct views of egressing drivers joining the highway from Miller’s
    Way. This would accord with policies T3 of the HFLP and T1, T2 and D5 of TLP.
    These generally seek to ensure highway and pedestrian safety in the transport
    network of London and ensure development is convenient and welcoming with no
    disabling barriers
Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. As per policy HE6 of the Framework, where a development proposal would harm
    the significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. I must give this harm considerable importance and weight.
23. As per policy HE7 of the Framework, a balanced judgement should be taken with
    regards to impacts upon the non-designated heritage asset. There would be a
    moderate level of harm to the setting of the BoM given its proximity to the hub
    location which would harmfully interrupt views of the façade of the building. This is
    worthy of additional moderate weight against the scheme.
24. I have had due regard to the benefits of the scheme as presented to me. This
    includes free public wi-fi, free UK calls, wayfinding assistance and an emergency
    services button. The Framework includes a full section on supporting high quality
    communications networks, and that decisions should support the expansion of
    these networks. However, this is with the caveat that equipment respects
    important environmental safeguards and support is not ubiquitous. These benefits
    are given limited weight.
25. The proposal also suggest that another hub, which is considered outdated, would
    be removed. This is located adjacent a garage on Shepherd’s Bush Road.
    However, that unit does not appear to be within the CA, nor is it considered similar
    in terms of its context compared to the appeal proposal. Moreover, depending on


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009776


       its circumstances, the unit may be required to be removed if it is at the end of its
       life cycle and the land thereafter restored. As such I attach limited weight to this
       aspect of the proposal.
26. These benefits of upgrading the unit are noted and are worthy of some positive
    weight. However, this would be limited. Conversely, great weight should be given
    to the asset’s conservation. The proposal would therefore conflict with guidance in
    the Framework regarding heritage assets. Moreover, I have also found harm to the
    character and appearance of the area more generally. It stands to reason that the
    additional harm would also not be overcome by the benefits.
27. Overall, the proposal would be contrary to the development plan and aims of the
    Framework to preserve the historic environment. There are no material
    considerations which indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
