Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 July 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009098
White House Farm, Main Street, Ealand, North Lincolnshire DN17 4JG
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
• The appeal is made by Mr Peter Milner against the decision of North Lincolnshire Council.
• The application reference is PA/2025/1145.
• The development proposed is a permission in principle application for the conversion of the redundant
  storage barn into a single dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Peter Milner against North Lincolnshire
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle (PiP). Planning Practice Guidance
       (PPG) advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The PiP consent route has 2 stages: the first stage (or
       PiP stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-principle and the second
       (‘technical details consent’ (TDC)) stage is when detailed development proposals
       are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2 stages.
4.     The scope of the considerations for PiP are limited to location, land use and the
       amount of development permitted. All other matters are considered as part of a
       subsequent TDC application if PiP is granted. I have determined the appeal
       accordingly.
5.     An applicant can apply for PiP for a range of dwellings by expressing a minimum
       and maximum net number of dwellings as part of the application. In this instance
       PiP is sought for 1 dwelling.
6.     During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. The amendments to the
       Framework have incurred a change in national planning policy which are material
       considerations to this appeal proposal. For this reason, and in the interests of
       natural justice, I have sought additional comments from the parties on the
       Framework and I have taken the comments received into account in arriving at my
       decision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009098


Main Issue
7.     The Council refused the application for reasons relating to its capacity for
       conversion and insufficient information relating to flood risk as the site is within
       Flood Zone 3, and the subsequent absence of a sequential test, flood risk
       assessment and drainage strategy. However, as the application is for PiP, the
       main issue is whether the appeal site is suitable for residential development,
       having regard to its location, land use, and amount of development.
Reasons
       Flood risk
8.     The appeal site comprises a stone-built barn within a collection of buildings
       forming White House Farm. The site is accessed from Main Road via a long
       access track positioned between two dwellings that also back onto the farmstead.
       Other residential boundaries are situated to the north-east and to the south. A
       dyke runs behind the barn from agricultural land to the west and from Main Road
       to the east. It is joined by a further dyke that runs north across the rear boundary
       of a residential garden.
9.     The proposal is for conversion of the barn to a single dwelling. Policy F4 of the
       Framework states that, in order to inform the assessment of flood risk and, where
       relevant, appropriate mitigation, a site-specific flood risk assessment (FRA) should
       accompany all development proposals in Flood Zones 2 and 3. Such assessments
       should be appropriate to the scale, nature and location of development and
       should, where relevant, support an assessment of whether a development
       proposal satisfies the sequential and exception tests set out in policies F5 and F6
       of the Framework.
10. Policy F7 of the Framework states that proposals should not present a risk from
    flooding to potential occupiers, users, or visitors, and should not increase flood risk
    elsewhere. Where development is proposed in a location known to be at risk from
    any form of flooding, now or in the future, it should be refused unless it satisfies
    five specific criteria.
11. The PPG states that changes of use can increase the vulnerability of the
    development or result in occupation or use by people who are more vulnerable
    than the previous occupants/users to risks from flooding. Older existing properties
    may not previously have been subject to a flood risk assessment and appropriate
    mitigation measures, or the nature or severity of the flood risk may have changed
    over time, requiring more appropriate mitigation.
12. As the proposal is for a change of use, neither a sequential test nor exception test
    is required to be undertaken. Nevertheless, the proposal is not supported by an
    FRA despite the Framework explicitly indicating that one is required for all
    development proposals. The application is for PiP and therefore supporting
    information, including an FRA, need only relate to the in principle matters of
    location, land use and amount of development. The Framework explains that the
    FRA should be appropriate to the scale, nature and location of development,
    irrespective of whether the sequential or exception tests are relevant. The scale,
    nature and location of development align with the in principle matters of location,
    land use and amount of development. Consequently, as an FRA has not been
    provided, I am unable to assess the flood risk of the proposal in relation to the in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009098


       principle matters, contrary to national planning policy. This is of particular concern
       given that the proposed land use would change from ‘less vulnerable’ to ‘more
       vulnerable’.
13. The Framework indicates that the purpose of the FRA is to inform appropriate
    mitigation, where relevant. It is therefore crucial that the flood risk of the site is
    assessed at the PiP stage in order to inform the design of appropriate mitigation at
    the TDC stage. Whilst there may be no evidence that flood risk cannot be
    mitigated through standard measures, in the absence of an FRA, there is no
    evidence available to inform what those measures would or should be at the TDC
    stage.
14. I accept that development of mitigation through a drainage strategy would amount
    to technical details. However, an FRA does not require the production of technical
    details evidencing final finished floor levels, infiltration or flood resilience
    measures. Instead, it requires an assessment of risk from flooding pertinent to the
    proposed land use, the amount of development and where it is to be located,
    including within the site. Consequently, an FRA would not require the creation of
    detail that would go beyond the in principle matters, and it should have been
    provided alongside submission of the PiP application in accordance with national
    policy.
15. I acknowledge that the Environment Agency and the Lead Local Flood Authority
    have stated that they do not require an FRA or other drainage information until
    TDC stage. Whilst their advice is material to the appeal, it is not binding,
    particularly when it is contrary to national policy.
16. I agree that investigations into local infrastructure capacity should be the subject of
    a detailed drainage design at the TDC stage. However, the statutory undertaker
    has not responded on the application and therefore I make no assumption as to
    whether the proposed development could be accommodated by the local sewer
    network.
       Capacity for conversion
17. In respect of whether the proposal is capable of conversion to a residential use,
    the stability of a structure and whether it will require a re-build, including revised
    floor levels, do not directly correspond to the in principle matters of location, land
    use and amount of development. Such considerations are technical matters
    relevant to the TDC stage of the consent route where detailed development
    proposals should be assessed. Therefore, I find no harm in respect of the matter of
    conversion with relevance to the in principle matters.
18. In having regard to Policy L2(1)(b) of the Framework, the proposal would make
    better use of a vacant building. However, as the suitability of the building for
    conversion would remain subject to further investigation at the TDC stage, I attach
    limited, not substantial, weight to this consideration in favour of the appeal.
       Other location, land use and amount of development considerations
19. The proposal would be within the settlement development limit, preventing
    encroachment into the countryside, and would be in a sustainable location in terms
    of its proximity to nearby transport infrastructure as well as local services and
    facilities. Whilst material to the appeal, these factors do not diminish the harm I


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009098


       have identified from a lack of information on flood risk relevant to the in principle
       matters. Furthermore, the location of the proposal within a settlement precludes it
       from meeting the definition of rural development despite its historic agricultural
       use.
20. The Council have not objected to the proposal on highway safety or capacity
    grounds. They have also confirmed that these considerations, as well as those
    related to residential amenity, should be dealt with at the TDC stage. Whilst I see
    no reason to reach a different conclusion, the absence of harm in these respects
    do not amount to benefits that weigh in favour of a grant of permission in principle.
       Summary
21. As the site-specific flood risk of the appeal site has not been assessed, the
    potential for harm from flooding for future occupiers of a more vulnerable land use
    would be substantial. For this reason, the appeal site would not be suitable for
    residential development, having regard to its location, land use, and amount of
    development. Conflict therefore arises with Policy DS16 of the North Lincolnshire
    Local Plan (2003) (NLLP) which seeks to prevent development from being
    permitted within floodplains where it would increase the number of people or
    buildings at risk. I do not find conflict with Policy DS14 of the NLLP as it concerns
    drainage details that would be more appropriately assessed at the TDC stage.
Other Considerations
22. I note that the determination period of the application significantly exceeded the
    statutory time limit for a PiP application. I further note that the Council explained
    the reason for the delay and that the appellant subsequently agreed an extension
    of time across the majority of the determination period. Whilst decisions should be
    made without delay, this is not a matter that is determinative of the appeal, which
    has otherwise been assessed in relation to the merits of the case pertinent to the
    main issue.
23. The appellant was not contacted to provide additional information relating to
    technical details. However, the PPG states that it is for the applicant to show that
    the change of use meets the objectives of the National Planning Policy
    Framework’s policy on flood risk.
24. The evidence provided by interested parties in respect of flood events and other
    issues may be anecdotal, particularly in respect of water in ditches, escape routes
    and the effects of other nearby development. Nevertheless, I have determined the
    appeal based on the breadth of evidence and the merits of the case before me.
25. The appellant has referred me to an appeal in the London Borough of Enfield
    (reference APP/W/Q5300/W/25/3376841). Although this decision concerns a PiP
    application for a change of use to residential, it does not concern flood risk. As
    such, I attribute limited weight to any comparison with it and it does not persuade
    me that the appeal proposal is acceptable in relation to the in principle matters. I
    have also considered the appeal decisions referred to me by the Council and
    interested parties. These decisions relate to proposals that are either composed of
    a different application type or amount of development than the proposal before me.
    They therefore have not been determinative in my assessment.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009098


Planning Balance
26. The scale, nature and location of the development proposal has not been
    assessed in respect of flood risk. The failure to provide sufficient information with
    regard to the in principle matters of a PiP application conflicts with the
    development plan, taken as a whole.
27. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. As the proposal is within a settlement, Policy S4 of the Framework
    applies. The proposed development should therefore be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects
    when assessed against national decision-making policies in the Framework.
28. The proposal would provide benefits in respect of its contribution to the housing
    supply and through conversion of a vacant building. However, as the proposal is
    for one dwelling, its overall contribution to the housing supply would be modest
    and, as set out above, the suitability of the building for conversion may only be
    established following submission of details at the TDC stage. Thus, the benefits of
    the proposal attract limited weight for the purpose of Policy S4.
29. There is no evidence before me, despite the site being within Flood Zone 3, that
    the site is used for water storage or flood risk management. However, the failure to
    provide an FRA prevents an informed assessment of the proposal’s risk from
    flooding despite the vulnerability of the site increasing. A precautionary approach
    is therefore necessary which, in the absence of sufficient flood risk information
    required by Policy F4, leads me to conclude that a residential use in Flood Zone 3
    would have a substantial adverse effect on future occupiers.
30. When considered against one another, the limited benefits of the proposal would
    be substantially outweighed by its adverse effect. As such, Policy S4 of the
    Framework does not fall in favour of permission being granted in this instance.
Conclusion
31. For the reasons given above, having considered the development plan as a whole,
    along with all other relevant material considerations, including the Framework, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
