Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by L Clark MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009184
Peterstone Lodge, Burnham Road, Peterstone, Burnham Overy Town, Norfolk
NR23 1RR
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Mrs D Miller against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk Borough
    Council.
   The application Ref is 25/01006/CU.
   The development proposed is described as the change of use from holiday let to unrestricted
    residential dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the principle of the proposal with specific regard to its location.
Reasons for the Recommendation
4. The appeal building has two bedrooms, a large living area and a garden with off
   road parking. It is accessed directly from the B1155 which has a speed limit of
   60mph. There is no public footpath along the road. There are three houses close to
   the site but otherwise it is located in open countryside.
5. The closest settlements to the appeal site are Burnham Thorpe, Burnham Overy
   Town and Burnham Overy Staithe. LP01 of the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk Local
   Plan 2025 (LP) categorises each of these settlements as Tier 6: Smaller Villages
   and Hamlets. They have very limited services and facility provision. Policy LP02 of
   the LP states that in Tier 6, residential development will not normally (my
   emphasis) be supported outside development boundaries unless allocated through
   a Local Plan or a Neighbourhood Plan. The appeal site sits outside of the
   development boundary of any settlement and is not an allocated site.
6. The crux of the matter here is whether the proposal represents something that is
   out of the norm and would elevate it above what would be considered ‘normal’ for
   the purposes of Policy LP02.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009184


7. It is not disputed that the building can be occupied continuously and that there
   would be no additional built form. In terms of the overarching aims of development
   and reducing the need to travel, there appears to be no safe means of getting to
   any of the closest villages. Even access to the nearest higher frequency bus stop
   would require a particularly long walk which would be partly along the side of a
   main road which is unlit, does not have segregated footways and carries vehicles at
   the national speed limit.
8. It is therefore more realistic that occupants would be reliant upon the use of a car
   for every trip they make. Whilst the holiday let may generate a notable level of
   vehicular activity in itself, they would be more likely to remain there for extended
   periods. Occupiers of a permanent unrestricted dwelling would be more likely to
   undertake more regular, arguably daily, journeys for employment, education and
   other everyday needs. The nature and frequency of journeys would therefore be
   materially different.
9. Holiday properties are not uncommon in tourist locations. Some might be in the
   countryside. They contribute towards an area’s tourism offer in that respect. It
   would therefore be more ‘normal’ to have such as a new dwelling under the
   auspices of the development plan. With this and the above in mind, and specifically
   the stance of the development plan’s spatial strategy and settlement hierarchy, one
   would not ‘normally’ allow unrestricted dwellings in the open countryside. Indeed,
   the aims of restricting such, for the LP, is to ensure appropriate patterns of growth.
   Permitting individual dwellings on an ad hoc basis outside of settlements with no
   other compelling reason to do so, would cumulatively undermine the aims of
   appropriate (locationally sustainable for the purposes of the LP) patterns of growth
   for housing across the district.
10. I therefore remain to be convinced that the circumstances of the case here would
    be out of a ‘normal’ situation for the purposes of Policy LP02. With this and the
    above in mind, the principle of the proposed development would not be acceptable.
    It would conflict with Policies LP01 and LP02 of the LP which seek to encourage
    sustainable patterns of development by directing to it within appropriate settlements
    and, by association, restricting it in the countryside.
Other Matters
11. The appellant has highlighted two bus routes, 201 and 414, that have stops close
    to the site. There are no bus stop signs that indicate a formal stop however they are
    identified on the corresponding website. The routes have only two journeys each
    day to serve a school service. The Holkham Victoria bus stop is a substantial walk
    away from the appeal site which partly involves walking along the B1155 as I have
    set out above. I therefore remain to be convinced that public transport would be
    easily accessible from the site and therefore be a sufficiently reliable alternative
    option to the private car.
12. There may be some positive aspects to the proposal including wastewater capacity,
    the standard of the accommodation and the potential for more landscaping
    however these matters would be a lack of harm and thus neutral in any balance of
    considerations. The same can be said for a lack of harm with regard to heritage,
    ecology, visual amenity, flood risk and agricultural land.
13. The Council has confirmed that they can demonstrate an acceptable housing land
    supply. I have no reason to conclude otherwise. Any concerns about the handling

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009184


     of any previous applications are outside of the scope of this appeal and should be
     directed to the Council. Similarly, the appeal relates to a refusal of planning
     permission, and I am therefore unable to consider any lawfulness matters. Aside
     from Policy LP02 of the LP, I have not been provided with any other development
     plan policy that would be relevant to the change of use of an existing holiday let to
     a dwelling nor a compelling case for there being too many holiday lets in this
     location. LP02 remains part of the adopted development plan at the time I consider
     the appeal.
14. In the Fincham case, a tier 5 settlement, the proposal was for self-build and custom
    housing as well as the conversion of a non-designated heritage asset. The
    circumstances were therefore not directly comparable to this appeal. For the Jolly
    Brewers and Rosalie Farm schemes, there was a reliance upon the subdivision of a
    residential building and reusing vacant buildings which found support in the
    iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework at the time.
15. I have not been provided with some of the planning history for other cited examples
    and therefore am unable to compare them to the appeal scheme. With regard to
    the Friskney scheme, the appeal site was connected to the village by a public
    footpath and thus more sustainable in locational terms. Neither this nor the other
    cited examples lead me to conclude otherwise on the appeal scheme.
Conclusion and Recommendation
16. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan and there are no sufficiently weighty material considerations to
    indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

L Clark
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER
Inspector’s Decision
17. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
