Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by S Leonard BA (Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009149
15 Stanfield Road, Bournemouth BH9 2NL
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by L Viljoen against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole
       Council.
•      The application Ref is P/25/05300/FUL.
•      The development proposed is change of use to form 8-bedroom House in Multiple Occupation (Sui
       generis).


Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.       An application for costs was made by L Viljoen against Bournemouth Christchurch
         and Poole Council. This is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.       Following the submission of this appeal, a revised version of the National Planning
         Policy Framework (the Framework), was published on 17 August 2026. This
         replaces the 2024 Framework. I am satisfied that the revised Framework does not
         differ significantly from the 2024 version in respect of the substance of the matters
         before me. Like the 2024 Framework, the revised version seeks to achieve well-
         designed places, protect occupier and neighbour living conditions, and conserve
         and enhance the natural environment. Accordingly, I have not deemed it
         necessary to seek comments from the main parties on the 2026 Framework, which
         I have considered in my decision.
4.       Since the submission of this appeal, a Certificate of Lawfulness application for the
         use of the appeal property as a House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) (Class C4)
         has been granted1. The Council has confirmed that as a result of this permission,
         Policy CS24 of the Bournemouth Local Plan: Core Strategy (2012) (the Core
         Strategy), which relates to proposals for change of use from Use Class C3
         dwellinghouse to HMO use, setting a 10% limit of HMOs in an area, would no
         longer be relevant should a subsequent planning application be submitted for the
         appeal scheme.
5.       Based on the evidence before me, including the decision notice, plans and officer
         report in respect of the aforesaid HMO approval, I am satisfied that there is no
1
    LPA Ref P/26/01394/CLE – Approved 20 May 2026

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009149


       longer a need for me to address the Council’s second reason for refusal which
       relates to the principle of converting from a C3 dwellinghouse to an HMO. I have
       dealt with the appeal accordingly.
6.     The description of development set out in the banner heading above is taken from
       the application form and appeal form. However, the Council’s decision notice
       additionally refers to the “erection of extensions and roof alterations to
       accommodate” the proposed change of use to an 8-bedroom HMO. The appellant
       has not agreed to this change of description, contending that these works would
       be carried out under Permitted Development (PD), as stated on the refused Sui
       Gen Plan drawing No. PG.1155.25.3.
7.     A comparison between the Existing Plans drawing Ref PG.1155.25.01 and the
       above Sui Gen Plan drawing confirms that these building works, which include
       side dormers and a rear single storey extension, comprise essential components
       of the appeal scheme.
8.     Moreover, I saw during my site visit that these extensions have not yet been
       carried out, and they were not shown on the Existing Plans submitted with the
       aforesaid certificate of lawful use application.
9.     It is not for me, under a Section 78 appeal, to determine whether the proposed
       extensions could be lawfully carried out as PD. To that end, it is open to the
       appellant to apply for determination under Sections 191/192 of the Act.
10. Indeed, since the submission of this appeal, a Certificate of Lawfulness application
    in respect of the extensions required to facilitate the appeal scheme (‘dormers to
    side elevations, roof extension for second floor accommodation, and single storey
    rear extension’) has been refused2.
11. An appeal has subsequently been lodged against that refusal3. At the time of
    writing, that appeal remains undetermined, and is due to be determined separately
    in accordance with the procedural timetable associated with that case.
12. For avoidance of doubt, my determination of the appeal before me is based upon
    the site circumstances and lawful planning status of the appeal site at this current
    point in time. Moreover, my determination of this appeal under Section 78 does not
    affect any subsequent issuing of a determination under Section 191/192,
    regardless of the outcome of this appeal.
13. Having regard to the above, I find, that for the purpose of the determination of this
    appeal, the Council’s description of development more accurately describes the
    proposal. I have determined the appeal on this basis.
14. I have noted the appellant’s reference to another appeal4 for a similar proposal,
    where the Inspector had regard to the lawfulness of PD roof works. However, the
    circumstances in that appeal differ notably from the current appeal in that the
    extensions had already been carried out, they benefitted from a Certificate of
    Lawfulness approval, and they comprised a different scheme that the appeal
    Inspector did not find harmful to the character and appearance of the area. As


2
  LPA Ref P/26/01438/CLP – Refused 20 May 2026
3
  Appeal Ref 6012438
4
  Appeal Ref APP/V1260/W/24/3357398


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision 6009149


        such, that decision does not alter my approach to the determination of the current
        appeal.
Main Issues
15. Having regard to all the above, the main issues are therefore:
    •    The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the host property
         and the wider area;
    •    Whether the proposal makes satisfactory provision for Biodiversity Net Gain
         (BNG); and
    •    The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of No.17
         Stanfield Road, having particular regard to noise and disturbance effects.


Reasons
Character and appearance
16. The appeal property comprises a detached two-storey residential property which
    lies within an established residential area of traditionally designed, two-storey
    period residential properties. They are visible from the public realm, set back along
    a common front building line behind shallow front gardens with low front boundary
    walls.
17. Throughout Stanfield Road there is a strong uniformity of roof design, building
    materials and architectural detailing on the properties. Buildings are characterised
    by brick walls under simple, shallow-hipped slate/tiled roofs, and incorporating a
    subsidiary front-facing pitched roof gable feature above a double-storey front
    projecting bay.
18. Architectural detailing seen throughout the street includes timber barge boards,
    roof finials, decorative tile edging and brick chimneys on the roofs, and sliding
    sash vertically glazed windows with decorative contrasting window headers and
    cills.
19. Accordingly, there is a high degree of regularity in building design throughout the
    road, and an architectural cohesiveness and regular rhythm of built development
    that results in an attractive prevailing streetscape.
20. The appeal property is typical of the above prevailing building style. It is a large
    detached two-storey property with facing brick walls under a slate hipped roof. It
    occupies a visually prominent corner position where its front, rear and street-facing
    side elevation are all clearly visible from the public realm of Stanfield Road and/or
    Firs Glen Road.
21. The building has retained its original roof form and many of its decorative
    architectural features. It has clear and uncluttered roof slopes which enable the
    projecting feature gablets on the front and side elevations to be fully appreciated
    along with decorative tiling and finials along the edges of the roof slopes and
    ridgeline. As such, the property comprises an attractive period property which
    makes a strong positive contribution to the prevailing townscape character of the
    area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009149


22. The proposed dormers would occupy a substantial portion of both side roof slopes,
    extending across the entire length of the existing ridge line. As such, they would
    dominate the side roof slopes due to their combined width and height and
    proximity to the roof ridge and eaves lines. A lack of fenestration in the side walls
    of the dormers would serve to emphasise their disproportionately large size in
    relation to the existing side roof slopes.
23. The flat-roofed design of both dormers would not respect the traditional hipped
    roof construction of the original property, nor that of the feature gabled projections
    on the front and road-facing side elevations. In particular, the wide flat-roofed road-
    facing dormer would sit awkwardly next to the existing subsidiary gable feature
    which it would wrap around and visually overwhelm.
24. In views of the front and rear of the property, the two new dormers together would
    be seen as boxy and top-heavy, and they would appear as an incongruous and
    over-dominant addition to the existing building.
25. The character of the original hipped roof would also be detrimentally eroded by the
    proposed gabled addition to the rear roof slope. This would noticeably unbalance
    the existing symmetry of front and rear roof slopes in views from Firs Glen Road.
26. Accordingly, I find that the appeal scheme would add excessively large and
    visually over-dominant additions to the host property, which would be at odds with,
    and visually overwhelm the original building form, as well as detracting from the
    visual appreciation of some of the defining architectural features of the appeal
    property. The result would be a detrimental erosion of the prevailing hipped
    roofscape which is defining positive unifying characteristic of the street scene.

27. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal proposal would
    materially harm the character and appearance of the host property and the wider
    area. It would therefore be contrary to Core Strategy Policy CS41, in so much as
    this policy, amongst other things, seeks to ensure that all development is well-
    designed, and that it respects the site and its surroundings through, inter alia, its
    scale, siting, character and appearance, and that it contributes positively to the
    appearance of the public realm.
Biodiversity Net Gain
28. The Environment Act 2021 and Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning
    Act 1990 (as amended) (the Act) introduced a statutory framework for biodiversity
    net gain (BNG), and it applies to all planning applications for non-major
    development submitted on or after 2 April 2024.
29. Under the statutory framework, unless an exemption applies, planning permission
    is deemed to have been granted subject to the Biodiversity Gain Condition (BGC)
    which requires that at least a 10% increase in biodiversity value is met. That value
    is measured against the pre-development biodiversity value of the site. Therefore,
    unless an exemption applies, applications for planning consent are required to
    provide minimum baseline information about the site’s biodiversity.
30. The Biodiversity Net Gain Requirements (Exemptions) Regulations 2024 set out
    various exemptions. The planning application form indicates that the appellant
    contends that the appeal scheme is subject to the ‘de minimis’ exemption. This
    applies to development which does not impact on any priority habitat and if there is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009149


         an impact on other on-site habitat, that impact must be on less than 25 square
         metres of non-priority habitat and on less than 5 metres of linear habitat. On-site
         habitat is impacted if it is lost or degraded such that there is a decrease in the
         biodiversity value of that habitat.
31. Where applicants consider that the development would not be subject to the
    biodiversity gain condition, Article 7 of The Town and Country Planning
    (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 provides that the
    applicant must provide a statement as part of the planning application setting out
    the reasons why they believe this is the case. No such statement has been
    provided.
32. The appeal documentation indicates that the appellant claims an exemption
    because the proposal comprises a change of use only, with extensions, including
    the proposed rear extension and cycle store outbuilding comprising works that are
    intended to be carried out under PD.
33. As previously stated, my decision takes account of the proposed additions to the
    existing property as shown on the planning application proposed drawings. These
    include a rear ground floor extension, a cycle-storage outbuilding in the rear
    garden and a bin store at the front of the site.
34. A reasonable estimate of the ground area to be taken up cumulatively by these
    works, would suggest that they exceed 25 sqm, and I saw during my site visit that
    most of the rear garden where the ground floor development works are proposed
    is given over to overgrown soft landscaping. As such, there are reasonable
    grounds for me to doubt that the development is exempt as claimed by the
    appellant.
35. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) is clear that it is for the appellant to
    demonstrate that the on-site habitat would be less than 25 square metres and that
    they should provide sufficient evidence to support their justification.
36. Moreover, although the PPG states that it is generally inappropriate to refuse an
    application on the grounds that the biodiversity gain objective will not be met, it is
    necessary to consider if the BNG condition is capable of being successfully
    discharged. If the development is not exempt, the BNG condition would apply.
37. In that case, the minimum information requirements set out under Article 7(1A) of
    the DMP should have been submitted with the application, including the statutory
    small sites biodiversity metric, to allow consideration of existing habitat baselines
    to enable understanding about the pre-development biodiversity value of the
    development’s onsite habitat at this stage, as stated in the PPG.5
38. It would not be appropriate to secure this information or the details of the required
    works to achieve the necessary BNG through a condition. Given BNG is a
    statutory requirement, this is a matter of importance and a failure to comply is a
    fundamental flaw of the proposal. As insufficient information has been provided, I
    cannot therefore be satisfied that the BNG requirement would be fulfilled.
39. In conclusion, whilst this matter may be capable of future clarification and
    resolution, for the purposes of this appeal decision, there is insufficient information
    before me to satisfactorily demonstrate that the statutory biodiversity gain
5
    Paragraph: 002 Reference ID: 74-002-20240214 and Paragraph: 011 Reference ID: 74-011-20240214


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               5
Appeal Decision 6009149


       objectives would be met. The proposal therefore conflicts with Core Strategy
       Policy CS30, in so much as it seeks to enhance biodiversity. It would also fail to
       meet the statutory requirements of the Environment Act 2021 and the Town and
       Country Planning Act 1990.
Living conditions
40. Saved Policy 6.17 of the Bournemouth District Wide Local Plan (2002) (Local
    Plan) recognises that there is a need for HMOs within the Borough to
    accommodate residents, such as students and young professionals, who do not
    wish, or cannot afford, to rent or buy a house or self-contained flat. This policy
    seeks to ensure reasonable levels of amenity, and that the building and locality are
    appropriate for HMO use, having regard to matters including the number of
    residents to be housed and the proximity and nature of neighbouring properties.
41. The appeal site is within a residential area mainly made up of single
    dwellinghouses but also including a number of HMOs. These include the appeal
    property which has a current lawful use as a Class C4 HMO.
42. The residential properties are primarily two-storey detached properties which are
    set back from the road behind small front gardens so that the main area of private
    amenity space comprises rear garden. No.17 Stanfield Road adjacent to the
    appeal site is one such dwelling house, and the Council’s third reason for refusal is
    concerned with the effect upon the living conditions of its occupiers as a result of
    additional noise and disturbance arising from the development.
43. Whilst the spacing between the two buildings is narrow, No.17 is set off its side
    boundary enabling pedestrian access to its rear garden. Moreover, its main
    windows serving principal rooms are generally positioned on its front and rear
    elevations, rather than directly facing the appeal site. The appeal property
    occupies a corner position, so that in addition to its principal street-facing
    pedestrian entrance and front entrance door facing Stanfield Road, it also benefits
    from an additional pedestrian entrance gate facing Firs Glen Road which provides
    alternative access to the side and rear of the site.
44. Also, due to its corner position, the windows serving the principal bedrooms and
    that of the communal lounge directly face the road frontages of the site, away from
    No.17. There are only small secondary windows on the rear and side elevation
    facing No.17 and this would remain the case with the appeal scheme, whose new
    dormer bedroom windows are proposed to be front and rear facing.
45. The proposal is for the change of use of the HMO to a large HMO for a maximum
    occupancy of 8 persons within 8 bedrooms. The property currently has 5 HMO
    bedrooms, and its lawful Class C4 HMO use allows for residency by up to 6
    unrelated individuals. As such, the greater capacity would be likely to result in
    increased activity at the site given that occupants would live largely independently,
    including from more people coming and going at the front of the site.
46. However, a greater number of occupants is not, of itself, evidence that a larger
    HMO would cause material harm to the living conditions of the occupants of
    neighbouring properties or the character of the area.
47. Whilst there would be an increase in comings and goings, this would be limited to
    people using the front door and the side access to the rear garden, which is on the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009149


       opposite side of the house to No.17. Whilst the rear garden could be used, it is
       unlikely that the use of the garden would be much different than that associated
       with the current small HMO use of the property, who would also be likely to live
       independent lives.
48. Accordingly, having regard to the existing and proposed arrangement of living
    space within the appeal property and the juxtaposition of the property in relation to
    that of No.17, I find that whilst the proposal would intensify the HMO use at the
    site, this would not lead to demonstrable harm to the living conditions of the
    occupiers of that neighbouring property, having particular regard to noise and
    disturbance effects. As such, the proposal accords with Local Plan Saved Policy
    6.17 and Core Strategy Policy CS41, in so much as these policies, amongst other
    things, seek to ensure that new development safeguards the amenity of
    neighbouring residents.
Other Matter
49. Informative note No.3 on the Council’s decision notice refers to a reason for
    refusal relating to heathland mitigation measures. Although no such reason for
    refusal has been included in the decision notice, the officer report confirms that the
    site lies within the Zones of Influence of the Dorset Heathlands and the New
    Forest Special Protection Areas (SPAs).
50. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (the
    Habitat Regulations) require that where a project is likely to result in a significant
    effect on a European site, a competent authority is required to make an
    appropriate assessment of the implications on the integrity of the European site in
    view of its conservation objectives. Any likely significant effects arising from the
    development need to be considered alone and in combination with other
    development in the area.
51. Additional residents, such as occupants of the proposed HMO, could lead to
    increased visitor pressure on these European Protected Sites (EPS). In
    combination with other proposals this is likely to result in pathways that could lead
    to significant adverse effects on the integrity of the EPS. Appropriate Assessment
    under the Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (the Habitats Regulations) is,
    therefore, required.
52. The appellant has sought to address this matter by means of a submitted draft
    planning obligation under Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990,
    in respect of financial contributions towards Strategic Access Management and
    Monitoring (SAMMs) in accordance with the Council’s adopted mitigation
    strategies as endorsed by Natural England.
53. Were I minded allowing the appeal, as the competent authority I would have been
    obliged to consider this issue. However, given my conclusion on the first 2 main
    issues, it is not necessary for me to carry out an Appropriate Assessment as
    required under the Habitats Regulations, or to consider this matter further, since it
    would not alter the outcome of this appeal. This is therefore a neutral matter in the
    appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009149


Conclusion
54. Whilst I have found no harm in respect of neighbour living conditions, the harms I
    have found in respect of character and appearance and BNG are sufficient to
    justify dismissing the appeal.
55. The proposal would conflict with the development plan taken as a whole, and there
    are no other material considerations, including the Framework, which indicate that
    the decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
56. Therefore, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Leonard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
