Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009245
67 Main Street, Bushby, Leicestershire LE7 9PL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr H Vaghela - AUM Construction UK Ltd against the decision of Harborough
    District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00298/FUL.
•   The development proposed is demolition of existing dwelling and erection of replacement dwelling,
    detached gym and swimming pool.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Since the Council’s decision, the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) has been revised. The main parties have been provided with an
   opportunity to comment on this matter. The Council’s comments on the revised
   Framework include reference to its heritage policies, which in terms of the actions
   when identifying harm to the Conservation Area, are not materially different to the
   previous iteration of the Framework. Furthermore, the appellant has been provided
   with an opportunity to comment on the revised Framework, but no comments have
   been received. In the circumstances, no party would be prejudiced by me
   proceeding to determine the appeal on the basis of the up-to-date local and
   national planning policies.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance
   the character or appearance of the Bushby Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The significance of the CA derives from the historic linear village along the former
   Leicester-Uppingham Road, together with the open spaces and clear visual gaps
   between dwellings, mature landscaping and varied traditional building forms that
   define the historic settlement. Dwellings ranging from low simple cottages to
   medium sized houses within spacious plots with mature landscaping are
   characteristic of the CA. This varied form, traditional character and spacious
   arrangement of dwellings is evident in the vicinity of the appeal site.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009245


6. The existing dwelling at 67 Main Street (No 67) is a modest chalet bungalow. Its
   low scale and position set back from the front boundary give it an understated
   presence. Together with the position of its main roof form set away from side
   boundaries, it sits comfortably within its plot. The immediate neighbouring dwellings
   consist of a modest, hipped roofed, bungalow at 69 Main Street and a two-storey
   dwelling with dormers within its roofscape at 65 Main Street (No 65). No 65 has a
   traditional aesthetic including ground floor bays, modestly proportioned upper floor
   windows and simple detailing to its entrance. It is positioned off-centre within its plot
   and close to the boundary with the appeal site. Even so, this results in a notable
   reduction in mass towards its opposite boundary which, together with the form and
   scale of No 67, ensures that this group of dwellings positively contribute to the
   varied built form, predominant traditional appearance, and spacious character of
   the CA.
7. The Harborough Development Management Supplementary Planning Document
   (2021) sets out that attention to detail, such as the proportion of the proposal, to the
   size of doorway and window openings, can do much to make a new building fit into
   its CA. It also emphasises that all new development must sit comfortably within the
   existing built form, respecting the form, layout and massing of the area.
8. Due to the similar alignment of its front elevation, comparable scale and massing,
   gable-ended form, and its close proximity to the dwelling at No 65, the proposal
   would dilute the spacious plot pattern, also weakening the visual distinction
   between these dwellings. Moreover, the proposed dwelling would incorporate a
   distinctly formal arrangement of large three-pane windows at ground and first floor
   level. These would closely align with the dormers and rooflights at roof level,
   resulting in an overly regimented, and uncharacteristic vertical emphasis. Together
   with the substantial central porch feature, with its modern door and window
   arrangement, the dwelling would appear overtly contemporary and unacceptably
   dominant within the street scene. It would be particularly conspicuous given its
   prominent position facing Newstead Avenue. Consequently, the proposed dwelling
   would detract from the variety in built form, prevailing traditional appearance and
   spacious qualities of the CA.
9. The appellant notes that no loss of historic fabric has been identified. However, the
   significance of the CA derives not only from its historic buildings, but also from its
   overall character and appearance, including its settlement pattern, spatial qualities
   and relationship between buildings and spaces.
10. The Council’s delegated report confirms that it has no concerns in respect of the
    proposed detached gym and swimming pool. From my own observations on site, I
    find no reason to disagree with this conclusion. Even so, this does not overcome
    my concerns in respect of the proposed replacement dwelling.
11. I have a statutory duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 as amended, to pay special attention to the
    desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
    Given the above, I find that the proposed development would result in harm to the
    significance of the CA. The harm should be weighed against any public benefits
    resulting from the proposal in line with Policy HE6 of the Framework.
12. The proposal would provide a replacement private dwelling, investment in the site,
    and the delivery of a more efficient and updated home in a sustainable village


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009245


     location. There is a suggestion in the Council’s delegated report that there is a
     shortfall in housing land in the district. Even so, in the context that there would be
     no net increase in the number of dwellings, that economic benefits associated with
     the construction would be short term, and that any economic, social and
     environmental benefits associated with the occupation of a replacement dwelling
     would be modest, there would not be public benefits in this instance sufficient to
     outweigh the identified harm to the significance of the CA.
13. I conclude, the proposed development would not preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the Bushby CA. In that regard, the proposal is contrary
    to Policies GD2, GD8 and HC1 of the LP, which require development to be
    sympathetic to local history, to respect the form and character of existing
    settlements, including the context and characteristics of the site. They also require
    development to respect the street scene as well as ensuring they are visually
    attractive as a result of good layout and architecture.
14. For the same reasons, the proposed development would also be contrary to the
    requirements in Policies HE4 and HE9 of the Framework to avoid harm to the
    significance of heritage assets and to consider a Conservation Area’s special
    architectural or historic interest in the design of development.
Other Matter
15. The proposal would remain a single dwelling and would not result in tandem or
    back land development. The principle of replacing the existing dwelling on an
    established residential plot is not disputed. However, this does not justify the
    identified harm under the main issue which relates to the specific design of the
    proposed development and its relationship with the CA.
Planning Balance, Conclusion and Recommendation
16. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
17. I have found that the proposed development would fail to preserve or enhance the
    significance of the Bushby CA. This is a matter which results in conflict with the
    development plan as a whole. Consequently, there is conflict with Policy DP3
    paragraph 1 of the Framework, which requires development proposals to respond
    to their context (the history, character and features of their site and its setting), so
    that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. There would also be
    conflict with the built form and identity principles under paragraph 2 of this national
    decision-making policy. DP3 states that development proposals should be refused
    if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of this policy or relevant
    aspects of the principles at paragraph 2.
18. Moreover, in line with Policy S4 of the Framework, the circumstances in which the
    benefits of approving development proposals are likely to be outweighed by
    adverse effects include situations where the development proposals would fail to
    comply with the national decision-making policies which include Policy DP3. There
    would also be conflict with Policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework relating to
    heritage, a matter which attracts considerable importance and weight.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009245


19. Overall, I find that the benefits of approving the development would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework. Accordingly, the proposed development
    would not be sustainable development.
20. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
21. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
