Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by L Fern BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009965
10 Bradfield Drive, Barking IG11 9AR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mohammad Ehsan Ali and Ms Sunbul Ehsan against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Barking & Dagenham.
•    The application Ref is 26/00134/FULL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of the dwelling (Use Class C3) to a 3-bedroom HMO
     (Use Class C4) for up to four occupants.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework was published in
       August 2026 (the Framework), which replaces previous iterations and the contents
       of which have been considered in the determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposed House in
                Multiple Occupation (HMO) regarding the need for the retention of the
                property as a single-family dwelling, the need for the HMO and accessibility;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of future residents of the
                HMO regarding the size of proposed Bedrooms 01 and 03; and
           •    whether the proposal would provide adequate car parking provision.
Reasons
Location
4.     Policy SP3 of the Barking and Dagenham Local Plan (2024) (the BDLP) places
       highest priority on the delivery of self-contained family housing to ensure that new
       residential development does not limit the supply of such provision. It subsequently
       requires development which impacts on the delivery of the most needed forms of
       housing to thoroughly demonstrate need. Furthermore, BDLP Policy DMH5
       supports the provision of HMOs but only where set criteria are met, including
       where there is an identified need for such development and where there would be
       no loss of family housing. These policies are broadly consistent with Framework
       policies relating to the delivery of a sufficient supply of homes.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009965


5.     Although there would be no irreversible alterations made to the property, the
       removal of a single-family home from the existing housing stock in a location
       where there is a need for such accommodation would be harmful. This would be
       regardless of the length of time the HMO would be in operation for. Furthermore,
       although Policy H9 of the London Plan (2021) requires boroughs to take account
       of the role of HMOs in meeting local and strategic housing needs, no substantive
       evidence has been provided to demonstrate a need for additional HMO
       accommodation in this location. An HMO property licence has been issued.
       However, the planning system works independently from licencing requirements,
       and the existence of a licence does not necessarily render the proposal acceptable
       in planning terms.
6.     London Plan Policy T4 and BDLP Policy DMT1 seek to promote sustainably
       located development. They require development proposals, amongst other things,
       to be integrated with current and planned transport access and connectivity and
       seek to reduce dominance of vehicles on London’s streets. These policies are
       broadly consistent with Framework Policy TR3 that requires development to be
       located where it can support sustainable patterns of movement, enable good
       accessibility and make the most of existing and proposed transport infrastructure.
7.     The evidence is notably deficient in terms of identifying the closest shops, services
       and facilities to the appeal site that future residents may utilise. In addition,
       although the appeal site is located only approximately 0.4 miles from the nearest
       high frequency service bus stops on Longbridge Road, this is a significant distance
       in this London context. Furthermore, regional transport hubs, retail centres and
       Upney underground station are considerably further. This position is reflected in
       the site’s Transport for London Public Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL) score
       of 0 (very poor). In such circumstances, it is likely that future residents would rely
       on use of a private car to undertake at least some of their day-to-day needs.
8.     For the above reasons, the appeal site would not be a suitable location for the
       proposed HMO regarding the need for the retention of the property as a single-
       family dwelling, the need for the HMO and accessibility. Thus, it would be contrary
       to London Plan Policy T4 and BDLP Policies SP3, DMH5 and DMT1.
9.     London Plan Policies D6 and D14, and BDLP Policies SP8, DMD1 and DMSI3
       relate to housing quality, design standards, noise, nuisance and strategic transport
       priorities and are therefore not relevant to this main issue.
Living conditions
10. BDLP Policy DMH5 provides support for proposed HMOs but only where they
    comply with the relevant standards, including those set out in the East London
    HMO Guidance and the housing space standards outlined in the London Plan. In
    this context, London Plan Policy D6 requires single bedrooms to have a floor area
    of at least 7.5 sq.m. The East London HMO Guidance, which is more locally
    relevant, requires a greater floorspace of 8.5 sq.m. where kitchen facilities are
    provided in a separate room, as they are in this case. These policies are broadly
    consistent with the Framework policies that seek to ensure proposals provide
    healthy living conditions for occupants.
11. It is acknowledged that the overall amount of internal floorspace within the
    property would exceed the required standards and that a rear garden would be
    provided. However, there are two very small bedrooms that fall below the requisite

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009965


       floorspace requirements (Bedrooms 01 at 7.415 sq.m. and Bedroom 03 at
       6.769 sq.m.). Bedroom 03 is also an awkward L-shape. These spaces would be
       important to occupants to maintain a good quality of life, which is pertinent given
       that occupants would be predominantly unrelated and would therefore likely spend
       more time within their own private spaces.
12. For these reasons, the proposal would be harmful to the living conditions of future
    residents of the HMO regarding the size of Bedrooms 01 and 03. Thus, it would be
    contrary to BDLP Policy DMH5 and London Plan Policy D6.
Car parking
13. London Plan Policies T1, T6 and T6.1, and BDLP Policy DMT2, amongst other
    things, require developments provide the minimum necessary car parking in
    locations that are not well connected by public transport. These policies are
    broadly consistent with Framework policies relating to transport.
14. As an absolute worst-case scenario, the proposal would create the need for 4 car
    parking spaces in-line with the number of occupants that could be accommodated
    within the HMO. Furthermore, it is more likely that car parking spaces would be
    required given that the appeal site has a poor level of accessibility to the public
    transport network for its London location and therefore it is likely that future
    occupants would be reliant on use of a private car to undertake at least some day-
    to-day needs.
15. The property benefits from a driveway to the front, that is accessible by a dropped
    kerb arrangement and that would likely accommodate two cars, and a single
    garage to the rear, that would be retained. Consequently, the proposal would
    provide 3 car parking spaces and would therefore be unlikely to create a significant
    demand for on-street car parking. In any case, on-street parking in this location is
    controlled by a Council Controlled Parking Zone designation requiring residents to
    apply for a parking permit.
16. For the above reasons, the proposal would provide adequate car parking provision
    and would therefore comply with London Plan Policies T1, T6 and T6.1 and BDLP
    Policy DMT2.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
17. The appeal site is located within a settlement and therefore Framework Policy S4
    is engaged. In this case, given the conflict with Framework policies relating to the
    sufficient supply of homes and living conditions, the adverse effects would
    substantially outweigh any benefits of approving the scheme. Consequently, it
    would not benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable development as
    articulated at Framework Policy S3.
18. The proposal is contrary to the development plan taken as a whole and there are
    no material considerations that would indicate a decision should be made other
    than in accordance with it. Thus, the appeal is dismissed.

L Fern
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
