Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by C Billings BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009069
257 Hagley Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham B16 9NA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mrs Jessica Jones of ME Group International Plc against the decision of
    Birmingham City Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/05037/PA.
•   The development proposed is installation of a modular self-service launderette facility and associated
    works.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of a
   modular self-service launderette facility and associated works at 257 Hagley Road,
   Birmingham, B16 9NA in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   2025/05037/PA, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   the 16 August 2026. In view of the changes therein, comments were sought from
   the main parties and I have considered any comments received in making my
   decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on public safety, with
   regard to crime and the fear of crime.
Reasons
4. The proposed laundrette facility would be located behind a high wall within the
   grounds of a B&B hotel situated on a busy main road. The site of the proposed
   laundrette comprises an area of hardstanding to the side of the B&B hotel building,
   with a vehicular access to a separate hotel car park at the rear running along the
   opposite side. The entrance to the B&B reception directly faces the area where the
   self-service laundrette is proposed. In addition, there are a number of windows in
   the sides of the B&B, at both ground and first floor level, which are close to and
   overlook where the new laundrette would be. Furthermore, even if the first floor
   windows in the side of Collection Hotel on the opposite side of the accessway serve
   a stairwell and meeting room only, they overlook the area where the laundrette is
   proposed and so provide some element of surveillance.
5. Therefore, even though the proposed laundrette would not be prominently visible
   from public vantage points, due to its siting behind a tall wall, there would be some

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009069


     natural surveillance, due to the activities and movement associated with the
     occupants/visitors and staff of the B&B and adjacent hotel. Furthermore, at the time
     of my site visit, while only a snapshot in time, I observed quite a few comings and
     goings from the reception of the B&B. Also, Hagley Road is a busy main road
     experiencing high levels of both vehicular and pedestrian movement. Together with
     the presence of nearby streetlights and a bus stop, this contributes to activity in the
     surrounding area, providing a degree of natural surveillance in the wider immediate
     vicinity of the appeal site. This would likely deter criminals from loitering and
     committing crimes adjacent to and associated with the laundrette despite its
     publicly hidden location.
6. While the West Midlands Police, Design Out Crime Officer sets out that crime rates
   within the wider Edgbaston area are high, no records of particular instances of
   crime have been identified in respect of the existing self-service laundrette which is
   to be replaced by the appeal proposal, or in relation to any other similar facilities
   within the wider local area. Furthermore, no substantive evidence has been
   provided to demonstrate that there would likely be any increase in the fear of crime
   related to the proposal. However, the Design Out Crime Office sets out that it is
   necessary to prevent potential crime, that the laundrette has cashless payment
   methods only, as proposed.
7. Having regard to the level of activity and natural surveillance nearby and subject to
   the implementation of appropriate management and security measures, including
   cashless payment methods, adequate lighting and CCTV, which could be secured
   by condition, the proposal would unlikely result in an increase in crime or contribute
   to a heightened fear of crime in the local area, including amongst any particular
   groups who may be vulnerable to crime or the fear of crime.
8. In view of the above, subject to conditions, the proposed development would not
   have a harmful effect on public safety in regard to crime or the fear of crime and so,
   would not conflict with Policy PG3 of the Birmingham Development Plan (January
   2017). This Policy, amongst other matters, requires all new development to create
   safe environments that design out crime through carefully considered site layouts,
   designing buildings and open spaces that promote positive social interaction and
   natural surveillance.
Other Matters
9. The appeal site is within the St Augustine’s Edgbaston Conservation Area (CA).
   Within the CA there is a wealth of traditional large, tall, Victorian buildings, mostly
   set within generous plots and constructed principally of red brick with slate roofs.
   Many of the older buildings have retained their original architectural features. Also,
   there are some listed buildings within the CA, including the Parish Church of St
   Augustine of Hippo, which is a grade II* listed building. Therefore, the significance
   of the CA is derived from its wealth of traditional large suburban Victorian buildings,
   consistent use of red brick materials and its listed buildings of architectural and
   historical quality.
10. While the brochure pictures of the laundrette show a signage cube on top of it, the
    proposed application plans do not include this. Therefore, only a small part of the
    roof of the laundrette would project above the existing brick wall, limiting its visibility
    from public vantage points. Due to this, together with the retention of the brick wall
    and that there are other intervening street features, including trees, surrounding the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009069


     wider site, the proposal would not be a prominent feature within the CA and would
     not harm any elements of the CA that contribute to its significance. Consequently,
     the proposal would have no effect on the significance of the CA.
11. The noise report submitted in support of the appeal proposal demonstrates that,
    subject to a condition restricting the laundrette’s operating hours as proposed, the
    development would not cause harmful noise disturbance to nearby residents.
    Accordingly, the noise and disturbance concerns raised in relation to the previous
    proposal would be appropriately addressed through such a condition, a view
    shared by the Council’s Environmental Health Officer. Furthermore, having regard
    to the submitted noise report and accompanying certification, and subject to the
    proposed restriction on operating hours, it is not necessary to impose a condition
    controlling the noise levels emitted from the laundrette.
12. Even if there is another existing laundrette further along Hagley Road offering an
    indoor and staffed presence and there is no evidence of local community support
    for the proposed laundrette, this does not mean that the proposal would be
    unacceptable based on its own merits and so, does not alter my findings on the
    proposal. Furthermore, the proposal would likely offer a different, self-service
    facility than the existing serviced laundrette, serving different community needs.
Conditions
13. The appellant was given opportunity to comment on conditions and any comments
    made have been considered in making my decision. Having regard to the advice in
    the Planning Practice Guidance and the Framework, in the interests of certainty,
    conditions are needed to clarify the approved plans and the timescale for
    commencing the development.
14. To ensure no harm is caused to the living conditions of those staying at the
    neighbouring hotel and B&B by reason of noise and disturbance, a condition is
    necessary to restrict the hours of operation of the laundrette to those applied for
    (only between 07.00 and 23.00 daily) and, as recommended in the KP acoustics
    Planning Compliance Report (August 2024). It has not been demonstrated that
    lesser hours, as recommended by the Council, would be necessary to protect the
    living conditions of nearby residents.
15. As referred to above, management and surveillance measures are needed for the
    laundrette facility to protect public safety, including appropriate lighting, CCTV, and
    cashless payment measures. Although, with CCTV in place and the comings and
    goings within the local vicinity, it is not necessary to require other natural
    surveillance measures to make the proposal acceptable. Furthermore, this would
    likely involve the need to remove at least part of the existing wall and so, would
    redesign the proposed scheme and potentially have implications on the effect of the
    proposal on the CA.
16. Reference to measures to ensure user safety and deter anti-social behaviour, as
    recommended by the Council, is vague and unprecise and so, has been omitted.
    Additionally, the words ‘unless otherwise agreed in writing,’ would fail to meet the
    relevant tests for conditions. Rather, any changes needed to the agreed
    Management and Surveillance Strategy would be more appropriately managed by
    a further application for planning permission.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009069


Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above, the appeal would accord with the development plan
    read as a whole and there are no material considerations that indicate otherwise.
    Accordingly, the appeal should be allowed.



C Billings
INSPECTOR




                                           Schedule of Conditions


    1. The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.

    2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following drawings: Location Plan & Proposed Site Plan, drawing no 25076-P01
       and elevation plans, EG Laveries Compacte V3 No _eg_050_817_646_a.

    3. Before the development is commenced a Management and Surveillance
       Strategy (Strategy) for the self-service laundrette shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the local planning authority. The Strategy shall include
       details of:

         a) the provision, specification, location, and coverage of CCTV for the laundrette;
         b) external lighting, including position, luminance levels and controls;
         c) cashless only payment methods;
         d) management and maintenance arrangements for all security and lighting
         measures to be put in place.

         The development shall thereafter be carried out and operated in accordance with
         the approved Strategy and maintained as such for the lifetime of the
         development.

    4. The hours of operation of the laundrette and any manual servicing of it shall only
       take place between 07.00 and 23.00 hours daily.


                                              End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
