Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by S Simms BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref:6009854
Green Farm, Lower Green, Stoke by Clare, Suffolk CO10 8HN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Wendi Rodger against the decision of West Suffolk Council.
•    The application reference is 25/1812.
•    The development proposed is change of use from agricultural building to create four dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The address on the application form differs from that on the decision notice. I have
       no evidence that the change was agreed and so have used that on the form.
Background and Main Issues
3.     The appeal relates to a large shed originally used to keep poultry at Green Farm.
       Class Q(b) of Part 3 of Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) permits
       development consisting of a change from a use as an agricultural building to a use
       falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) together with building operations
       reasonably necessary to convert the building for that purpose.
4.     The Council considers that the proposed development is or may not be permitted
       under paragraphs Q.1(b), Q.1(d) and Q.1(j) of Part 3 of Schedule 2, because the
       site has been used for a non-agricultural purpose since ceasing to be part of an
       established agricultural unit, because it may exceed the cumulative number of
       permitted dwellinghouses and because it would consist of building operations
       other than those specified to the extent reasonably necessary.
5.     The Council further considers that the application fails to comply with the condition
       in paragraph Q.2(1) of Part 3 because it provides insufficient information to enable
       an assessment of compliance and so fails to apply the provisions in paragraph W.
6.     The main issues in this appeal are therefore whether (i) the site has been used for
       any non-agricultural purpose since ceasing to be part of an established agricultural
       unit; (ii) the development would exceed the cumulative number of permitted
       dwellinghouses; (iii) the development would consist of building operations other
       than those specified to the extent reasonably necessary; and (iv) sufficient
       information has been provided to enable an assessment of compliance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009854


Reasons
7.     Permission was granted to change the use of the wider farm, excluding the shed,
       from agriculture to a stud farm in the late 1970s, which was implemented and is
       ongoing. The appellant states that the site is a former agricultural building that was
       (but is no longer) part of an established agricultural unit and has not been used for
       any non-agricultural purpose since it ceased to be.
8.     I saw on my site visit that the building was in reasonable repair, not derelict, and
       contained straw, including a fresh bale. Evidence submitted with the application
       also includes photographs of the interior of the building containing horse boxes
       and other horse equipment. A photograph submitted to the Council’s ‘Call for Sites’
       is captioned “Central barn and stabling…”
9.     Whilst an application in 2002 for the adjacent manège included the site, I accept
       that equestrian activity elsewhere within the holding does not automatically result
       in extinguishment of the previous agricultural use and that there is no explicit
       permission for or certificate of any lawful non-agricultural purpose. However, the
       limitation does not require such a use to be, or always have been, lawful.
10. The building has clearly been used for some purpose since it ceased being part of
    an established agricultural unit in the 1970s or 1980s. On the submitted evidence,
    in view of the use of the wider holding, the lack of evidence of agricultural horse
    use, and on the balance of probabilities, I find that it has been used for a non-
    agricultural purpose, most likely equestrian.
11. Consequently, the development is not permitted, and I need not consider the
    extent of the works, cumulative limit or adequacy of information.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



S Simms
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
