Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 August 2026
by F Leung BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009647
23 Manchester Street, Luton LU1 2QB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr A Shaffi of Shaffi and Sons against the decision of Luton Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00073/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of ground floor shop Class E to Sui Generis takeaway
     together with replacement shop front from aluminium to painted timber.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Notwithstanding the description of development set out above, which is taken from
       the application form, it is clear from the plans and accompanying details that the
       development also comprises a flue/extract duct on the rear elevation. The Council
       dealt with the proposal on this basis and so shall I.
3.     Prior to the determination of this appeal, a revised version of the National Planning
       Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The
       changes made to the Framework, insofar as they relate to the substantive matters
       in this appeal, do not fundamentally alter the relevant policy position. I am
       therefore satisfied that no party would be prejudiced by my consideration of the
       revised version of the Framework in reaching my decision. References hereafter
       are to the revised version of the Framework.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
         •     the vitality and viability of the Luton Town Centre Shopping Area; and
         •     the health and wellbeing of residents in the surrounding area.
Reasons
Vitality and viability of the town centre
5.     The appeal site is a ground-floor commercial unit located along a secondary
       shopping frontage within the Luton Town Centre Shopping Area, as defined on the
       Policies Map of the Luton Local Plan 2011-2031 (2017) (the LP). It is currently
       vacant. The appellant indicates that it was previously in use as a grocery store.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009647


6.     Policy LLP22 of the LP indicates that, within the Luton Town Centre Shopping
       Area, planning permission will be granted for the development of non-A1 town
       centre uses in secondary shopping frontages, provided that the proposed use
       would not result in more than 50% of the identified frontage being in non-A1 use.
7.     Since the adoption of the LP in 2017, the Town and Country Planning (Use
       Classes) Order 1987 has been amended. With effect from 1 September 2020,
       shops, formerly within Class A1, now generally fall within Class E, whereas hot
       food takeaways, formerly within Class A5, are now sui generis uses.
8.     The proposal seeks the change of use of the existing vacant retail unit to a
       takeaway. At the time of my site visit, I counted nine commercial units along this
       section of Manchester Street (Nos 9 to 27), including the appeal premises and
       another vacant unit. Of these units, five were non-retail food outlets. The proposal
       would increase the number of non-retail units to six out of nine units. This would
       represent two-thirds of the identified frontage and would significantly exceed the
       50% threshold set out in Policy LLP22. The appeal proposal would therefore
       further erode the proportion of retail uses within the identified shopping frontage.
9.     The appellant states that there have been difficulties in re-letting the premises as a
       Class E unit since the former grocery store vacated the site. However, there is no
       substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that the unit is no longer viable for
       Class E use, or that sufficient marketing has been undertaken.
10. The appeal site does not fall within the Creative Quarter identified under Policy
    LLP11 of the LP. However, it fronts St George’s Square, which lies immediately
    south of the Creative Quarter. St George’s Square functions as a meeting place
    and as a venue for events and festivals, while also forming part of the wider town
    centre shopping area. The surrounding shopping malls also include entertainment
    uses, including a cinema.
11. St George’s Square is identified in the Luton Town Centre Delivery Plan 2025-
    2030 (the Delivery Plan) as Luton’s cultural and social hub, with proposals for its
    redesign, including opportunities for businesses to extend café tables into the
    space. While I recognise these proposals for the square, the frontages surrounding
    the square already include a number of food outlets and the appeal site lies within
    a shopping frontage defined by the LP. The development plans for St George’s
    Square do not contradict the LP requirement to maintain an appropriate proportion
    of retail uses along designated shopping frontages. I am therefore not satisfied
    that refusing planning permission for the replacement of a retail shop with a
    takeaway would be contrary to the Council’s development plans for the square.
12. The appellant also states that many retail shops within the shopping centre do not
    open late and that the proposal would contribute to the Council’s ambition to
    increase economic activity during the evening and night-time, in accordance with
    the Delivery Plan. I acknowledge that the proposal, with its longer evening opening
    hours, would make some contribution to the night-time economy. However, night-
    time operation is not unique to takeaways, as other retail uses, including
    convenience stores, can also operate into the evening. The proposed late-night
    opening hours therefore would not justify the loss of a retail unit along a
    designated shopping frontage.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009647


13. I acknowledge that the proposed takeaway would provide an additional dining
    option in the town centre, complementing cultural events and entertainment
    activities at and around St George’s Square. It would also offer an option for those
    who do not wish to dine in but may wish to use the seating areas around the
    square. Furthermore, it could provide a food option for guests at the nearby hotel,
    which the appellant indicates has no dining facilities of its own, thereby offering
    some support for the Council’s objective of increasing overnight stays in the town.
    However, there is already a high concentration of food establishments offering
    varied cuisines in the area, including those adjacent to the appeal premises which
    already provide takeaway services into the late evening. Consequently, the
    contribution of the proposal to the range of dining options in the area would be
    relatively limited.
14. For the reasons given above, the proposal would result in an over-concentration of
    non-retail uses along a designated shopping frontage, contrary to the relevant
    provisions of Policy LLP22 of the LP. Consequently, it has not been sufficiently
    demonstrated that the proposal would not adversely affect the vitality and viability
    of the Luton Town Centre Shopping Area. It would also conflict with the broader
    aims of Policy LLP21, insofar as that policy seeks to direct main town centre uses
    to locations and scales appropriate to the centre hierarchy. Furthermore, the
    proposal would undermine the aims of Policy LLP3, which, amongst other matters,
    seeks to ensure that Luton Town Centre provides a balanced offer of high-quality
    uses, including independent and national retail, alongside other town centre uses.
15. Policy LLP23 is referred to in the Council’s case officer report, but not in the
    reasons for refusal. In any event, that policy relates to District and Neighbourhood
    Areas and Shopping Parades, whereas the appeal site lies within the Luton Town
    Centre Shopping Area. Accordingly, Policy LLP23 has not been determinative in
    my assessment.
Health and wellbeing of residents
16. Policy HC5 of the Framework states that development proposals for hot food
    takeaways should be refused within reasonable walking distance1 of schools and
    other places where children and young people congregate, unless the location is
    within a designated town centre. It also states that such proposals should be
    refused in locations where there is evidence that a concentration of such uses is
    having an adverse impact on local health, pollution or anti-social behaviour.
17. The appeal site is opposite Luton Central Library, across St George’s Square.
    However, it is not within reasonable walking distance of Dallow Primary School.
    The appeal site is also within a designated town centre. I acknowledge that
    children and young people may reasonably be expected to congregate at and
    around St George’s Square. Nevertheless, the town centre location is a relevant
    exception under Policy HC5 of the Framework. Moreover, food establishments
    around St George’s Square and within the wider town centre provide a broad
    range of food choices.




1
 Annex B of the Framework defines ‘reasonable walking distance’: “for the purpose of policy HC5 (hot food takeaways) it should be
considered to be around 400m, or around five minutes’ walk time if topography, route availability and quality or physical barriers
would prevent or discourage walking up to 400m”.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6009647


18. At the time of my visit, excluding a food truck offering takeaway Thai food, all food
    outlets along Manchester Street had some seating facilities for on-site
    consumption. While some of them appeared to sell fried chicken or burgers as a
    main offering, at least two of them provided other food choices, including salad
    and sushi. Irrespective of whether some of these food outlets could be regarded as
    hot food takeaways or as offering less healthy food choices, the evidence before
    me, including the public health documents and strategies referred to by the
    Council, does not adequately demonstrate that this particular location at
    Manchester Street has such a concentration of hot food takeaways that it is
    causing an adverse impact on local health.
19. Furthermore, there is limited planning control over the precise food choices that
    may be provided within a food establishment, whether for on-site consumption or
    takeaway only. There is also no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate
    that, by reason of being a takeaway, the proposal would inherently provide less
    healthy food choices than a food establishment with seating facilities for mostly on-
    site consumption. Overall, given the availability of a variety of food choices within
    the town centre, I am not persuaded that an additional takeaway at the appeal
    premises would materially prejudice the ability of residents, including children and
    young people, to make healthy food choices.
20. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not materially harm the health and
    wellbeing of residents in the surrounding area. Accordingly, it would not conflict
    with Policies LLP1 and LLP25 of the LP insofar as they seek, amongst other
    things, to support and to promote healthy communities.
21. The proposal would also accord with Policy HC5 of the Framework, having regard
    to the appropriateness of its designated town centre location and the absence of
    sufficient evidence that a concentration of such uses is having an adverse impact
    on local health, pollution or anti-social behaviour. In this respect, it would not
    undermine the Framework’s objective of promoting healthy and inclusive places.
22. Although it does not form part of the Development Plan, the Luton 2040 Vision
    seeks to make Luton a healthy, fair and sustainable town and identifies population
    wellbeing as one of its five priorities. For the reasons detailed above, it is unlikely
    that the proposal would materially detract from the achievement of that priority.
Other Matters
23. The appeal site is located within the Town Centre Conservation Area (the CA).
    Heritage matters do not form part of the Council’s reason for refusing the proposed
    development. Nonetheless, section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires special attention to be paid to the
    desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
24. The CA is concentrated on the town centre and includes George Street, a main
    shopping street, together with several streets extending from it. The dominant
    Town Hall and the adjoining war memorial are key features. The appeal site forms
    part of a row of two- and three-storey buildings facing St George’s Square, with
    commercial uses at street level. These buildings reflect a mix of designs and ages,
    with modern shopfronts of varied design and style. Based on my observations, the
    significance of the CA, insofar as it relates to the proposal, derives in part from the
    varied design and scale of the built form in this commercial shopping street
    location.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009647


25. The only external alterations proposed would be the external flue at the rear of the
    building, which would be screened from public views, and the alteration of the
    aluminium shopfront to a painted timber shopfront. Bearing in mind the extent,
    nature and location of the proposed development, the proposal would have a
    neutral effect on, and would therefore preserve, the character and appearance of
    the CA as a whole.
26. I am also aware that the site is close to the Grade II listed buildings of Luton Town
    Hall and the War Memorial. Mindful of the statutory duty set out in section 66(1) of
    the Act, I have had special regard to the desirability of preserving their settings.
    Their special interest and significance derive, in part, from their historic and
    architectural interest, as appreciated principally from Town Hall Square.
    Notwithstanding the proximity of the appeal site to the listed buildings and the
    degree of intervisibility between them, given the nature and scale of the proposed
    development, the proposal would preserve their settings and would not harm their
    significance.
27. The Council has raised no objection with respect to the CA or the setting of the
    listed buildings. Nevertheless, the absence of harm in these respects does not
    weigh for or against the proposal and does not alter my conclusion on the main
    issues.
28. The appellant contends that the proposed shopfront alterations would improve the
    street scene, the CA and the setting of the historic Luton Town Hall. Having regard
    to the nature and scale of the proposal, any benefits associated with the shopfront
    alterations would be limited. They would not outweigh the harm I have identified to
    the vitality and viability of the town centre shopping area.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal proposal would conflict
    with the development plan as a whole, and there are no material considerations
    that indicate the proposed development should be determined other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

F Leung
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
