Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009404
37A Parkside Road, Birmingham B20 1EL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Bateman against the decision of Birmingham City Council.
•   The application Ref is 2026/01375/PA.
•   The development proposed is the erection of two storey side and rear extension and single storey
    side extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure and Preliminary Matter
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of
   the main issue in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have
   proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal property is a semi-detached dwelling that appears to have been
   extended at single level to the rear and side. Dwellings on this side of the road are
   set back from and lower than the highway. Surrounding development comprises
   detached and semi-detached dwellings of similar appearance and scale with gable
   or hipped roof designs which, by virtue of limited visible alterations, set behind
   modest front gardens and driveways, lend a pleasant consistency, originality and
   spaciousness to the street which contributes positively to the character and
   appearance of the area.
6. The proposed development would comprise a substantial flat roof two-storey
   extension that would wrap around the side and rear of the dwelling. The box-like
   appearance would fail to reflect the prevailing roof forms that characterise both the
   host dwelling and the surrounding area. It would appear as an unduly bulky and
   conspicuous addition which would disrupt the simple form and proportions of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009404


     existing dwelling. The side elevation although set back would still be clearly visible
     from public vantage points, whilst the rear would be viewed from rear gardens of
     neighbouring dwellings.
7. Consequently, the proposed development would result in unacceptable harm to the
   character and appearance of the host property and surrounding area. Contrary to
   Policy PG3 of the Birmingham Development Plan 2031, 2017, (DP) Policy DM2 of
   the Development Management in Birmingham, Development Plan Document 2031,
   2021 (DPD) and guidance contained in the Birmingham Design Guide, Principles
   Document, 2022, which, amongst other things, seek to ensure new development is
   of a high design quality that responds to site conditions and is appropriate to its
   location.
8. With regard to Policy S4 of the Framework and the principle of development within
   settlements, there would be some benefits to the extension of the dwelling.
   However, they would likely be of a private and personal nature that, accordingly,
   would attract very limited weight. The harm I have found, and the subsequent
   development plan conflict, would be obvious and enduring and I therefore ascribe it
   significant weight. The benefits of granting planning permission for the proposals
   would therefore be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
Other Matter
9. Whilst the apparent lack of engagement from the Council has caused frustration,
   these matters are between the main parties and do not affect my consideration of
   the main issue. Any concerns relating to conduct are best addressed through direct
   engagement with the Council, utilising any complaints procedure that it may have.
Conclusion and Recommendation
10. The appeal scheme would conflict with the development plan, and material
    considerations do not indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I
    therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
11. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
