Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by L Gardner MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6009681
Land adjoining Pioneer Point, 3-5 Winston Way, Ilford IG1 2ZG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Rana-Jaswal of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Redbridge.
•    The application Ref is 0287/26.
•    The development proposed is installation of a proposed new Global street hub, including the
     associated display of advertisements on both sides of the unit at Land outside Pioneer Point, 3-5
     Winston Way, Ilford IG1 2ZG.

Appeal B Ref: 6009686
Land adjoining Pioneer Point, 3-5 Winston Way, Ilford IG1 2ZG
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Rana-Jaswal of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Redbridge.
•    The application Ref is 0288/26.
•    The advertisements proposed are installation of 1No. BT Street Hub Unit and associated
     advertisement panels on either side of the unit.

Decisions
1.     Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of a
       proposed new Global street hub, including the associated display of
       advertisements on both sides of the unit at Land adjoining Pioneer Point, 3-5
       Winston Way, Ilford IG1 2ZG in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       0287/26 subject to the conditions in the attached Schedule 1.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of associated
       advertisement panels on either side of the street hub unit at Land adjoining
       Pioneer Point, 3-5 Winston Way, Ilford IG1 2ZG in accordance with the terms of
       the application, Ref 0288/26, dated 30 January 2026. The consent is for five years
       from the date of this decision and is subject to the five standard conditions set out
       in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations and the additional conditions in the
       attached Schedule 2.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Appeal A relates to the refusal of planning permission for the proposed street hub.
       Appeal B is in respect to the refusal of an associated advertisement consent which
       would be an integral part of the proposed hub sought under Appeal A. I have
       considered both on their individual merits, but as they raise similar issues, I have
       combined these cases into a single decision letter.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6009681 and 6009686


4.     In respect to Appeal B, Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control
       of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) state that
       advertisements should be subject to control only in the interests of amenity and
       public safety. With respect to Appeal B, the development plan policies referred to
       by the Council are not determinative, but I have taken them into account as
       material considerations.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on:
           •    the character and appearance of the public realm and the surrounding area,
                and,
           •    highway safety, with particular regard to users of the highway network and
                pedestrian movement.
6.     The main issues in relation to Appeal B are the effect of the proposed
       advertisements on:
           •    visual amenity, and,
           •    public safety, with particular regard to users of the highway network.
Reasons
Character and appearance and visual amenity
7.     The appeal site forms part of the footway along Winston Way, a busy thoroughfare
       within Ilford Metropolitan Centre. Owing to its location within the centre, the
       surrounding area has a mixed use character, with substantially sized mixed use
       commercial and residential buildings immediately adjacent to the appeal site.
8.     Winston Way is formed of three lanes of highway on either side of the
       carriageway, separated by a central reservation. Although the appeal site itself is
       void of existing street furniture, I did observe examples of street furniture nearby to
       the site, including a bus stop, associated shelter and a bin, as well as street lamps
       and a sculpture within the central reservation.
9.     The appeal development would introduce an additional piece of street furniture into
       the footway, which, in part through the illumination of the associated
       advertisements, would hold a level of prominence to the street scene.
       Nevertheless, noting the urban environment within which the development would
       sit, the street hub would read as a subservient and unobtrusive addition which
       would not create undue visual clutter within the street scene.
10. I therefore find that the appeal development would have an acceptable effect on
    the character and appearance of the public realm and the surrounding area, as
    well as the visual amenity of the area. On this basis, I have identified no conflict
    with Policies LP26 and LP28 of the Redbridge Local Plan (2018) (the Local Plan)
    or Policy D8 of the London Plan (2021) (the LP), all of which seek collectively to
    promote high quality design which respects the local character and amenity of the
    surrounding area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6009681 and 6009686


Highway and public safety
11. Policy D8 of the LP seeks in part to ensure that the public realm is safe and
    accessible, outlining that desire lines for people walking should be a particular
    focus. Policy LP26 of the Local Plan, refers in part to the need for development to
    positively contribute to street frontages, including through legibility and movement.
12. Policy LP28 of the Local Plan, which relates to advertising and shop fronts,
    outlines that the Council will resist advertisements that impede the visibility or
    distract the attention of drivers or pedestrians at any access road, junction, or point
    where special care is needed. Policy T4 of the LP states, amongst other matters,
    that development proposals should not increase road danger.
13. The proposed street hub would be positioned close to the edge of the footway
    zone, leaving a reasonable proportion of footway available as the main pedestrian
    thoroughfare, away from the highway edge. Even noting that the footway is a busy
    thoroughfare, the resultant footway width absent of the development would still
    allow for continued two-way movement along the footway, including for the
    movement of wheelchairs, prams, or pedestrians with mobility aids.
14. The appeal site sits between the junction of Winston Way and Clements Lane and
    the roundabout which joins Winston Way to Ilford Lane. Nevertheless, the site is
    not in such close proximity to either the junction or the roundabout that it would
    impede visibility or unduly distract users of the highway network at either of these
    points.
15. With the ability to control the level of illumination of the advertisements by
    condition, as well as the frequency and style of movement, the advertisements
    would not represent an unsafe distraction to either cyclists or drivers of vehicles. I
    therefore do not find there to be a demonstratable likelihood that the development
    would lead to an increased risk of collisions.
16. On this basis, I find that the proposal would have an acceptable effect on highway
    and public safety, with particular regard to users of the highway network and
    pedestrian movement. I have therefore identified no conflict with Policies LP26 and
    LP28 of the Local Plan, or Policies D8 and T4 of the LP.
Other Matters
17. The Council has referred to the refusal of a prior approval application for a
    payphone in 20151. Notwithstanding that the appeal development is materially
    different in its design and function, I understand that the 2015 refusal related to a
    prior approval process under the Electronic Communications Code which engaged
    different policy considerations. I have assessed the appeal proposal on its own
    merits and the planning history relating to the appeal site does not alter my overall
    conclusions.
Conditions
18. I have considered the conditions put forward by the Council, where necessary I
    have amended the wording in the interests of precision and enforceability.



1
    Council reference 0767/15


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6009681 and 6009686


19. In respect to Appeal A I have imposed a condition listing the approved drawings in
    the interests of clarity in addition to the standard time condition. In the interests of
    maintaining the character and appearance of the area, I have imposed a condition
    requiring compliance with the materials stated within the application documents. I
    have also imposed a condition requiring compliance with the submitted
    Management Plan, in the interests of public safety.
20. In relation to Appeal B, in addition to the five standard conditions set out within
    Schedule 2 of the Regulations, it is necessary to control the illumination and
    display characteristics of the advertisements in the interests of visual amenity and
    public safety, particularly to prevent the advertisements standing out significantly
    from the background illumination of the street during hours of darkness.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that Appeal A and Appeal B should be
    allowed, subject to the conditions set out in my formal decisions.


L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6009681 and 6009686




SCHEDULES OF CONDITIONS

SCHEDULE 1 - Appeal A Ref: 6009681

1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
         the date of this decision.
2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
         drawing nos PIONRP/LIB/XX/XX/DR/A/1000/S0 (Issue P1),
         PIONRP/LIB/XX/XX/DR/A/2100/S0 (Issue P1),
         PIONRP/LIB/XX/XX/DR/A/2300/S0 (Issue P1),
         PIONRP/LIB/XX/XX/DR/A/2301/S0 (Issue P1), BT Street Hub Unit Dimensions.
3)       The external materials to be used in the construction of the development hereby
         permitted shall accord with the detail set out on page 11 of the supporting
         document Street Hubs Beyond Connection (Street Hub Product Statement, V2.0
         September 2024).
4)       The Global Street Hub hereby permitted shall be managed in accordance with
         Version 3 of the BT Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan and
         shall include the ongoing use of an algorithm to identify repeated anti social
         number use. Any change to the Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan Version
         3 shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
         The Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan approved shall remain in force for
         the lifetime of the device.

SCHEDULE 2 - Appeal B Ref: 6009686

1)       The intensity of the illumination of the advertisements permitted by this consent
         shall be no greater than 300 cd/m² between dusk and dawn, consistent with
         guidance set out in the Institute of Lighting Professionals publication Brightness
         of Illuminated Advertisements (PLG05, 2023) (or its equivalent in a replacement
         guide).
2)       In daylight hours, the advertisement display luminance shall be controlled in
         order to reflect ambient light conditions (to ensure it is neither too bright or too
         dull), and shall at all times be no greater than the recommended maximum
         daytime luminance values set out in Table 10.5 within the Institution of Lighting
         Professionals – Professional Lighting Guide (PLG 05) 'Brightness of Illuminated
         Advertisements including Digital Displays' (or its equivalent in a replacement
         guide) in cd/m².
3)       There shall be no moving images, animation, video or full motion images
         displayed. The minimum display time for each advertisement shall be 10
         seconds and the advertisement shall not include any features which would result
         in interactive messages or advertisements being displayed.
4)       The interval between successive advertisements shall be no greater than 1
         second and the complete display shall change without effect. The display shall
         include a mechanism to default to a blank or black screen in the event of
         malfunction, or if the advertisement is not in use.
END OF SCHEDULES OF CONDITIONS

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
