Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009739
Priors Court Farm, Rudge Lane, Beckington, Frome BA11 6TS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and
     Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Craig Stone of Stone Developments Wiltshire Limited against the decision of
     Somerset Council.
•    The application reference is 2026/0437/PAA.
     The development proposed is change of use of agricultural buildings to 6 no. dwellinghouses (C3).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
       3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (GPDO) for change
       of use of agricultural buildings to 6 no. dwellinghouses (C3), at Priors Court Farm,
       Rudge Lane, Beckington, Frome BA11 6TS, in accordance with the application
       reference 2026/0437/PAA, subject to the condition set out in Regulation 75 of the
       Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017, and subject to the
       following condition:
       1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans and details: AH2024/68 BARN C&D SHEET 1;
          AH2024/68 BARN C&D SHEET 2; AH2024/68 BARN C&D SHEET 3;
          AH2024/68 BARN C&D SHEET 4 and AH2024/68 BARN C&D SHEET 5.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have used the description of the proposal used on the Council’s decision notice,
       with the exception of any superfluous wording, as it accurately reflects the appeal
       scheme.
3.     For the purposes of clarity, I have adopted the appellants references for the
       agricultural barns on and adjacent to the site, namely existing Barns A, B, C and D
       and Barn E which benefits from planning permission.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       came into effect on 17 August 2026. In determining this appeal, I have taken into
       account comments from the main parties in the interests of natural justice.
5.     As this appeal proposal relates to a prior approval notification development plan
       policies can be considered relevant only insofar as they relate to the development
       and prior approval matters. Paragraph W.10(b) of Schedule 2, Part 3 of the GPDO



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009739


       requires regard to be had to the Framework, insofar as it is relevant to the prior
       approval matter under consideration.
Background and Main Issues
6.     Class Q of Part 3 of Schedule 2 to the GPDO permits;
       (a) a change of use of —
         (i) a building that is part of an established agricultural unit and any land within
         that building’s curtilage, or
         (ii) a former agricultural building that was (but is no longer) part of an established
         agricultural unit and any land within that building’s curtilage,
       to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of Schedule 1 to the Use Classes
       Order,
         (b) development referred to in sub-paragraph (a) together with the extension of
         the building referred to in sub-paragraph (a), or
         (c) development referred to in sub-paragraph (a) together with building
         operations reasonably necessary to convert the building referred to in sub-
         paragraph (a) to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of that Schedule
         or to extend that building.
7.     The Council have concluded that the proposed extension to Barn D would
       constitute permitted development. Based on the evidence before me I see no
       reason to disagree.
8.     Paragraph Q.1 sets out when development is not permitted under Class Q. In this
       case, the Council concluded that the development is not permitted as it does not
       have suitable existing access to a public highway (paragraph Q.1(p)).
9.     Furthermore, paragraph Q.2(1) sets out that development is permitted under Class
       Q subject to the condition that before beginning the development the developer
       must apply to the local planning authority for a determination as to whether the
       prior approval of the authority will be required regarding several considerations.
10. Of these, the matters in dispute relate to (a) transport and highways impacts of the
    development; and (e) whether the location of siting of the building makes it
    otherwise impractical or undesirable for the building to change from agricultural
    use failing within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of Schedule 1 of the Use Classes
    Order.
11. On the basis of the above, the main issues are;
           •    whether the proposed development falls within the permitted development
                rights under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q paragraph of the GPDO, with
                particular regard to the existing access (paragraph Q.1(p)); and

           •    if so, whether the prior approval details relating to transport and highways
                impacts of the development are acceptable; and

           •    whether the location or siting of the building would make it impractical or
                undesirable for the building to change to a dwellinghouse, specifically

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009739


                whether future occupiers would be afforded satisfactory living conditions, for
                future occupiers with particular regard to noise.
Reasons
Existing access
12. While the GPDO does not define what constitutes a suitable access or specify a
    particular standard that must be achieved, it is reasonable to assume it should be
    of sufficient quality to support normal day-to-day residential use.
13. Access to the appeal buildings is achieved via an existing track from the public
    highway. At my site visit, the existing access appeared well formed and capable of
    regular day-to-day residential vehicular movements, the visibility splays offer a
    good view of the highway in each direction, and views into the site when
    approaching it. The Council’s officer report acknowledged that visibility at the
    access is reasonable. Even with the gate in place, I observed that sufficient room
    exists within the site to provide manoeuvring space such that vehicles could
    access and exit the site in forward gear.
14. Whilst the access falls marginally below the 5m width sought by local standards, at
    approximately 4.8m it remains of sufficient width to allow two standard motor
    vehicles to pass one another at low speed. Indeed, there is nothing to prevent the
    removal of the gate and posts as indicated by the appellant, in the future, further
    improving the access arrangements. Additionally, the limited number of
    movements as detailed in the transport assessment indicates that conflict between
    vehicles exiting and entering the site would be minimal.
15. In any event, the use of a modest barn for agricultural storage purposes would not
    result in a significant conflict with private vehicles accessing the proposal, or
    indeed likewise any cyclists or pedestrians. Moreover, the planning history1 clearly
    indicates that the Council have previously considered the access as being suitable
    for an array of uses each attracting its own particular pattern and composition of
    vehicular traffic and activity.
16. As such, I conclude that the site has a suitable existing access to the public
    highway and therefore accords with the provisions of paragraph Q1(p).
Transport and highways impacts
17. The Transport Statement submitted with the planning application concludes that
    the proposed development would not adversely affect the safe and efficient
    operation of the local highway network.
18. The Highway Authority raised no objection to the proposal and the submitted
    evidence demonstrates that the transport and highways impacts from the proposal
    would be acceptable.
19. Whilst the proposed parking provision does not strictly accord with the standards
    set out in the Somerset Countywide Parking Strategy, having regard to the
    particular characteristics of the site, the anticipated parking demand and the
    evidence before me, I am satisfied that the level of parking proposed would be


1
LPA refs: 2024/0393/PAA, 2025/0369/PAA, 2024/0394/PAF, 2021/1314/PAF, 2025/0631/FUL.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6009739


       sufficient to meet the reasonable needs of future occupiers without giving rise to
       unacceptable transport and highway impacts.
20. The evidence before me does not demonstrate that the proposed change of use
    and associated increase in vehicular activity would result in harm to highway
    safety, nor would it lead to severe residual cumulative impacts on the transport
    network. I therefore conclude that the proposal satisfies the requirements of
    paragraph Q.2(1)(a) of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO in respect of
    transport and highway impacts.
Living conditions of future occupiers
21. Barn A and B have extant consents for conversion to dwellings. As such, the
    proposal would result in a largely residential area within the wider agricultural
    landholding. Barn E, yet to be built, is restricted by condition to the storage of hay,
    farm vehicles and machinery only and will not be used for the accommodation of
    livestock or for the storage of slurry or sewage sludge. This condition was imposed
    to safeguard the residential amenities of occupiers of nearby properties.
22. I have had regard to whether the proposal would amount to development in a
    location that is otherwise impractical or undesirable. The site is not a remote
    agricultural holding in an intensive active farming use. It is well connected to the
    local highway network and to local services and facilities.
23. Whilst there will likely be comings and goings associated with agricultural activity
    which at times could occur late into the evening or early in the morning, the
    evidence indicates that the agricultural use of the site is limited in nature, with the
    remaining barn restricted to storage purposes only. As such, the level of activity is
    likely to be modest and less intensive than that typically associated with an
    operational farmyard.
24. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) states that ‘impractical’ or ‘undesirable’ are
    not defined in the regulations, and the local planning authority should apply a
    reasonable ordinary dictionary meaning in making any judgment. PPG defines
    impractical, insofar as it reflects that the location and siting would “not be sensible
    or realistic”, and that undesirable reflects that it would be “harmful or
    objectionable”. In these circumstances, I am not persuaded that the limited
    agricultural activity would give rise to significant conflict with the residential uses,
    nor that the proposal would prejudice the use of Barn E for agricultural storage
    purposes. Consequently, the prospect of incompatibility between the respective
    uses would be minimal.
25. I am also mindful that the Council did not find the location of the appeal site neither
    impractical nor undesirable for residential dwellings in their assessment of Barn A
    and B. Moreover, at the time of those considerations Barn C and D subject of this
    appeal, could have reasonably been used for unrestricted agricultural activities at
    a more intensive level, given their size and form.
26. Consequently, although some disturbance may be possible from the use of the
    neighbouring Barn E, I conclude that neither the location nor siting of the
    agricultural buildings would make it impractical or undesirable for them to be used
    as dwellinghouses. Therefore, the proposed development would comply with
    paragraph Q.2(1)(b) and (e) of the GPDO.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009739


Other Matters
27. The site lies within the Mells Valley SAC Bat Consultation Zone C. The grant of
    planning permission under Article 3(1) of the GPDO is subject to the provisions of
    the GPDO for each class of development and compliance with regulations 75 to 78
    of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended)
    (Habitats Regulations). Article 3(1) specifies a pre-commencement condition which
    must be met, where a development may affect a European protected habitat, such
    as a SAC. This requires a separate application to be made to the Council to
    undertake an Appropriate Assessment and, depending on the outcome, this would
    determine whether, in terms of that matter, the scheme could be undertaken as
    permitted development under the GPDO.
28. My attention has been drawn to the appeal site being in proximity to the Grade II
    listed Priors Court Farmhouse. Under Section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings
    and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I must have special regard to the desirability of
    preserving the listed building and its setting. The evidence indicates that the
    Council did not consider the proposal to be within the setting of a heritage asset.
29. During my site visit, I could not observe Priors Court Farmhouse from the appeal
    site. Priors Court Farmhouse is located approximately 80m further east along
    Rudge Lane, beyond Davidges Cottage, set back from the lane. Given the
    separation between the appeal site and listed building, lack of intervisibility, and
    the amount of intervening development, I conclude that the proposal would
    preserve the setting of Priors Court Farmhouse.
30. The Parish Council has requested financial contributions through a planning
    obligation. However, the proposal before me is under the prior approval process
    set out in Class Q, which restricts consideration to the matters prescribed by the
    GPDO. There is no mechanism within the Class Q process for securing planning
    obligations under section 106 of the Act. Consequently, the requested
    contributions are not a matter that can be considered in determining this appeal.
31. A number of other issues have been raised by interested parties outside of those
    matters considered objectionable by the Council. These include drainage,
    sewerage, internal layout of the proposed dwellings, private outside space,
    outlook, natural light, fire risk, loss of best and most versatile land, parking
    dominance and the provision of cycle storage, heat pumps and refuse storage.
    However, as the appeal relates to prior approval, the matters for consideration are
    restricted to those set out in the relevant paragraphs of the GPDO. Therefore,
    these other issues raised fall outside the matters I can consider.
Conditions
32. Paragraph W (13) of the GPDO allows a prior approval to be approved
    unconditionally or subject to conditions reasonably related to the subject matter of
    the prior approval.
33. It is not necessary to impose a time limit condition as Paragraph Q.2 (3) states that
    development under Class Q must be completed within a period of 3 years starting
    with the prior approval date. I have imposed a condition specifying the approved
    plans in the interest of certainty and subject to the condition set out in Regulation
    75 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009739


Conclusion
34. For the reasons set out above, the appeal is allowed, and prior approval is granted
    subject to conditions.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
