Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026
by S Simms BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009076
74 - 76 Coombe Road, New Malden, KT3 4QU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by William Way (New Malden) Limited against the decision of the Royal Borough
     of Kingston upon Thames.
•    The application reference is 24/02949/FUL.
•    The development proposed is redevelopment of site comprising five separate residential buildings to
     provide a total of 20 residential units and 61.7 square meters of ground floor commercial space with
     associated access, parking, and landscaping following demolition and removal of existing buildings
     and structures.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by William Way (New Malden) Limited against
       the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames. This is the subject of a separate
       decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The appellant submitted a Unilateral Undertaking with the appeal, which the
       Council considers deals with two of its reasons for refusal. I see no reason to
       disagree and have had regard to this in establishing the main issues.
4.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the
       latest Housing Delivery Test results were published on 17 August 2026. I invited
       the main parties to comment on any implications of these for their cases and took
       their responses into account in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are (i) the effect of the proposal on the supply of employment
       floor space and industrial land, and whether the proposal would make adequate
       provision for (ii) affordable housing and (iii) parking and access.
Reasons
Employment floor space and industrial land
6.     The appeal site comprises a warehouse with trade counter fronting a main road,
       from which there is an access to a rear car park and yard, which extend behind
       both neighbouring buildings and have an egress to a residential side road.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009076


       Submitted valuations report a gross internal area (GIA) of 436sqm. The site is in
       use as a builders’ merchants and is within the northern end of New Malden District
       Centre, which extends along the main road and includes a variety of uses, with tall
       office buildings around a railway station about 350m to the south.
7.     The proposal would replace the commercial floor space and land with 20 dwellings
       and a commercial unit of 62sqm GIA. An Economic Needs Assessment reports
       that there are currently 20 part-time employees, which it equates to 2.9 full-time
       equivalents (FTEs). However, the Statement of Case contains a table of seven
       employees, who spend a total of 315.5 hours per week on site, which are equated
       to seven FTEs. In comparison, the appellant estimates that three FTEs would be
       employed in the new commercial unit.
8.     Overall, there would be a loss of commercial floor space, land and, quite possibly,
       employment. The appellant justifies this by reference to a surveyor’s report on
       market demand that there is no prospect of letting the site for employment use
       once the lease expires in December 2027 due to market changes, which favour
       locally available trade parks, industrial areas and high-footfall locations over the
       dated buildings and residential setting of the site. It further reports that commercial
       uses would not be viable in any redevelopment for the same reasons.
9.     I am unconvinced that changes in the builders’ merchants market reflect demand
       for all alternative commercial uses and, despite the advice, the proposal includes
       such a unit. Without marketing, I am also unconvinced that there is no prospect of
       letting the site for employment use. Overall, the evidence and marketing required
       by Policy DM17 of the Kingston Core Strategy (CS) and Policies E4 and E7 of the
       London Plan (LP) are not provided, so I conclude that the effect on employment
       floor space and industrial land would be unacceptable.
Affordable housing
10. The proposal makes no affordable housing provision, which the appellant seeks to
    justify through a viability assessment. The assessment concludes that providing
    50% affordable housing, with a 70:30 split between social and affordable rent,
    would create a substantial deficit and make the scheme unviable. It also identifies
    a smaller deficit with no affordable housing. The benchmark land value it uses is
    taken from an existing use valuation submitted with the application.
11. The valuation suggests that the low site coverage might encourage investors to
    apply a similar yield to those in established trade parks and provides examples of
    such transactions. However, this appears at odds with the same surveyor’s report
    that market changes mean that trade parks would now be favoured over the site.
    The GIAs of the transacted premises are also many times that of the subject and
    the valuation per unit GIA is well above those in the transactions.
12. A review of the viability assessment for the Council finds a value less than two-
    fifths of the valuation to be realistic but cites no comparators and implies a value
    per unit GIA lower than any cited in the valuation. A further valuation by a different
    surveyor for the appellant is lower than the original and cites recent transactions in
    premises with GIAs closer to that of the subject but still implies a value per unit
    GIA that is much higher than secured in any of the transactions.
13. I accept that valuation is not a precise exercise and requires valuers to utilise their
    expertise and market knowledge to make appropriate adjustments to comparable

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009076


       transactions. Similarly, the nature of a review is to critically consider work already
       carried out, rather than necessarily seek out alternative comparators. I have no
       reason to doubt that the reviewer did not also apply their expertise, even if their
       market knowledge might be less local to the area.
14. Even if the more pessimistic assumptions made by the reviewer (and the market
    demand report) are wrong, there remain significant differences between the value
    found by the review and the valuations. Consequently, and due to the disparities
    with the comparators and inconsistency with the market demand report, I am not
    persuaded that the lack of affordable housing is justified.
15. Although a unilateral undertaking submitted with the appeal includes a review
    mechanism, it would only secure affordable housing from any increase in gross
    development value beyond that assessed by the viability assessment. It could not
    address any shortcomings in the current evidence, which fails to justify provision
    below the maximum reasonable amount required by CS Policies DM15 and CS10
    and LP Policies H4 and H5, contrary to those policies.
Parking and access
16. The proposed site layout includes two disabled spaces, the clear area to the rear
    of which would overlap with the footway of the residential side road. These areas
    are required to allow a disabled person space in which to access or leave a parked
    vehicle. Whilst the design would not be capable of being fully marked out, the
    Council’s Neighbourhood Traffic Engineer has not objected to the design.
17. Most vehicles are accessed from their sides, the clear area for which would not
    overlap, so the risk of conflict with pedestrians on the footway would be low and
    manageable, comparable to that of getting into or out of the side of a car parked
    on the street. Certainly, it would not compromise highway safety or increase road
    danger to an extent contrary to CS Policy DM9 or LP Policy T4. Consequently, I
    find that the proposal would make adequate provision for parking and access.
Other Matters
18. The Borough has 1.48 years’ supply of deliverable housing land and 66% of the
    requirement has been delivered in the last three years, representing evidence of
    unmet housing need. The proposal would provide 20 dwellings, economic benefits
    during construction and improvement to the character and appearance of area, so
    enhancing the setting of the locally listed church opposite. It would also support
    local services and facilities through demand created by its occupiers.
Planning Balance
19. Policy S3 of the Framework requires decisions on development proposals to apply
    a presumption in favour of sustainable development by applying Policy S4 of the
    Framework within settlements. This requires proposals to be approved unless
    benefits would be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, assessed against
    decision-making policies in the Framework, which are likely to include impacts to
    the appropriate safeguarding of land or buildings in the development plan.
20. The viability assessment does not rely on a price paid or intended, and reflects the
    Planning Practice Guidance methodology, but does not itself explain differences
    from the inputs and assumptions used in the viability assessment that informed the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009076


       development plan, as required by Policy DM5 of the Framework. Moreover, I have
       found significant disparities in valuations, comparators and demand evidence.
21. The proposal would not provide the homes needed for different groups assessed
    under Policy HO1 of the Framework, as required by Policy HO7 of the Framework.
    However, it will contribute general needs housing and, given the scale of unmet
    need and of the proposal, I nonetheless attach moderate weight to the provision of
    20 dwellings. However, I attach significant weight to the failure to meet affordable
    housing requirements, which is contrary to Policy HO8 of the Framework.
22. The evidence on market demand does not support the proposed commercial unit
    and so I cannot be sure it would result in the economic benefits that Policy E2 of
    the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to. Therefore, I attach only
    modest weight to this as a factor. I also attach modest weight to the benefits of
    construction activity and support for local services and facilities.
23. Without marketing, I cannot be sure that the site would become vacant or that the
    proposal would make better use of it, with the benefits to which Policy L2 of the
    Framework refers. Consequently, and despite the scale of the loss compared to
    the identified requirement, I attach substantial weight to the impact on land and
    buildings safeguarded by CS Policy DM17 and LP Policies E4 and E7.
24. The proposal would improve the character and appearance of the area, and so I
    attach substantial weight to compliance with CS Policies CS8 and DM10 on design
    quality. The parking would have an acceptable impact on safety and so comply
    with Policies TR4 and TR6 of the Framework.
25. Overall, the provision of housing, improved character and appearance, re-use of
    land and local economic benefits are substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects of the failure to meet affordable housing requirements and impacts to the
    safeguarding of land or buildings in the development plan, which the evidence
    does not indicate is no longer appropriate. Therefore, the application of Policy S4
    of the Framework means that the proposal should not be approved.
26. Furthermore, CS Policies DM15 and CS10, and LP Policies H4 and H5 are not
    materially inconsistent with the Framework and so should continue to be afforded
    significant weight. Benefits referred to by Policy L2 of the Framework cannot be
    relied upon and, in this case, CS Policy DM17 and LP Policies E4 and E7 also
    remain consistent with the Framework because, like Policy S4 thereof, they accept
    alternative uses if there is evidence safeguarding is no longer appropriate.
Conclusion
27. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Consequently, I conclude that it should be dismissed.



S Simms
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
