Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009586
10 Windlesham Road, Brighton BN1 3AG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by A Green of Castle Accommodation against the decision of Brighton & Hove
     City Council.
•    The application Ref is BH2026/00119.
•    The development proposed is alterations to existing 10no person house in multiple occupation (Sui
     Generis) with erection of single storey rear extensions and conversion of garage to habitable space,
     with creation of managers accommodation studio and 1no self-contained studio (C3), resulting in 10
     residents plus onsite manager (part retrospective).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Castle Accommodation against Brighton &
       Hove City Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The development proposed was originally described as ‘internal and external
       alterations to existing 10 person HMO, to include managers accommodation studio
       plus self contained studio, resulting in 10 residents plus onsite manager (in
       manager studio)’. However, the decision notice refers to the development
       proposed as ‘alterations to existing 10no person house in multiple occupation (Sui
       Generis) with erection of single storey rear extensions and conversion of garage to
       habitable space, with creation of managers accommodation studio and 1no self-
       contained studio (C3), resulting in 10 residents plus onsite manager (part
       retrospective)’ which I have used in the banner heading above as this is a more
       accurate description of the proposal.
4.     Some alterations have already been carried out, including some changes to the
       internal room layout. For the avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeal
       based on the submitted plans considered by the Council.
5.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. This has introduced significant changes to its structure and
       presentation, including the incorporation of development management policies.
       However, having carefully considered the new Framework, I am satisfied that,
       insofar as the issues determinative to this case are concerned, the relevant policy
       approach has not fundamentally changed, and my consideration of it would not
       cause procedural unfairness or prejudice to parties. Therefore, the parties have
       not been invited to make further comments.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009586


Main Issues
6.       The main issues in this appeal are:
         •    whether acceptable living conditions would be provided for future occupiers,
              with particular regard to the provision of internal communal space and second
              floor bedroom space; and
         •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of neighbouring
              occupiers, with particular regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
Living conditions – future occupiers
7.       The appeal site comprises a detached property in a residential area. The building
         provides accommodation over three levels for which a certificate of lawful use or
         development as a large house in multiple occupation (HMO) for 10 unrelated
         individuals was granted by the Council in 20251. The proposed extensions and
         alterations would provide two studios and nine bedrooms.
8.       Together, Policies DM1 and DM7 of the City Plan Part Two 2022 (CP) set out the
         standards for HMOs. Policy DM1 seeks to deliver high quality homes and requires
         proposals for residential development to meet the nationally described space
         standards which are set out. A single bedroom should have a floor area of at least
         7.5sqm. This policy sets out minimum gross internal floor areas (GIA) for the
         overall sizes of residential units which vary according to the number of bedrooms
         and storeys of accommodation. Any area with a headroom of less than 1.5m does
         not count towards the GIA unless used for storage.
9.       Policy DM7 requires the provision of communal living space and cooking and
         bathroom space appropriate in size to the expected number of occupants. The
         supporting text states that the minimum size of usable communal living space
         (including lounge, kitchen and dining areas) should be 16sqm, equating to 4sqm
         per person for a small four person size HMO, with proportionately more communal
         lounge space provided for HMOs accommodating more residents. Factors such as
         usability and configuration of the space and the size of bedrooms and the extent of
         their ability to function as social areas will be taken into account in determining
         whether communal space provision is sufficient.
10. There is no dispute that the ground floor rooms and first floor studios would meet
    the sizes required by Policy DM1. The four bedrooms on the second floor would
    exceed the 7.5sqm minimum standard for single occupancy. At my site visit, I
    observed the impact of the sloping roofs and outward opening shower room doors
    on the usability of the top floor rooms. Whilst compact, with beds largely positioned
    under sloped roofs, there is sufficient head space to move comfortably around the
    rooms. There is also some wall space to accommodate furniture such as hanging
    rails and chests of drawers. Each second-floor bedroom has a good-sized window
    providing sufficient outlook from the rooms.
11. The Council considers that the proposal would generate a need for 44sqm of
    communal space for the 11 residents, whereas the appellant states that this
    should be reduced as the two occupants of the proposed studios would have their

1
    Application ref: BH2025/01095


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6009586


       own lounge/dining/kitchen areas. Nevertheless, given the accesses to the
       proposed studios within the building, there is no reason to suggest that their
       occupants would not use the communal spaces. Indeed, the communal lounge
       would be sandwiched between the studios.
12. The proposed communal living areas would comprise a kitchen/diner measuring
    14.3sqm on the ground floor, a 11.6sqm lounge on the first floor and a 4.4sqm
    kitchen on the second floor, providing a total of 30.3sqm of shared space. Even if
    the requirement was reduced to discount for the occupiers of the proposed
    studios, it would still fall noticeably short of the 36sqm required for the 9 occupants
    of the remaining bedrooms. Further, the communal spaces would be spread
    across three rooms on different floors, with the kitchen on the top floor being very
    small with no space for a table and no window. Given the relatively compact
    overall sizes of the bedrooms on this level, residents of the rooms on this floor
    would be more likely to use the ground floor communal kitchen/diner which would
    include space to sit down and eat.
13. The appellant states that the proposed communal space would equate to 3.37sqm
    per person (assuming 9 sharing residents) compared to the previous 2.9sqm per
    person for the 10-person HMO. There was previously a single communal space
    comprising a linked dining room and kitchen on the ground floor and most
    bedrooms were significantly more spacious, enabling many of them to also
    function as social areas. This contrasts with the multiple communal rooms split
    across the floors and the smaller bedrooms now proposed which would provide
    insufficient space for the HMO’s residents to socialise.
14. I acknowledge that some of the larger ground floor rooms would benefit from
    kitchenettes and there would be space within the studios to enable their occupants
    to socialise. Nevertheless, this does not negate the requirement to provide high
    quality homes, including the provision of appropriately sized communal living
    space, in accordance with policies in the CP.
15. Overall, whilst the proposal would provide sufficient second floor bedroom space,
    there would be insufficient internal communal space, creating unacceptable living
    conditions for future occupiers. In this respect, it would conflict with Policies DM1,
    DM7 and DM20 of the CP which seek to achieve appropriate amenity for proposed
    occupiers, including adequate communal living space, amongst other things.
Living conditions – neighbouring occupiers
16. The lawful use of the property by 10 people is already significantly more than
    would usually be expected if it were occupied by a large family, and the proposal
    would increase the number of residents to 11. An additional occupant would create
    more intensive use of the site, including more activity in the building and external
    areas, and more comings and goings by the additional resident, their visitors and
    delivery drivers.
17. Nevertheless, the property lies adjacent to 8 Windlesham Road which, as part of
    the same certificate of lawful use or development for the appeal site, can lawfully
    be used for occupation by 11 unrelated individuals as a large HMO. In this context,
    it is not considered that the cumulative increase in activity associated with an
    additional resident at the appeal property would cause unacceptable disturbance
    to the occupants of nearby dwellings.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009586


18. Therefore, I conclude that the proposed development would not harm the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to noise and
    disturbance. In this regard, it would comply with Policies DM20 and DM40 of the
    CP where they require developments to not cause nuisance nor unacceptable loss
    of amenity to nearby residents.
Other Matters
19. The appellant states that the proposal has been designed to overcome the
    reasons for refusal of a previous application for alterations and extensions to
    increase the occupancy levels of the HMO to 13 residents2. Nonetheless, I must
    determine the appeal scheme on its merits based on the plans before me.
20. The appellant expresses general dissatisfaction with the Council’s handling of the
    application, including the time taken for its decision. This does not have any
    bearing on my determination of this appeal, but I consider matters raised in the
    appellant’s application for costs.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as
    a whole and the material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be
    dismissed.

A Wright
INSPECTOR




2
    Planning application ref: BH2025/02618


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
