Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Chris Mayes CMLI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009880
The Teapot, East Pier, Sandside, Scarborough, North Yorkshire YO11 1PG
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•   The appeal is made by Mr M Smith against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•   The application reference SCAZF25/01322/FL was approved on 19 March 2026 and planning
    permission was granted subject to conditions.
•   The development permitted is change of use of land for external seating area.
•   The condition in dispute is No 3 which states that: ‘The fixtures, furniture and barriers associated with
    the approved use shall be located within the approved area between the specified hours of 09:00-
    18:00 from Monday-Sunday, only and not at any other time. They shall be removed and stored away
    from the approved area outside of the specified hours’.
•   The reason given for the condition is: ‘In the interests of preventing visual and architectural harm to
    the listed building, in accordance with Policy DEC5 of the Scarborough Borough Local Plan’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Since the appeal was submitted, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) has been published. In the interests of procedural fairness, the
   parties were given an opportunity to comment on the implications for the appeal. I
   have taken those comments into account and determined the appeal having regard
   to the provisions of the 2026 Framework.
3. Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   requires the decision maker, when considering whether to grant planning
   permission for development which affects a listed building or its setting, to have
   special regard to the desirability of preserving the building, its setting or any
   features of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses. I have had
   special regard to that duty in determining the appeal.
4. The appeal site is situated within the Scarborough Conservation Area (the CA). In
   accordance with the duty imposed by Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
   Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), I have paid special attention
   to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the
   CA.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether the condition is necessary and reasonable, having
   regard to the effect that the continued presence of the approved fixtures, furniture


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009880


        and barriers beyond the permitted hours would have on the significance of heritage
        assets.
Reasons
6. The significance of this part of the CA derives substantially from its historic
   relationship with Scarborough's harbour and maritime development. The listed East
   Pier, Old Pier, Vincent’s Pier, West Pier (List Entry No. 1242900) (the East Pier)
   are important components of that significance and remain conspicuous reminders
   of the town's historic maritime function. The nearby Toll Bar1, a non-designated
   heritage asset, also contributes to the historic interest and distinctiveness of the
   area.
7. The significance of the listed East Pier derives from its architectural and historic
   interest as surviving harbour infrastructure and from the evidence it provides of
   Scarborough’s maritime development. Its form, fabric and continued relationship
   with the harbour enable its historic function and evolution to be readily appreciated.
   The appeal site forms part of its open harbourside setting, which allows the pier to
   be experienced as a distinct element of the historic harbour. The relative openness
   of the appeal site therefore contributes positively to the ability to appreciate the
   significance of the listed pier.
8. Although the harbour and seafront are important tourist destinations, I observed at
   my site visit that the East Pier possesses a character that is distinct from the more
   intensively commercialised parts of the Foreshore and Sandside. Those areas are
   characterised by a concentration of commercial activity, amusement uses and
   associated paraphernalia. By contrast, the part of the CA including the East Pier,
   Toll Bar and appeal site retains a more open and historically legible character,
   within which the historic function and evolution of the East Pier remain readily
   appreciable.
9. The appellant seeks to amend Condition 3 to allow the approved furniture and
   barriers to remain in place between 08:00 and 22:00 during the tourist season,
   identified as extending from April to September. Although the seasonal limitation
   would temper the perception of permanence, the furniture and barriers would
   remain in place for substantially longer each day and into the evening throughout
   that six-month period. This would give the seating area a more sustained visual
   presence during the principal tourist season.
10. Allowing those features to remain in place until 22:00 would materially increase
    their presence within the East Pier environment. The commercial furniture and
    barriers would be experienced for longer within a location whose significance
    derives substantially from its historic maritime character. This would erode the
    ability to appreciate the East Pier as a historic structure within its open harbourside
    setting and diminish the contribution that the relative openness of this part of the
    harbour makes to the character and appearance of the CA.
11. The proposal would therefore harm the significance of the listed East Pier through
    development within its setting. It would also harm the character and appearance of
    the CA and detract from the contribution that the Toll Bar makes to the historic
    interest and distinctiveness of the locality. The effects would be seasonal and


1
    Also referred to in the evidence as the Toll Station and Toll Gate.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                      2
Appeal Decision 6009880


     would affect a limited part of the setting of the East Pier and the wider CA. The
     resulting heritage harm would therefore be at the lower end of the scale.
Heritage Balance
12. The proposal would provide some public benefits. Allowing the furniture and
    barriers to remain for longer would provide the business with greater operational
    flexibility during the tourist season, increase opportunities for customers to use the
    seating area and support economic activity associated with an established local
    enterprise. However, their removal outside the permitted hours would not, in itself,
    prevent the premises from continuing to operate. Moreover, planning permission
    has already been granted for the external seating area. The benefits before me are
    therefore confined to those arising from the additional period during which the
    furniture and barriers could remain in place. In that context, the public benefits
    would be modest.
13. Set against those benefits, the proposal would harm the significance of the listed
    East Pier through development within its setting, harm the character and
    appearance of the CA and detract from the contribution that the Toll Bar makes to
    the historic interest and distinctiveness of the locality. The Framework makes clear
    that harm to the significance of a heritage asset is a matter of considerable
    importance and that substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
    Although the identified harm would be at the lower end of the scale, I attach
    substantial weight to the conservation of the listed East Pier and the CA. Taking
    account also of the harm to the contribution made by the Toll Bar, the collective
    heritage harm carries substantial weight in the balance.
14. Having regard to those statutory duties and to the Framework as a whole, the
    modest public benefits arising from the additional period during which the furniture
    and barriers could remain in place would not outweigh the identified heritage harm.
15. I therefore conclude that Condition 3 is necessary and reasonable to safeguard the
    significance of the nearby heritage assets. The proposed variation would harm the
    significance of the listed East Pier through development within its setting, fail to
    preserve the character or appearance of the CA and harm the contribution made by
    the Toll Bar. It would therefore conflict with Policy DEC5 of the Scarborough
    Borough Local Plan (July 2017), which seeks to conserve the historic environment
    and requires proposals to conserve those elements that contribute to the
    significance of designated heritage assets, preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of conservation areas, and avoid harm to non-designated heritage
    assets unless outweighed by public benefits.
Other Matters
16. The appellant refers to other premises where external seating areas operate over
    longer periods, sculptures recently installed on the East Pier and other permissions
    where comparable restrictions have not been imposed. However, I have been
    provided with limited information about the circumstances of those developments.
    In any event, each proposal must be considered on its own merits. Those examples
    do not therefore alter my findings regarding the effect of the variation on the
    significance of the heritage assets.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009880


Conclusion
17. I conclude that the condition is necessary and reasonable. The proposed variation
    would conflict with the development plan, and the material considerations do not
    indicate that the appeal should be determined otherwise than in accordance with it.
    Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.



Chris Mayes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
