Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009942
18 Newick Avenue, Little Aston, Sutton Coldfield, Staffordshire B74 3DA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jay Ponkiya against the decision of Lichfield District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00234/FUL.
•    The development proposed is demolition of existing dwelling and erection of a 4 bedroom detached
     dwelling (self-build) with associated works.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the revised Framework) came into
       force on the 17 August 2026. It is a material consideration which should be taken
       into account from the day of publication. Although the revised Framework is
       significantly different from the previous versions the wording of the details most
       pertinent to this appeal are unchanged. Having considered the revisions and in
       light of the principles of natural justice, in this instance it is not necessary to invite
       any submissions from the parties on the revised Framework.
3.     As part of the appeal submission the appellant has submitted a revised sightline
       and cycle parking drawing (ref K100000-K10-ZZ-XX-D-A-0010 rev P02) which was
       also submitted to the Council before the application was determined. Although this
       plan was not the plan which was considered by the Council in making their
       decision, it was available to them at the appeal and the Council has had an
       opportunity to provide comments. Consequently, neither main party would be
       prejudiced if I were to take the amended plan into account in my decision.
4.     Following submission of the appeal documents, the Council has confirmed that it is
       no longer seeking to defend the second reason for refusal which related to
       highway safety, the suitability of the proposed second access, and cycle parking. I
       have, therefore, dealt with this in Other Matters rather than as a main issue.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
       •   the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area;
           and
       •   the effect of the development on biodiversity and the requirement for 10%
           Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009942


Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     The appeal site currently comprises a detached, single storey, dwelling positioned
       within a spacious plot and enclosed by well-established trees and hedges on all of
       the boundaries. It is located on a corner position on the junction between Newick
       Avenue and Vercourt, a private road serving mostly single-storey dwellings. It is in
       a residential area within the settlement.
7.     The hedges and trees around the appeal site contribute positively to the verdant
       and green character of the site and the area. The size of the existing dwelling also
       contributes to the spacious character of the site. However, the corner position, the
       trees and hedges, the wide pavement and the road to Vercourt also form a
       significant part of the spacious character of the immediate area around the existing
       dwelling.
8.     Opposite the appeal site is a relatively new build dwelling which has a large
       footprint and massing. I also saw other properties along Newick Avenue with
       footprints that appeared to almost fill the width of their plot, including others with
       double gable frontages, large areas of glazing, balconies to the front and similar
       design features to the appeal proposal. Although the appeal site currently contains
       a relatively small dwelling in a large plot, the surrounding residential area is
       characterised by a range of sizes of properties, mostly two-storey, in large plots.
       Nevertheless, the presence of other large dwellings has altered the low density
       pattern of the area and reduced the spacing between buildings.
9.     Hence, although the appeal proposal would be significantly larger than the
       existing, single-storey, property on the site, and extend further across the site and
       deeper into the rear garden, this would not automatically equate to harm. From the
       evidence before me, and my observations in the area, the proposal would result in
       a dwelling of a similar height, scale, massing and footprint to other properties
       along Newick Avenue. Even with three habitable floors, including the rooms in the
       roof, the proposed dwelling would, therefore, respect the character of the
       surrounding area in terms of layout, size and scale.
10. The appeal proposal would retain most of the boundary trees and hedges,
    especially to the side and rear where it would be seen in the context of Vercourt.
    This would retain the strong, verdant, landscape feature that contributes positively
    to the area, would reduce the visual effect of the development, and would ensure
    that the generous landscape setting is maintained and still the dominant feature of
    the street scene. Moreover, there would be sufficient separation between the
    proposed dwelling and existing houses, and as most of the boundary hedges and
    trees are to be retained, this would form a visual break between the appeal
    proposal and the single-storey properties on Vercourt. Furthermore, the properties
    on Vercourt would continue to be read in their own context as a distinctly separate
    character area to the houses along Newick Avenue. The separation distance,
    retention of boundary planting and the position of the road and footpath to Vercourt
    would ensure that the spacious character of the immediate area is retained.
11. Furthermore, the contemporary design of the proposal, which would be read from
    the street as a two-storey dwelling with rooms provided in the roof space served by
    rooflights, would not be out of keeping with the design and materials of others
    within the wider area, even with the large central gable feature, glazing, and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009942


       balcony. The design and the retention of the green boundaries would result in a
       high quality built environment that respects the character of the surrounding area
       in terms of its appearance. For these reasons, I find that the appeal proposal
       would not be visually intrusive in the street scene nor erode the spacious character
       of the area when considered in the context of other large properties along Newick
       Avenue and the size of the appeal plot. Overall, the appeal proposal would,
       therefore, be sympathetic to the established character of the area and would
       maintain a strong sense of place.
12. For the above reasons, the appeal proposal would not adversely affect the
    character and appearance of the area. It would, therefore, comply with the
    requirements of Policy BE1 of the Lichfield District Local Plan Strategy 2008-2029
    (the LPS) which, amongst other matters, requires all development to ensure that a
    high quality sustainable built environment can be achieved, requires development
    to carefully respect the character of the surrounding area and development in
    terms of layout, size, scale, architectural design and public views, and aims for
    new development to ensure high quality, inclusive, design through the appreciation
    of context, as well as plan, scale, proportions and detail.
Biodiversity net gain
13. The appeal site comprises an existing dwelling, garage, hard surfaced areas,
    grassed garden, trees, hedges and other planting. The appeal would lead to a net
    loss of biodiversity habitat due to the larger footprint of the proposed dwelling and
    the removal of landscaped garden and trees.
14. Both main parties have assessed the proposal as a self-build dwelling and the
    appellant has confirmed that they are willing to enter into a legal agreement to
    secure this so that the development would be exempt from Biodiversity Net Gain
    (BNG). However, I have no such agreement before me.
15. Without a completed legal agreement I cannot be certain that the appeal proposal
    would be exempt from BNG and it would, therefore, adversely affect biodiversity
    and the requirement for 10% BNG, contrary to the requirements of Schedule 7A of
    the Town and Country Planning Act (as amended) and Policy NR3 of the LPS
    which, amongst other matters, seeks to protect, enhance, restore and implement
    appropriate conservation management of the biodiversity value of the land and
    buildings, and deliver net gain for biodiversity.
Other Matters
16. The second reason for refusal on the Council’s decision notice relates to highway
    safety, whether the second access to the development would be appropriate and
    whether there would be sufficient cycle parking. Following the submission of the
    amended sightline and cycle parking plan, the Council has confirmed that it is no
    longer seeking to defend this reason for refusal and that the revised plans show a
    safe means of access and sufficient cycle parking. I have no compelling evidence
    to disagree with this. Consequently, if I were minded to allow the appeal, subject to
    conditions, it would not be contrary to Policies ST1 and ST2 of the LPS.
17. The proposed dwelling would be sufficient distance from the neighbouring
    properties so as not to result in any loss of privacy for the occupiers of those
    dwellings, even from the upper floor windows. The proposed first floor, rear,
    balcony would be set in between two projecting sections containing bedrooms.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009942


       The balcony would provide views for the occupants of the property over their own
       garden but, due to these rooms either side, and the separation distances, it would
       not overlook the neighbouring properties. The windows in the side elevations of
       the proposal would be capable of being secured as obscure glazing, if I were
       minded to allow the appeal, to ensure that the risk of overlooking is minimised.
18. The separation distance would also ensure that the appeal proposal would not
    result in a building that is overbearing for the occupiers of neighbouring properties.
    The Council raised no concerns regarding this matter and assessed the proposal
    against Policy BE1 of the LPS and the Sustainable Design Supplementary
    Planning Document. Even considering the concerns raised by interested parties, I
    have no reason to disagree with the Council’s findings.
19. Concerns have also been raised by interested parties regarding the loss of trees,
    amongst other matters. Although some trees are to be removed to provide for the
    siting of the proposed dwelling and for the second access, the majority of the trees
    and other landscaping is to be retained. The loss of trees would be limited to what
    is required to enable the development. As I have found that the retained green
    boundaries would help to minimise the visual effect of the proposed development
    the trees proposed to be removed would not be harmful to the area.
Conclusion
20. For the reason given above the appeal should be dismissed.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
