Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by S Leonard BA (Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009745
Pine Lodge, Chilworth Drove, Chilworth, Hamphire SO16 7JH
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr Neil Palmer (NA Palmer Design Ltd) against the decision of Test Valley
     Borough Council.
    The application Ref is 25/02219/FULLS.
    The development proposed is 4 bed dwelling and carport.


Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The appellant’s planning application form and appeal form describe the proposal
         as a ‘3 bed dwelling and carport’. However, the refused floor plan drawing Ref
         10536-PL-03 rev B indicates that the proposed first floor accommodation would
         comprise 4 bedrooms. and the Council’s refusal notice refers to a 4-bed dwelling. I
         have dealt with the appeal based on the scheme as refused.
3.       Whilst the planning application form refers to white render and grey cladding walls
         and an EDPM flat roof, the appellant’s appeal statement confirms that, as shown
         on the refused elevation drawing Ref 10536-PL-04 rev B, the proposed dwelling
         would comprise a traditional vernacular pitched roof design with brick and
         washboard rustic style cladded walls. I have dealt with the appeal accordingly.
Main Issues
4.       The main issues are:
         Whether the appeal site is a suitable location for a new dwelling, having regard
          to the Council’s adopted spatial settlement policy and the accessibility of the site
          to facilities and services;
         The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
         The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of Pine Lodge
          and the future occupiers of the appeal scheme, having particular regard to
          privacy; and
         The effect of the proposal on the integrity of the Solent and Southampton Water
          and New Forest Special Protection Areas (SPAs), having regard to additional
          nitrates and increased recreational pressure.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009745


Reasons
Location
5.    The appeal site is located on the west side of Chilworth Drove, within open
      countryside to the south of Chilworth village and the M27. It forms part of the
      garden of Chilworth Lodge, a detached two-storey dwelling, which fronts onto, and
      has vehicular access from, Chilworth Drove.
6.    The Council’s spatial settlement strategy is set out in Policy COM2 of the Test
      Valley Borough Revised Local Plan DPD adopted Local Plan 2011 – 2029 (2016)
      (the RLP). This seeks to create and maintain sustainable settlements by
      supporting the principles of the social and economic elements of sustainable
      development, whilst ensuring that there is no conflict with policies which aim to
      respect the environment, including the character of the area and important
      landscape features.
7.    The appeal site is located approximately 500m south of the settlement boundary of
      Chilworth, the nearest identified settlement, which is designated as a Key Service
      Centre containing a range of facilities and services.
8.    Policy COM2 states that development outside boundaries of settlements will only
      be permitted if: a) it is appropriate in the countryside as set out in the RLP; or b) it
      is essential to be located within the countryside.
9.    New-build residential development that may be considered appropriate in
      countryside locations such as the appeal site as set out in the RLP include rural
      exception affordable housing or community led developments which meet social or
      economic community needs, and occupational accommodation for rural workers.
10. None of the exceptions to justify new housing in the countryside apply to the
    appeal scheme which is for a new market dwelling. No substantive evidence has
    been put forward by the appellant to demonstrate that it is essential to be located
    in the countryside.
11. This strategy of directing new development to the most sustainable locations is
    generally consistent with the approach to the location of new housing as set out in
    the National Planning Policy Framework 2024 (the Framework). As such,
    notwithstanding the Council’s failure to demonstrate a five-year housing land
    supply, I afford moderate weight to Policy COM2.
12. With regards to accessibility, the appeal site is not isolated from built development,
    having regard to the existence of other residential properties which are
    sporadically located along Chilworth Drove, including flats at Chilworth Heights
    and dwellings at Chilworth Tower Farm adjacent to the appeal site.
13. However, the nearest community facilities and services are in the village of
    Chilworth located to the north of the M27. The settlement boundary and built
    development therein, are distinctly separate from this enclave of built development
    due to intervening undeveloped countryside.
14. Moreover, the appeal site is a notable distance from the services and facilities and
    public transport connections within Chilworth, and I have considered the
    convenience, safety and attractiveness of alternative means of travel to access the
    nearest facilities and services. Whilst it is feasible to walk or cycle to services and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009745


       facilities within the settlement, future occupiers of the appeal scheme would be
       required to traverse most of the route along narrow, single width rural lanes,
       including Chilworth Drove, Manor Road and Roman Way. These routes are largely
       enclosed on both sides by mature roadside hedging/trees. They have no street
       lighting, and in the main, no footpath. They are also subject to regular vehicular
       traffic associated with residential properties located along their routes.
15. As such, walking or cycling from the site, particularly in the dark, inclement
    weather or in colder months, would therefore be unattractive to most future
    occupiers. Having regard to the above, I consider that future occupiers of the
    proposed dwelling, which could potentially include the elderly, children and those
    with mobility issues, would be significantly physically restricted from accessing the
    existing facilities and services and public transport network at Chilworth. As such,
    they would be heavily reliant on the use of the private motor vehicle to gain access
    to the most basic of services and their day-to-day travel for services, community
    facilities and employment.
16. I accept that opportunities to maximise sustainable transport solutions will vary
    between urban and rural areas and it is reasonable to assume that future
    occupiers of the development would use private car transport as a means of
    access to a few facilities and services. However, in this instance they would be
    almost wholly dependent upon the car for all such journeys and the location of the
    appeal site would not provide a genuine choice for future occupiers to travel to
    facilities and services other than by the private car.
17. I therefore conclude that the appeal site is not a suitable location for a new
    dwelling, having regard the Council’s adopted spatial settlement policy and the
    accessibility of the site to facilities and services. Accordingly, the appeal scheme
    would conflict with the aforesaid aims of RLP Policy COM2.
18. This accords with the Framework objectives of ensuring that sustainable transport
    modes are prioritised and actively managing patterns of growth to support
    opportunities to limit the need to travel and offer a genuine choice of transport
    modes including the promotion of walking, cycling and public transport.
Character and appearance
19. The southern section of Chilworth Drove beyond the point where it crosses the
    M27 is a tranquil narrow single-width no-through rural lane. It is a public right of
    way, along which roadside parking is prevented, and which at its southern-most
    end changes into a non-vehicular woodland track leading into Lords Wood beyond.
    This comprises a wider predominantly wooded area which lies to the south of
    Chilworth village and to north and west of Southampton city.
20. Whilst there are residential properties located within the lane, they comprise low-
    density built development and are sporadically dispersed along the road, within
    generous, maturely landscaped plots.
21. Most of the dwellings tend to be set well back from the road frontage where they
    are screened in views from the public realm by mature frontage trees and soft
    landscaping. As a result, the road has a distinctly pleasant verdant peaceful rural
    character. Mature trees make a visually dominant positive contribution to this
    prevailing environment.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009745


22. The appeal site is surrounded by other residential properties and, together with
    buildings associated with a farm/equestrian centre, they comprise an isolated
    enclave of built development within the surrounding wooded setting.
23. Even so, notwithstanding that a group of properties exist at this location, aside
    from the host property at Pine Lodge, these are set well back from their frontages
    and are heavily screened in views from the lane by mature vegetation and trees.
    As such, they do not have a visibly perceptible impact upon the wooded rural
    nature of the surrounding area.
24. The host property, in contrast, stands out as an anomaly within the verdant
    streetscape. Due to its low brick-walled open frontage combined with the proximity
    of the wide building structure to the front boundary, it presents a notably more
    suburban-like built presence within the surrounding rural environment. This is at
    odds with the generally secluded nature of built development within the locality.
25. The proposed new dwelling would be set back further into the site than the host
    property. However, it would occupy a large part of the existing undeveloped
    garden to the side of the dwelling. At present, this garden provides a spacious,
    green and treed setting to the side of the existing house. The proposed siting of
    the new dwelling in relation to the existing house would be such that it would be
    seen alongside of it in views from the lane, due to the aforesaid open site frontage
    together with the proposed removal of a section of the existing frontage hedging to
    accommodate the new access.
26. There is no objection to the traditional pitched roof brick and tiled design of the
    new dwelling per se. However, it would screen a large amount of the treed
    backdrop to the site and, in conjunction with the host property, it would result in
    two dwellings being viewed side by side from the public realm, together with a
    large access, turning and parking area and carport structure to the front of the site.
    This would result in an intensity of visible built development which is out of keeping
    with, and notably more suburban in character than, the prevailing secluded nature
    of existing built development whereby mature landscaping dominates. The result
    would be a detrimental erosion of the prevailing verdant soft landscaped rural
    character of the area.
27. Moreover, the appeal scheme would be sited near protected trees on the appeal
    site. These comprise a Lawson Cypress adjacent to the eastern site boundary and
    an Oak, a Beech and a Lawson Cypress adjacent to the western boundary with
    Chilworth Heights. I saw during my site visit that these trees collectively, due to
    their condition, height and canopy characteristics, are visible from the public realm
    and provide a mature green setting to the appeal site, and a soft verdant interface
    between the existing built development on the appeal site and neighbouring built
    development. As such, they make a positive contribution to the wooded verdant
    character of the area.
28. Having regard to the appellant’s submitted Tree Report1, I share the Council’s
    concerns about the proposed proximity of the new dwelling to several of these
    trees. The new house is indicated to lie outside of the root protection zones
    (RPAs) of these trees. However, the trees would be sited within the proposed rear
    private outdoor amenity area of the new dwelling, where, having regard to their

1
 KJF Consultancy Ltd Ref TR.V2.LAPL.CT.CD.S Version 2 Revised Report submitted with the appeal and based upon Proposed
Site Plan Ref 10536-PL-02 Rev B


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decision 6009745


       position on the western site boundary, they would shade this part of the site
       particularly in the afternoon and evening.
29. They would also impact upon the light and outlook of windows on the rear and
    west side elevations of the dwelling which serve principal rooms including dining
    room, kitchen and lounge, including full height glazing doors opening out onto the
    garden from the dining room and lounge. The latter large openings indicate that
    this area of the garden is likely to be well-used by future residents, and this view
    appears to be supported by the appellant’s Tree Report which refers to part of a
    proposed patio area falling within the RPA of the Lawson Cypress (Tree 4).
30. Moreover, a large part of the proposed new carport, parking and driveway would
    be sited within the RPA of the protected Lawson Cypress (Tree 1). As such, the
    proposal represents a potential threat to the character, amenity value and longer-
    term survival of this tree, the loss of which would materially harm the character and
    appearance of the area.
31. I have had regard to the appellant’s proposed use of piled foundations or similar
    for the building and a Cellular Confinement System (CCS) for the driveway and
    parking area to protect the tree roots in this area. In the absence of any
    substantive evidence to the contrary, I have no reason to consider that these
    construction methods, in principle and subject to a condition to ensure appropriate
    details, would not comprise satisfactory means of construction for these parts of
    the development, having regard to tree root protection.
32. However, it appears on the basis of the submitted Tree Report and my site visit,
    that the amount of RPA that would be covered by the proposed new building and
    hard surfacing would amount to more than the 20% figure contained within British
    Standard 5837:12. As such, based on the evidence before me, I cannot be certain
    that the incursion into the RPA of the Cypress as a result of the appeal scheme
    would not result in a harmful deterioration of the in the root health and condition of
    this tree.
33. Moreover, there is no information before me in respect of the proposed routes of
    services and any necessary drainage facilities, whose installation has the potential
    to adversely affect tree roots. Taking a precautionary approach, I am not
    persuaded, based on the information before me, that tree protection is capable of
    being ensured by means of a planning condition.
34. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would materially
    harm the character and appearance of the area. As such, it would be contrary to
    the aims of RLP Policies E1 and E2, which amongst other things, seek to ensure
    that new development is of a high quality design which respects the character of
    the surrounding area, in terms of, inter alia, layout and appearance, and that it
    protects, conserves and enhances the landscape character and is designed and
    located to ensure that the health and future retention of important landscape
    features, including trees and hedges, will not be prejudiced.
35. For similar reasons, the proposal would also be contrary to Policies of the
    Framework which seek to achieve well-designed places as set out in Chapter 12.
Living conditions
36. The Council is concerned that there would be unacceptable impacts on the living


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009745


       conditions of the occupiers of the host property and the future occupants of the
       new house having regard to overlooking and loss of privacy associated with the
       proposed new first floor window serving bedroom 3 on the front elevation of the
       new dwelling and the existing dormer windows on the south elevation of the host
       property.

37. The Council has not referred to any specific adopted minimum standards, such as
    window-to-window or window-to-building distances that it considers to be
    breached by the appeal scheme. Furthermore, I find that the proposed
    juxtaposition of the first-floor windows in relation to each other and neighbouring
    garden land is such that views over neighbouring land would be oblique rather
    than direct. Moreover, the views would be directed over relatively small areas of
    both gardens, and in places which are more exposed to public views than the
    private rear amenity areas, of which ample space would remain for both dwellings.

38. Moreover, planning conditions to ensure the construction of appropriately high and
    solid boundary fencing/walling along the northern site boundary of the new plot
    such that privacy would be ensured at ground floor level, and to prevent the
    installation of additional first floor windows on the north elevation of the new
    dwelling, could ensure acceptable privacy levels for the occupants of both
    houses.
.
39. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would not have a
    materially harmful effect upon the living conditions of the occupiers of Pine Lodge
    or the future occupiers of the appeal scheme, having particular regard to privacy
    effects. The proposal would therefore accord with the aims of RLP Policy LHW4 in
    so much as this policy, amongst other things, seeks to ensure that new
    development provides for the privacy of its occupants and that of neighbouring
    properties.
SPAs
40. The Council’s fifth and sixth reasons for refusal relate to the failure of the appeal
    scheme to mitigate the ‘in combination’ effects of new residential development
    upon the Solent and Southampton Water and New Forest SPAs. The former is
    concerned with increased levels of nutrients from wastewater from new dwellings
    having a detrimental impact upon the water quality of the SPA. The latter refers to
    the impacts of increased recreational use of the New Forest associated with new
    housing and resulting disturbance to vulnerable bird species found therein.
41. The appellant has confirmed willingness to address these matters, but at the time
    of writing this decision, the required S106 agreement to secure the necessary
    nutrient neutrality and financial contribution towards alternative recreational open
    space in accordance with the Council’s adopted mitigation strategies has not been
    completed.
42. Within the context of this appeal, the responsibility for assessing the effects of the
    proposal on the SPAs falls to me as the competent authority. Were I minded to
    allow the appeal, I would need to carry out an Appropriate Assessment (AA)
    before considering the necessary mitigation, since the proposal would be likely to
    have a significant effect on the SPAs.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009745


43. However, as the first and second main issues provide clear reasons for dismissing
    the appeal, I have not had cause to pursue undertaking an AA. As such, I do not
    need to consider this matter further, since any findings on this issue would not
    change the appeal outcome. This is therefore a neutral matter in the appeal.
Planning Balance
44. The Council has confirmed that it cannot demonstrate a 5-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites as required by the Framework. Both main parties are
    agreed that the current housing land supply figure is 2.54 years. As such,
    Paragraph 11 of the Framework applies, which states that relevant policies for the
    supply of housing should not be considered up to date where a 5-year housing
    land supply cannot be demonstrated.
45. Paragraph 11 d) of the Framework states that where the policies that are most
    important are out of date, permission should be granted, unless any adverse
    impacts of doing so would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits
    when assessed against the policies in the Framework taken as a whole, having
    particular regard to key policies for directing development to sustainable locations,
    making effective use of land, securing well-designed places and providing
    affordable homes individually or in combination, or, where the application of
    policies in the Framework that protect areas or assets of particular importance,
    referred to in Paragraph 11d)i provides a strong reason for refusing the
    development proposed. The latter does not apply in this case and so Paragraph
    11 d) ii applies.
46. Paragraph 8 of the Framework defines the three dimensions of sustainable
    development as performing economic, social and environmental objectives. When
    judged against some of the core planning principles of the Framework, the appeal
    proposal would perform well.
47. Paragraph 61 of the Framework refers to boosting significantly the supply of
    homes. The proposal would make a small contribution towards addressing the
    Council’s housing supply deficit and, as a 4-bedroom dwelling, it would make a
    positive contribution to the supply of family housing. Also, it could be built out
    relatively quickly, having regard to Paragraph 73 of the Framework. There would
    also be economic benefits because of the construction of the new dwelling, and
    economic and social benefits as a result of its future occupation.
48. The aforesaid benefits weigh in favour of the development, and I afford them
    moderate positive weight, having regard to the extent of the housing shortfall and
    the modest size of the proposal.

49. However, the harms I have identified in respect of conflict with the Council’s
    adopted spatial settlement policy and the inaccessibility of the site to facilities and
    services and the impact on the character and appearance of the area would be
    significant.

50. The location of the appeal site would not provide a suitable site for housing
    development and the proposal would not give a genuine choice for future
    occupiers to travel to facilities and services other than by the private car. As such,
    the proposal would seriously undermine the spatial strategy of the RLP, which
    aligns with that of the Framework. Moreover, the Framework social and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009745


       environmental objectives of sustainable development in respect of fostering well-
       designed, beautiful places with accessible services and protecting and enhancing
       our natural and built environment would not be met.
51. Accordingly, having given careful consideration of the balance of factors, I
    consider that, when assessed against the policies in the Framework taken as a
    whole, the adverse impacts would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
    benefits, and the proposal would not be a sustainable form of development. The
    conflict with the development plan is not outweighed by other considerations
    including the Framework.
52. Whilst the Framework encourages the effective use of land in meeting the need for
    homes and requires the Council to approach decisions in a positive and creative
    way, these matters are not unqualified.
53. The Council has not identified any harm in respect of other issues, including
    highway safety, vehicular access and parking, ecology, biodiversity and flood risk.
    Moreover, I have found no harm in respect of the living conditions of future
    occupiers of the new dwelling and the host property. However, as these are
    requirements of planning policy and legislation, in terms of the planning balance,
    the absence of identified harm in respect of these matters is a neutral factor that
    weighs neither for nor against the development.
Conclusion
54. For the reasons given above, I therefore conclude that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Leonard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
