Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 July 2026
by D Marley BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009045
Fairfields Farm Buildings at Brockhill Lane, Beoley, Redditch, Worcestershire
B98 9DA
•           The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
            amended) against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part
            3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
            Order 2015 (as amended).
•           The appeal is made by Mr Harvey against the decision of Bromsgrove District Council.
•           The application Ref is 25/00580/CUPRIO.
•           The development proposed is change of use of existing adjoining agricultural buildings to 1 No.
            4 bedroom dwelling and associated building operations.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
   3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for change of use of
   existing adjoining agricultural buildings to 1 No. 4 bedroom dwelling and associated
   building operations at Fairfields Farm Buildings at Brockhill Lane, Beoley, Redditch,
   Worcestershire B98 9DA in accordance with the application 25/00580/CUPRIO and
   the details submitted with it including plan nos NB0225_001A A1, NB0225_005A
   A3, and NB0225_006A A1, and subject to the following conditions:
       1.      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the vehicle
               parking spaces have been provided in accordance with drawing no
               NB0225_005A A3. Thereafter those spaces shall be retained for the parking
               of vehicles only.
       2.      Any contamination that is found during the course of the construction of the
               development hereby permitted that was not previously identified shall be
               reported immediately to the Local Planning Authority.
               If contamination is found, except for work required to be carried out as part
               of an approved remediation scheme, development on the part of the site
               affected shall be suspended until the following requirements have been
               complied with:
                 i.    a site investigation and risk assessment has been carried out in
                       accordance with the Environment Agency's 'Land Contamination: Risk
                       Management' guidance (or equivalent if replaced), and a written report
                       of the findings has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
                       Local Planning Authority. The site investigation and risk assessment
                       shall assess the nature and extent of suspected contamination;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009045


                 ii.   where unacceptable risks are found, a remediation scheme has been
                       carried out in accordance with details that have been submitted to and
                       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The remediation
                       scheme shall identify measures to bring the site to a condition suitable
                       for the intended use by removing unacceptable risks to identified
                       receptors and shall ensure that the site will not qualify as Contaminated
                       Land under Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 in
                       relation to the intended use of the land after remediation; and
                iii.   following the completion of any measures identified in the approved
                       remediation scheme, a verification report for all the remediation works
                       has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
                       Authority.
               In the event a remediation scheme is required to be carried out, the
               development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the verification
               report has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
               Authority.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
   Order 2015 (the ‘GPDO’) was amended on 21 May 2024. However, the
   amendments to Class Q of Part 3 of Schedule 2 of the GPDO are subject to
   transitional arrangements. These arrangements allow for an application for
   determination as to prior approval in relation to previously permitted development
   under Class Q until the end of 20 May 2025. The application form identifies that the
   appellant sought to use the permitted development right as it stood prior to 21 May
   2024. The transitional arrangements are therefore applicable to this appeal, and
   references to the GPDO in this appeal should be read in this context.
3. I have taken the description of development from the decision notice, as this more
   accurately describes the proposal.
4. The officer report refers to potential discrepancies between the drawings, however
   the report also identifies that the external dimensions of the building would be
   unchanged. I consider the plans before me to be sufficiently accurate to assess the
   proposal without being prejudicial to interested parties. I have considered the
   scheme as indicated on the submitted plans as that is the scheme for which prior
   approval is sought.
5. During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework was
   published on 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered, any considerations
   that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I am satisfied
   that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard to the latest version in
   reaching my decision.
Background
6. With regard to the transitional arrangements identified, under Article 3(1) and
   Schedule 2 Part 3 Class Q of the GPDO development is permitted for the change
   of use of an agricultural building and land within its curtilage to a use falling within
   Class C3 (dwellinghouses), together with building operations reasonably necessary
   to convert the building, subject to certain limitations and conditions.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6009045


7. The reasons for refusal relate to whether the works to the barn proposed for
   residential use would be reasonably necessary to convert the building to the
   dwellinghouse and whether the barn is structurally capable of conversion, whether
   the demolition of 2 other barns would be reasonably necessary for the building to
   function as a dwellinghouse, and matters related to whether prior approval should
   be granted in relation to Paragraph Q.2(1)(e).
Main Issues
8. The main issues are, therefore:
     •          whether the building operations proposed would be reasonably necessary
                to convert the building to a use falling within Class C3, with particular regard
                to the demolition of two nearby barns and the works proposed to the
                existing building; and
     •          if the proposal is found to constitute permitted development, whether prior
                approval would be required and should be granted, with particular regard to
                whether the location or siting of the building makes it otherwise impractical
                or undesirable for the building to change from agricultural use to a use
                falling within Class C3.
Reasons
Whether building operations would be reasonably necessary for conversion
9. There are 3 buildings onsite. These include the barn proposed for conversion (the
   ‘Main Barn’) and 2 separate barns. The 2 separate barns are of moderate size and
   located close, but separate to, the barn proposed for conversion to a
   dwellinghouse.
     Demolition of nearby barns
10. The reason for refusal identifies that the Council considers the prior approval
    application would result in the 2 separate barns being demolished, and that the
    demolition of these barns would go beyond that reasonably necessary for the
    conversion of the Main Barn to a dwellinghouse. Commentary on this matter was
    provided in the appellant’s statement. The 2 separate barns are partly open sided
    where they face towards the Main Barn.
11. However, the information submitted by the appellant at application stage does not
    state that these two barns would be demolished. Whilst the submitted plans do
    mark a small area of the Main Barn as proposed for demolition, the 2 separate
    barns are not identified for demolition on the proposed plans.
12. I queried this matter with the Council, who identified that the reason for refusal was
    based on its interpretation of the submitted drawings and the relationship between
    the converted building and the adjoining structures to the east, which the Council
    consider needs to be demolished to facilitate the parking area shown on the plans.
13. However, Paragraph W.2 of Schedule 2 Part 3 of the GPDO identifies that prior
    approval applications under Class Q should be accompanied by a written
    description of the proposed development which should include any building or other
    operations, alongside a plan indicating the site and showing the proposed
    development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6009045


14. To my mind, inferring that buildings would be demolished when this has not been
    identified within the submission would go beyond the provisions of Paragraph W.2,
    even if commentary was provided at appeal stage. Equally, as the 2 barns are
    partly open-sided as they face towards the Main Barn, substantive evidence is also
    not before me to suggest they would require demolition to facilitate the parking
    arrangements shown, nor why the demolition would be necessary to allow the Main
    Barn to function as a dwellinghouse. The appellant may have subsequently
    secured prior approval for the demolition of the 2 barns, however this is a separate
    matter to the prior approval application before me.
15. Therefore, given the wording of the relevant provisions of the GPDO, I do not
    consider that the proposal includes the demolition of the 2 separate barns. As such,
    this does not fall within the building operations proposed, and it is not necessary to
    consider whether or not the demolition of these barns would be reasonably
    necessary to facilitate the change of use of the buildings.
     Works proposed to the existing building
16. The Main Barn is constructed with steel portal frames with side elevations
    constructed largely of a concrete block or corrugated sheeting base and slatted
    timber boarding, with a roof identified as corrugated asbestos. There are some
    existing openings on the side elevations of the building, which principally relate
    either to existing access points or a partial opening at the location of an animal
    trough. At my site visit, the side walls and roof appeared to be in largely good order.
    The timber boarding is broadly consistently arranged, with small gaps between
    each board.
17. The proposal would include the repair of the existing roof sheeting and vertical
    timber cladding, and the insertion of vertical timber cladding and glazing to a
    number of openings. The proposal would also include the insertion of a number of
    doors and windows. The submitted planning statement identifies that the barn
    would be internally insulated.
18. In considering whether the building operations proposed would be reasonably
    necessary to convert the building to a dwellinghouse, my attention has been drawn
    to the judgement in Hibbitt v SSCLG & Rushcliffe BC [2016] EWHC 2853 (Admin).
    This identified that the building proposed for change of use under Class Q must be
    capable of conversion to residential use without operations amounting to a
    complete or substantial re-building of the pre-existing structure.
19. The appellant has submitted a Structural Inspection (2025) (the ‘Structural
    Inspection’). This report is relatively high level, and does not contain specific
    commentary on a structural analysis the appellant asserts demonstrates that the
    building is structurally capable of conversion without substantial rebuilding.
    Nevertheless, the Structural Inspection does not identify that the building cannot be
    converted to a residential use, nor suggest significant structural interventions for
    such a use. The Council consider that the submitted information is insufficient.
    However, the Structural Inspection was professionally prepared, following a site
    inspection by an individual who is on the evidence before me suitably qualified.
20. Planning Practice Guidance (the ‘PPG’) identifies that is only where an existing
    building is already suitable for conversion to residential use that the building would
    be considered to have the permitted development right. The PPG further identifies
    that internal works are not generally development, and for the building to function

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009045


     as a dwelling it may be appropriate to undertake certain internal structural works
     which are not prohibited by Class Q. Given this, and in the context of the
     information before me, neither party has identified specific structural interventions
     which would go beyond the requirements of the Class, nor did my site visit lead me
     to a different view. As such, in relation to the structural elements of the building, I
     cannot conclude that the proposal would go beyond that reasonably necessary to
     facilitate the change of use.
21. Equally, whilst the proposal would enclose some openings, including those where
    an animal trough is located, and include some repair to the existing cladding, the
    existing building is nevertheless relatively enclosed. External materials would also
    be for the most part retained. In addition, although the Council consider it
    inadvisable that the roof sheeting is retained or repaired, given the general order of
    the roof material I have no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that
    repair works to the roof sheeting would be extensive nor that its repair or retention
    would be unacceptable in the context of current building practice or legislation
    governing contaminants.
22. There are some gaps between the timber boarding which largely makes up the top
    half of the external walls. However, the submitted plans identify that this boarding
    would be retained and repaired as appropriate. There is no suggestion that the
    timber cladding would be substantially replaced and, whilst there are gaps between
    the boards, the barn would be internally insulated. Internal insulation would
    comprise internal works that, as I have set out, is not generally development.
23. At my site visit I noted that some of the metal cladding was discoloured, and some
    may therefore require repair or potential replacement. Equally, on the evidence
    before me some wooden boarding on the western elevation may be replaced.
    However, the extent of repair or replacement in either case would not be of such
    extent as to comprise rebuilding, either taken in isolation or when set alongside the
    other works.
24. The PPG identifies that it is not the intention of Class Q permitted development
    rights to allow rebuilding work which would go beyond what is reasonably
    necessary for the conversion of the building to residential use. As set out above, I
    do not consider that a large amount of the external fabric of the building would need
    to be replaced. By contrast, given the general order of the building, its relatively
    enclosed nature and the extent of existing materials proposed for retention, the
    works proposed to the building are reasonably necessary to convert the building to
    a dwellinghouse, and would not be of such extent such that the works would
    constitute a fresh or substantial rebuild.
25. Class Q also allows for the installation or replacement of, amongst other matters,
    windows, doors, roofs, or exterior walls to the extent reasonably necessary for the
    building to function as a dwellinghouse, and given the extent of works proposed I
    find no conflict with this requirement.
26. As a result of the above, due to the scale and extent of building operations to the
    building described, I conclude that the building operations proposed to the Main
    Barn would not go beyond that reasonably necessary to convert the building.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009045


     Conclusion – whether building operations reasonably necessary
27. As a result of the above, due to the scale and extent of building operations
    described, I conclude that the building operations proposed would not go beyond
    that reasonably necessary to convert the building. Given this, the proposal would
    also be permitted development in accordance with Paragraph Q.1(i)(i) and Q.1(i)(ii)
    of the GPDO.
Prior approval
28. At my site visit I observed an existing access to the site from Brockhill Lane via a
    track. This track was largely surfaced in a loose gravel or compacted stone and
    slopes slightly upwards from the road to the appeal site. The proposal would utilise
    this track as a vehicular access to the site. I observed good visibility in both
    directions along Brockhill Lane.
29. Whilst the Council refers to a lack of a visible access track in aerial photography
    and site imagery, including that provided within its Statement, I have also been
    provided with a photograph showing the presence of a historic access track leading
    up to the barn. At my site visit, I also observed that the access track was present
    and appeared in good order. Although the buildings are located some distance from
    the road, the length of the track is nevertheless not substantial. Therefore, for the
    purposes of this appeal, I am persuaded that there is an existing access that could
    be utilised, albeit one that may have become overgrown in the past.
30. The Council considers that the lack of hard surfacing would make the location
    impractical or undesirable and that planning permission would be needed for hard
    surfacing. However, I have not been given any specific reason why the track must
    be hard surfaced or what harm would occur if it were not. For much of its length the
    track is loosely gravelled or formed of compacted stone, which would likely provide
    sufficient traction for vehicles using the site. The slope from the road to the barn is
    relatively gentle and is unlikely to cause access problems in winter or wet
    conditions. I also saw no evidence of material being deposited on the road surface.
    In the absence of any specific harm being identified, I do not consider hard
    surfacing of the access to be necessary.
31. Therefore, and given the existing access track’s general good order, I have no
    reason to conclude that the access could not be used in its current form. Given this,
    its utilisation would not therefore result in the urbanisation of the site, nor would its
    use be impractical.
32. As such, given the submitted evidence, I have no reason to conclude that the
    proposal would give rise to the need for a future application for planning
    permission, nor be undesirable as a result of urbanising impacts related to the track
    itself. Therefore, the proposal would be acceptable with regards the location or
    siting of the building, and it would not be otherwise impractical or undesirable for
    the building to change from agricultural use to a use falling within Class C3.
Other Matters
33. Whilst interested parties have raised concerns regarding the location of the site
    within the Green Belt, this is not a matter for consideration under the prior approval
    application.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009045


34. Reference was made in the highways authority response to conflict with the
    Streetscape Design Guide. However, I have neither been provided with a copy of
    this document nor provided with specific commentary as to how the proposal may
    conflict with it. As a result, this matter has not been determinative to my decision.
35. The Council’s reasons for refusal did not include other prior approval matters which
    it considered would not be acceptable. I have included consideration of matters
    raised by the highways authority in my reasoning above, and will give further
    consideration to matters that could be subject to condition. I therefore have no
    reason to conclude that other prior approval matters are not acceptable.
Conditions
36. The GPDO imposes conditions on planning permissions granted under Class Q,
    and the Class includes the condition that development under Class Q is permitted
    subject to the condition that it must be completed within a period of 3 years starting
    with the prior approval date, which it is not necessary to restate in my formal
    decision.
37. Beyond the need for compliance with the approved details, which is required by
    compliance with Paragraph W.(12) of Schedule 2 Part 3 of the GPDO, the Council
    did not include any suggested conditions. However, a number were suggested by
    consultees, and I have had regard to these further suggested conditions insofar as
    these relate to the subject matters of the prior approval. I have additionally made a
    number of amendments in the interest of precision and enforceability, and with
    reference to the other relevant tests.
38. To ensure that adequate provision is made for the parking of motor vehicles and
    that the transport and highways impacts of the development are acceptable, it is
    necessary to impose a condition requiring parking spaces to be provided prior to
    occupation, and thereafter retained. As turning facilities are not specifically
    identified on the submitted plans, I do not consider this element of the proposed
    wording to be precise or necessary, and have excluded this element of the wording
    from the condition. Equally, the proposed condition made reference to plan
    NB0225_006A A1, however this plan also does not show parking spaces, and I
    have therefore omitted this drawing from the condition imposed.
39. The Contaminated Land Officer has raised concerns that, given the previous
    agricultural use, contaminated land may be present at the appeal site, and
    proposed a condition requiring that any land contamination be reported and as
    appropriate remediated. Whilst the appellant states there would be no
    contamination risks, the conclusions of the Contaminated Land Officer have also
    not been substantively challenged. Given this, it is necessary to impose a condition
    requiring works to cease and remediation to be undertaken in the event
    contamination were to be found, to avoid risk to future occupiers by ensuring
    matters related to contamination risks on the site are remediated where
    appropriate. Whilst the suggested wording includes an encouragement to seek
    professional advice and for reports to be prepared by competent persons, this
    would not be precise or enforceable, and I have excluded these elements from the
    condition imposed.
40. The highways authority has suggested conditions related to cycle parking to comply
    with the Council’s parking standards, and for the provision of a residential welcome
    pack to reduce vehicular movements. I have not been provided with any cycle

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6009045


     parking standards, nor what harm would arise in relation to transport and highways
     matters were cycle parking not provided. Equally, Planning Practice Guidance
     makes clear that the permitted development right does not apply a test in relation to
     sustainability of location. As such, I do not consider either condition to be
     necessary.
41. Whilst a condition has been suggested requiring the access gates to be set back 5
    metres from the highway and be inward opening, the proposal does not include
    alterations to the existing gates that are already inward opening and set back from
    the highway. The proposed condition is not therefore necessary.
42. Although a condition has been suggested requiring part of the track to be hard
    surfaced, I have set out in my reasoning why in the context of the evidence before
    me this would not be necessary.
43. Whilst no condition was suggested, reference was made to visibility splays in the
    commentary provided by the highways authority. Given the good visibility from the
    site, which appeared to be along the road itself, I cannot conclude that land outside
    of the control of the highways authority would be required to ensure adequate
    visibility. As such, conditioning visibility splays would not be necessary to ensure
    that the proposal would be acceptable in terms of its transport and highways
    impacts.
Conclusion
44. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed and
    prior approval should be granted.

D Marley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
