Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by F Bradley BRP (NZ) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009720
Land adjacent to 1 Ninesprings Cottage, Wymondley Road, Hitchin, Hertfordshire
SG4 9QL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr J Hill, Curtis Trust Limited C/O John Shilcock Limited, against the decision
     of the North Hertfordshire District Council.
•    The application ref is 26/00361/PIP.
•    The development proposed is described as permission in principle for the erection of one detached
     dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for residential
       development comprising a minimum of one and a maximum of one dwelling at
       Land adjacent to 1 Ninesprings Cottage, Wymondley Road, Hitchin, Hertfordshire
       SG4 9QL in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00361/PIP, dated
       10 February 2026.
Procedural Matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
       stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
       is suitable in-principle and the second stage (‘technical details consent’) is when
       the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
       of these two stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     I have not used the site address provided in the application form as it did not
       clearly identify the site. Instead, I have used the address in the Council’s decision
       notice and subsequently used by the appellant in the statement of case as it more
       accurately reflects the site’s location.
5.     During this appeal, a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given an opportunity to
       comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the appeal. Both parties
       provided responses, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching
       my decision.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009720


Main Issue
6.     The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, with
       reference to whether the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Reasons
Background and policy context
7.     The appeal site is within the Green Belt. Policy SP2 of the North Hertfordshire
       Local Plan 2011-2031 (the LP) sets out the district’s settlement hierarchy and
       spatial distribution for development. The site is outside the settlement boundary of
       Hitchin where the policy states that development is only permitted if it is supported
       by an adopted Neighbourhood Plan, noting that Neighbourhood Plans cannot
       allocate development within or remove sites from the Green Belt. Policy SP5 of the
       LP reflects the Framework by only permitting development proposals in the Green
       Belt where they would not result in inappropriate development or where very
       special circumstances have been demonstrated.
8.     The objective of Green Belt policies in the Framework is to prevent urban sprawl
       by keeping land permanently open. The government attaches great importance to
       Green Belts, the essential features of which are their openness and permanence.
       Policy GB2 of the Framework sets out the five purposes of the Green Belt.
9.     The Framework, at Policy GB6, goes on to state that inappropriate development is,
       by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very
       special circumstances. Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless one
       of the exceptions listed in Policy GB7 applies. One exception includes where the
       proposed development would utilise grey belt land. Grey belt is defined in the
       Framework as land in the Green Belt comprising previously developed land and/or
       any other land that, in either case, does not strongly contribute to any of the
       purposes (a), (b), or (d) in Policy GB2.
10. The North Herts Green Belt Review July 2016 (the GBR) identifies the parcel of
    land in which the appeal site is located as making a strong contribution to the
    Green Belt purposes through checking the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up
    areas and preventing neighbouring towns merging into one another. Annex E of
    the Framework provides considerations for informing judgements of the
    contribution to the purposes of the Green Belt, to which I refer below.
Purpose (a)
11. The assessment areas that contribute moderately are likely to be adjacent or near
    to a large built-up area but include one or more features that weaken the land’s
    contribution to purpose (a). Such as, in this case, having physical feature(s) in
    reasonable proximity that could restrict and contain development and being
    partially enclosed by existing development, such that new development would not
    result in an incongruous pattern of development.
12. The site is free from existing development and is adjacent to the town of Hitchin
    which represents a large built-up area. The site would be partially enclosed by
    physical features including the existing residential development to the west, the
    elevated railway line and vegetation to the south and vegetation along the eastern
    boundary. The development would be broadly in keeping with the pattern of
    development on the adjacent residential properties fronting Wymondley Road. Due

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009720


       to the site’s partial enclosure and relationship to the adjacent residential
       development, the proposed development would not result in an incongruous
       pattern of development. These features would also serve to restrict and contain
       the proposed development to an extent. Accordingly, the site makes a moderate
       contribution to purpose (a) of the Green Belt as set out in the Framework.
Purpose (b)
13. The GBR identifies the parcel of land in which the site is located as making a
    significant contribution to purpose (b) by preventing the merging of Stevenage and
    Hitchin. The site itself however forms a very small part of the gap between the two
    towns. Due to its small size and the existing intervening features between the
    towns, including roads and vegetation, the site could be developed without
    resulting in the loss of visual separation between the towns. Accordingly, the site
    makes a moderate contribution to purpose (b) of the Green Belt.
Purpose (d)
14. Hitchin is a historic market town. The parties have not identified any visual,
    physical or experiential connection to the historic aspects of the town and none
    were visibly apparent during my site visit. Accordingly, the site does not contribute
    towards purpose (d) of the Green Belt.
15. To conclude, the site does not strongly contribute to the relevant purposes of the
    Green Belt and therefore comprises grey belt land.
16. As stated above, Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out categories of development
    that are not inappropriate in the Green Belt and therefore should not be regarded
    as harmful to the Green Belt or be required to demonstrate very special
    circumstances. In this case, part (1)(g) of the Policy is relevant which provides that
    development must meet four criteria to which I refer below.
17. The proposed development would utilise grey belt land. Due to the scale of the
    proposed development, its congruity with the settlement pattern and the degree of
    enclosure, any encroachment into the countryside would be limited. Consequently,
    and for the reasons given above, the proposal would not fundamentally undermine
    the purposes of including land within the Green Belt when taken together.
    Accordingly, criterion i. is met.
18. The Council cannot demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable housing sites,
    therefore there is an evidenced unmet need for the residential development
    proposed, hence criterion ii. is met.
19. Policy TR3 of the Framework seeks to ensure that development is located where it
    can support sustainable patterns of movement, enable good accessibility for
    different users and make the most of existing and proposed transport
    infrastructure. There are bus stops and footpaths in close proximity to the site
    which would be available for use by future occupants to access Hitchin town
    centre. Due to its proximity to, and access to, different modes of transport, the site
    would be in a sustainable location.
20. In its response to the implications of the Framework on the proposed development,
    the Council refers to a lack of footway at the front of the site and potential conflict
    between pedestrians and cycle users to and from the site and vehicles along the
    road. Notably this was not a reason for refusal as the Council was satisfied this

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009720


       matter could be dealt with at the second stage of the permission in principle
       process and as the site is in a sustainable location. I agree with these conclusions.
       Even if it was considered as part of this first stage, due to the scale of the
       development, it would not result in a significant adverse impact on the transport
       network. Consequently, the proposal accords with Policy TR3 of the Framework
       and meets criterion iii.
21. The proposed development is not major development therefore criterion iv. is not
    relevant.
22. As the proposed development meets the relevant criteria in part (1)(g) of Policy
    GB7, it is therefore not inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Accordingly,
    there is no need to consider its impact on the openness of the Green Belt.
23. To conclude, the proposed development would not be inappropriate development
    in the Green Belt and is suitable for residential development, having regard to its
    location, the proposed land use and the amount of development. As I have found
    the proposal is not inappropriate development, it is consistent with Policy SP5 of
    the LP which seeks to protect the Green Belt from inappropriate development. The
    proposed development would conflict with Policy SP2 of the LP which seeks to
    restrict development outside the settlement boundary. The weight I attach to this
    conflict is addressed below.
Other Matters
24. Matters including details of access to the site, ecological impacts, surface water
    drainage, and design and appearance would be dealt with at the technical details
    stage. Any potential impacts arising from the overhead lines which are in proximity
    to the site would also be considered at that stage.
25. Concerns have been raised by third parties about the proposal setting a precedent
    for further development. In this case, due to the site’s degree of containment and
    relationship with the adjacent residential development, I am satisfied the
    permission would not set a precedent for similar development.
26. The appellant contends that the site is within Flood Zone 1 and the Council raises
    no objection on flood risk grounds. While third parties have raised concerns
    regarding flood risk no technical evidence has been provided to demonstrate that
    the development could not be carried out within an area of low flood risk.
27. The site is located approximately 500 metres from the edge of Great Wymondley.
    Due to the distance from the village and intervening fields, the small scale of the
    proposed development and as the proposed dwelling would be viewed in the
    context of the adjacent residential development, there would be no appreciable
    harm to the setting of heritage assets in the village.
28. The Council states that the proposed development conflicts with part (1)(j) of
    Policy S5 of the Framework. However, part (5) states that the policy does not
    apply to development proposals within the Green Belt, which should instead be
    determined in accordance with Policies GB6, GB7 and/or GB8, as appropriate. It
    further provides that where development would not be inappropriate through the
    application of Policy GB7, proposals should be approved unless their benefits are
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework and having regard to part (2)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009720


       of Policy S5. As I have found that the proposal would accord with Policy GB7 and
       would not constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt, the decision is
       to be made by applying the approach set out in part (5) of Policy S5 rather than
       part (1)(j).
Planning Balance and Conclusion
29. I have identified conflict with Policy SP2 of the LP however I have found that the
    site is in an accessible location and any encroachment into the countryside would
    be limited. For these reasons and having regard to part (5) of Policy S5 of the
    Framework, I give limited weight to the conflict with this policy.
30. I have found that the site is suitable for the proposed development having regard
    to its location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development. Substantial
    weight is given to the provision of a new dwelling in accordance with Policy HO7 of
    the Framework, with the proposal providing a modest contribution to the Council’s
    housing supply. Economic benefits would result from the construction of the
    proposal, as well as from future occupiers supporting local services and facilities,
    and together are afforded limited weight.
31. I have not identified any adverse effects that would substantially outweigh the
    benefits. Accordingly, the presumption in favour of sustainable development, as
    set out in Framework Policy S3, applies. Furthermore, as the proposed
    development is not inappropriate development in the Green Belt, it would not
    conflict with the national decision-making policies referred to in part (2) of Policy
    S5, which indicate that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.
32. The PPG indicates that, unless some other period is clearly justified, the default
    duration of a permission in principle is three years. I have no reason to consider
    that a departure from the default duration would be justified in this case.
33. For the reasons set out above, the appeal is allowed.

F Bradley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
