Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 July 2026
by E Fawcett BA (Jt Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009276
Premier House, 13 Bark Street East, Bolton BL1 2BQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jonathan Blackston of Pink Flamingo 24 Ltd against the decision of
     Bolton Metropolitan Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 21353/25.
•    The development proposed is change of use from Class E commercial building to 2 C3
     self-contained flats.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appellant has put forward an amended scheme that would alter the windows
       to the second floor of the property and change a bedroom within the larger flat to
       an office, making it a 2-bedroom unit. Whilst these plans were submitted prior to
       the determination of the application, the Council has indicated that the amended
       plans were not accepted. The submitted amendments would represent a
       substantial change to the scheme considered by the Council. In particular, the
       proposed enlargement of the second-floor windows to form angled window
       openings was not part of the original proposal and, as the site lies within a
       Conservation Area, such alterations may be harmful. Furthermore, these
       amendments are not reflected on the submitted elevation drawings. Consequently,
       I have determined the appeal against the plans considered by the Council when it
       made its decision.
3.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision. Framework references hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would provide adequate living conditions for future
                occupants, with particular reference to internal living space, outdoor space,
                daylight, outlook and noise; and




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009276


           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area and
                whether the St George’s Conservation Area would be preserved or
                enhanced.
Reasons
Living conditions
5.     The site is located within the northern part of Bolton’s Town Centre, outside the
       main retail area, with the surrounding area characterised by terraced properties
       including commercial and residential uses. To the rear of the property is a 2-storey
       detached building, the signage to which indicates its use as a joiner’s workshop.
6.     Policy JP-H3 of the Places for Everyone Joint Development Plan Document
       2022 to 2039 (2024) (the PfE) requires all new dwellings to comply with the
       Nationally Described Space Standards (the NDSS). Whilst it is intended for the
       ground-floor flat to be occupied by a single person, the bedroom would be large
       enough to provide a double bed. It would, therefore, be difficult to reasonably
       enforce such a restriction on the number of occupants by condition as the Council
       would have limited ability to monitor this, and any change in occupancy could
       occur without any obvious external indication. Furthermore, the overall gross
       internal floor area (GIA) would not meet the minimum standard for 2 people
       occupying the flat. Although the shortfall is small, Policy JP-H3 is explicit in
       requiring compliance with the standards and accordingly the proposal raises
       conflict with this policy.
7.     The NDSS also requires a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 2.3 metres across at
       least 75% of the GIA. The proposed floor plan indicates heights of around
       1.5 metres, rising to around 1.8 metres, close to both the front and rear of the
       building on the second floor. My site visit confirmed that the roof height increases
       beyond this towards the centre of the building. Given this arrangement, and noting
       that the flat extends across 2 floors, I am satisfied that it could effectively function
       as a 3-bedroom flat. Consequently, it would provide appropriate living conditions in
       this regard.
8.     The Council’s General Design Principles Supplementary Planning Document
       (the SPD) states that proposals for flats should provide either a balcony of at least
       5 square metres or an adequately screened communal area, providing a minimum
       of 18 square metres per flat. The rear yard would be used primarily for bin storage.
       Although some space would remain, the useability of the yard for activities
       occupants would reasonably expect to undertake, for instance, drying clothes,
       growing plants, relaxing and play, would be heavily constrained by its narrow
       width. Furthermore, the position of the yard below ground floor level and between
       2 buildings would create a strong sense of enclosure and potentially limit light to
       this area. Combined with the use for bin storage and its associated odours, this
       area would not be particularly attractive or inviting to future residents.
9.     Although the site's town-centre location limits the opportunity to provide extensive
       outdoor space, the proposal would nevertheless fail to comply with the SPD
       guidance. This is particularly relevant to the 3-bedroom flat, which is more likely to
       accommodate a family and therefore generate a greater need for usable outdoor
       space. Whilst future occupants may not wish to maintain a garden and,
       notwithstanding that some nearby residential properties may have access to less
       outdoor space, the lack of adequate outdoor space at the appeal property would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009276


       result in a poor living environment for future occupants. The importance of such
       space is heightened given the constrained internal accommodation.
10. The window to the bedroom of the ground-floor flat would face the 2-storey joiner's
    workshop to the rear, separated by approximately 3.8 metres. This is significantly
    less than the recommended interface distance of 13.5 metres set out in the SPD.
    Whilst the window would be positioned above the rear yard and would not
    therefore face directly onto the full height of the opposing wall, the workshop
    building would nevertheless form a prominent and dominant feature in the outlook
    from the room. Although the adjacent building would be unlikely to significantly
    restrict daylight to this room, having regard to its height and width relative to the
    position and south facing orientation of the window, the scale and proximity of the
    building would nevertheless result in an oppressive outlook for future occupiers.
11. The 2 bedrooms proposed at second-floor level would each be served by a narrow
    vertical window and a single roof light. Although the cill level to the roof lights
    would likely be below typical head height, they would primarily provide views of the
    sky. Outlook and daylight would also likely be obstructed by the internal roof
    beams observed during my site visit. Consequently, the rooflights would contribute
    little meaningful outlook. The vertical windows, although facing a highway, would
    be dominated by the gable wall of the building opposite. When considered
    alongside their limited width and easterly orientation, the rooms would experience
    restricted outlook and daylight, resulting in accommodation that would appear
    relatively dark and uninviting.
12. The building to the rear has signage indicating its use as a joiner's workshop, and
    activity observed during my site visit supports that conclusion. Even if not currently
    operating, there is no evidence before me to suggest that such a use could not
    lawfully recommence. Given its proximity to the appeal property, activities at the
    workshop have the potential to generate noise and cause harm to the living
    conditions of future occupants, particularly when windows are open.
13. In the absence of substantive evidence to demonstrate otherwise, such impacts
    would be likely even if the workshop operated only during daytime hours.
    Furthermore, there is no evidence before me indicating that its operating hours are
    restricted. Although a condition could be used to secure noise mitigation
    measures, in the absence of details regarding the nature and extent of the noise
    arising from the adjacent use, it cannot be ascertained if such measures would be
    effective. Consequently, this matter could not be adequately addressed by
    condition. Although other residential properties exist nearby, and even if there
    have been no complaints about the noise from the workshop, it has not been
    demonstrated that the proposal’s close relationship to the neighbouring use would
    provide acceptable living conditions.
14. Whilst the floorspace of the 3-bedroom flat complies with the NDSS, it would fail to
    provide a high standard of accommodation due to restricted outlook and daylight to
    2 bedrooms and insufficient outdoor space. The 1-bedroom flat would not only fall
    below the minimum NDSS floorspace requirement but would also provide poor
    outlook from the bedroom and inadequate outdoor space. Furthermore, both flats
    would likely be subject to unacceptable levels of noise from the adjacent
    workshop. Taken together, these shortcomings would result in poor living
    conditions for future occupants.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009276


15. I therefore conclude that the proposal would fail to provide adequate living
    conditions for future occupants, with particular reference to internal living space,
    outdoor space, daylight, outlook and noise. It would therefore conflict with
    PfE Policies JP-P1 and JP-P2 and Policy CG4 of Bolton’s Core Strategy (2011).
    Collectively, these seek to ensure, amongst other things, that development is
    comfortable and inviting, with indoor and outdoor environments offering a high
    level of amenity that minimises exposure to pollution, compatible with surrounding
    land uses, protecting amenity, and complies with the NDSS.
Character and Appearance
16. The appeal property is located within the St Georges Conservation Area (the CA).
    The statutory duty set out in Section 72(1) Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires special attention to be paid to the
    desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a CA.
17. The significance of the CA is derived from, amongst other factors, its strong linear
    built form with groupings of continuous building frontages, dominated by early
    19th century red brick terraced housing, interspersed with late 19th and early
    20th century prestigious buildings. As a result, the area retains much of the
    character of an early 19th century residential district.
18. The appeal property makes a positive contribution to this significance through the
    retention of key historic features, including its timber sliding sash windows and
    pitched slate roof, which are characteristic of the area's traditional terraced
    housing. These features reinforce the historic architectural rhythm and visual
    coherence of the streetscape, maintaining strong visual links with the property's
    original residential use. In combination with many of the neighbouring terraced
    properties, the appeal property contributes positively to the significance of the CA
    by maintaining the legibility of its historic development, preserving the continuity of
    its traditional built form, and reinforcing its distinctive character and appearance.
19. The proposed replacement windows, installation of air source heat pumps
    (ASHPs) and the potential for roof-mounted photovoltaic (PV) panels on the rear
    roof slope would likely alter the external appearance of the building within the CA.
    However, the submitted information provides little substantive detail regarding the
    design of the proposed windows or the siting and appearance of the proposed
    ASHPs and PV panels. Therefore, I cannot be satisfied that these alterations and
    additions would not result in a harmful effect on the character and appearance of
    the CA, or that an acceptable proposal could be secured through the use of a
    pre-commencement condition.
20. Solar PV panels would likely alter the appearance of the rear roof slope, which is
    visible from public views. Likewise, ASHPs can be visually prominent and
    unsympathetic to a historic environment, and there is no information before me
    regarding their size, design or exact location. In relation to the proposed windows,
    insufficient detail has been provided to demonstrate how improved thermal
    performance could be achieved whilst preserving the traditional appearance of the
    building, particularly in respect of the existing sash windows. In the absence of
    substantive evidence demonstrating otherwise, I cannot conclude that these
    alterations would preserve the character or appearance of the CA.
21. Noise mitigation measures also have the potential to alter the external appearance
    of the building and effect the CA. However, the appellant has confirmed that such

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009276


       measures are not proposed as part of the development. Therefore, based on the
       evidence before me, the proposal would not cause harm to the character and
       appearance of the CA from such works, notwithstanding that I have found harm to
       living conditions as a result of noise from the neighbouring use.
22. In view of the above, I therefore find that the appeal proposal would cause harm
    to, and fail to preserve or enhance, the character or appearance of the CA. Based
    on the information before me, the magnitude of this harm would be towards the
    lower end of the spectrum. Nevertheless, having regard to my statutory duty, I
    attach considerable importance and weight to that harm.
23. Policy HE4 of the Framework sets out that any harm to, or loss of, the significance
    of a designated heritage asset should have a clear and convincing justification.
    Policy HE6 goes on to state that the effect on the asset and its significance should
    be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
24. The scheme would provide 2 new flats in an accessible location close to services,
    contributing towards housing supply and choice in the area. However, 2 residential
    units would make a limited contribution to the Council’s housing supply, and
    therefore I find the public benefits arising from the delivery of this additional
    housing would be modest.
25. Public economic benefits would arise from the proposal, including contributions to
    the local economy during the construction phase of the development. These
    however would be short term benefits. Further economic benefits would also arise
    from additional spending in the area by future occupants of the flats. Cumulatively,
    given the small scale of the development, the economic support to the area arising
    from the appeal proposal would be minor. I therefore attach a small amount of
    weight in respect of the economic benefits.
26. The proposal would secure the long-term re-use of a vacant building and enable
    energy efficiency and low carbon heating measures to be employed, which Policy
    HE6 identifies can be important public benefits. I afford moderate weight to these
    as the condition of the vacant building is not such that it is causing harm to the
    character and appearance of the CA, and its small scale means that the benefits
    arising from the energy efficiency and low carbon measures would be modest.
27. Taking these matters together, I find that the public benefits of the proposal do not
    outweigh the considerable importance and weight that should be attached to the
    identified harm to the CA and the substantial weight that should be given to its
    conservation, irrespective of the level of harm.
28. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal would cause harm to the
    character and appearance of the area and would fail to preserve or enhance the
    CA. Consequently, it would conflict with PfE Policies JP-P1 and JP-P2.
    Collectively, these seek to ensure, amongst other things, that development
    conserves and enhances the historic environment and particular consideration is
    given to ensure that the significance of key elements of the historic environment
    which contribute to Greater Manchester’s distinctive identity and sense of place
    are protected from harm. The proposal would also be contrary to the requirements
    of the Act as well as the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009276


Planning Balance and Conclusion
29. The proposal would fail to provide acceptable living conditions for future occupants
    and would cause harm to the character and appearance of the area, failing to
    preserve or enhance the CA. It therefore conflicts with the development plan,
    taken as a whole.
30. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
31. Policy H07 gives substantial weight to the benefits of providing homes which will
    contribute towards meeting evidenced accommodation needs of the community.
    However, there is no substantive evidence before me which identifies such a need
    for the type of accommodation proposed. Nevertheless, the proposal would add to
    the overall supply of homes, in line with the aims of the Framework, and I therefore
    afford this benefit moderate weight given its small scale.
32. Economic benefits would also arise during the construction phase and through
    future expenditure by occupiers of the proposed dwellings. However, given the
    limited scale of the development, these benefits would be small and therefore
    attract a correspondingly small amount of weight.
33. The environmental benefits indicated above are supported by Policies CC2 and
    HE6 of the Framework. Whilst substantial weight should be given to these benefits
    and to the better use of vacant and underutilised buildings, as per Policy L2,
    following Policy HE6, the harm I have identified to the CA attracts considerable
    importance and weight. The proposal would also conflict with Policy DP3 which
    indicates that proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they fail to
    respond to the history, character and features of their site and its setting and
    therefore fail to integrate with and enhance their surroundings
34. Furthermore, given the proposed accommodation would fail to provide acceptable
    living conditions for future occupants, it conflicts with Policy P3 of the Framework. I
    attach significant weight to this conflict.
35. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework
    does not point to permission being granted in this instance.
36. Consequently, there are no material considerations, including the Framework, to
    suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to all
    relevant matters, the appeal should be dismissed.

E Fawcett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
