Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by A Wright BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009237
Oakland Stud (formerly Tanglewood), Forest Grange, Horsham, West Sussex
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Ryan Crumley against the decision of Horsham District Council.
•      The application Ref is DC/25/1428.
•      The development proposed is full application for proposed two pitch settled Gypsy accommodation
       site along with retention of cess pit.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The description of development in the banner heading above is taken from the
         application form but has been shortened in the interests of precision.
3.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
         August 2026 which replaces the previous version and the Planning Policy for
         Traveller Sites. I invited the Council and the appellant to consider whether the new
         Framework has relevance to this appeal and have taken account of the responses
         received in my decision.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue in this appeal is whether the proposal would conserve and
         enhance the natural beauty of the High Weald National Landscape (formerly Area
         of Outstanding Natural Beauty).
Reasons
5.       The flat appeal site lies in the countryside to the north of the private Forest Grange
         access road. It comprises an existing sand school with approval for use as a part-
         time fitness boot camp1, the adjacent hardstanding and driveway, and the access
         road. There is a mobile home in residential use by the appellant and an associated
         septic tank on part of the hardstanding area which are subject to an enforcement
         notice upheld on appeal2. There are some timber sheds and stables in the
         surrounding fields, and residential uses nearby to the south of the access road.
6.       The site is within the High Weald National Landscape (HWNL) where there is a
         statutory duty to seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the
         natural beauty. Further, Policy N4 of the Framework states that proposals within
         National Landscapes (NLs) should be limited in scale and extent and sensitively
1
    Appeal ref: APP/Z3825/W/24/3350033
2
    Appeal ref: APP/Z3825/C/25/3360097 ‘the previous appeal’

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009237


       located and designed to avoid harm to the statutory purposes and special qualities
       of the landscape. It requires substantial weight to be placed on the importance of
       conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of NLs.
7.     Policy 30 of the Horsham District Planning Framework 2015 (HDPF) generally
       reflects the statutory and national policy requirements. It also requires proposals
       within protected landscapes, including the HWNL, to have regard to the
       management plan for the area and to demonstrate how key components of natural
       beauty will be conserved, amongst other things.
8.     Having regard to the High Weald AONB Management Plan, the HWNL is one of
       the best surviving medieval landscapes in north-west Europe. Its natural beauty is
       derived from the essentially rural and small-scale landscape character, rich in
       wildlife and cultural features, created by historic and locally distinctive agricultural
       and forestry practices. Features include abundant ancient woodland, and a mosaic
       of fields created by woodland clearance often bound by hedgerows and woods.
9.     The Horsham District Landscape Character Assessment outlines the
       characteristics of the St Leonard’s Forest Landscape Character Area (LCA) within
       which the site lies. This character area is very densely wooded, with the
       combination of forest cover and ghylls creating a strongly enclosed landscape with
       confined views. It includes a medium scale field pattern of regular arable fields
       which divide the woodlands and is identified as being highly sensitive to change.
10. The appeal site comprises an equestrian use within a wider open area of
    paddocks and fields surrounded by tree belts and woodland, including the ancient
    woodland associated with St Leonard’s Forest. Therefore, the site and its setting
    are characteristic of the NL and the LCA.
11. The proposal is for two pitches of Gypsy accommodation, comprising two mobile
    homes on the area currently occupied by the sand school, a parking and turning
    area on the adjacent hardstanding, with the septic tank retained in its current
    position. An evergreen leylandii hedgerow has been planted around three sides of
    the sand school with a timber fence on the west boundary and there are recently
    planted native hedgerows to the north and east of the hardstanding area. The
    proposed development would be contained within the hedge boundaries and there
    would be no encroachment into woodland or removal of significant trees.
12. Similar to the Inspector’s findings on the previous appeal, the introduction of two
    mobile homes and the residential use of the site with its associated domestic
    paraphernalia and vehicles would have an urbanising effect. This would be more
    damaging than the jumps and poles associated with the sand school and the
    temporary equipment used for the boot camp sessions, with more intensive,
    constant use of the hardstanding than would be expected of the existing
    equestrian and boot camp uses. This would be harmfully at odds with the rural,
    largely undeveloped landscape character on the north side of the access road.
13. The recently planted hedges are intended to provide screening, and the evergreen
    planting is uncharacteristic of the local landscape structure. Even if the leylandii
    were to be replaced by native hedging, the hedges along with the septic tank
    subdivide the existing field pattern, in stark contrast to the open character of the
    surrounding landscape.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009237


14. With a low height and modest scale, the mobile homes would not impinge on the
    skyline, and the proposed dark coloured timber finishes would be less stark in the
    landscape than lighter coloured units. It is indicated that the existing floodlights
    would be removed, though this is not shown on the proposed plans, and the
    appellant’s statement refers to low-level, downward facing lighting. Further, the
    proposed structures and parking and turning areas would be largely screened by
    an existing building, hedges and trees in views from the access road and
    surrounding land.
15. Nonetheless, as found in the previous appeal, the high protection afforded to NLs
    does not exist only in visually prominent locations. The existing septic tank and
    hedgerows together with the proposed mobiles and associated paraphernalia
    would not relate sympathetically to the local landscape but would erode the local
    field pattern. Although this erosion would be limited, the proposed scheme would
    not conserve and enhance the natural beauty of the HWNL.
16. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would fail to conserve and enhance the
    natural beauty of the HWNL. This would be contrary to Policies 23, 25, 30 and 33
    of the HDPF. Amongst other things, these seek to protect landscape character,
    including by conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the HWNL, and
    require proposals for Gypsy accommodation to not have an unacceptable impact
    on the character and appearance of the landscape. The proposal would also
    conflict with Policy N4 of the Framework and would therefore not further the
    statutory purposes of protected landscapes.
Other Considerations
Pitch supply and need
17. The Council accepts that it cannot currently demonstrate an up-to-date five year
    supply of deliverable Gypsy and Traveller pitches. Its current position is a 2.9 year
    supply, which is a significant shortfall. In these circumstances, Policy S5 of the
    Framework states that development which would address an evidenced unmet
    need should be approved provided it meets the criteria in Policy HO12, unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national-decision making policies in the Framework.
18. Policy HO12 of the Framework outlines that proposals for Traveller sites should be
    located so that they provide a settled base. Amongst other things, it also requires
    the existing level of local provision, need for additional sites and other personal
    circumstances which may be relevant to be taken into account.
19. The Council’s Revised Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment
    September 2024 indicates a need for 79 pitches for those who meet the national
    policy definition of Gypsies and Travellers. Of these, 50 pitches are required in the
    first five years, with the remaining required in the longer term to 2040.
20. The Council states that these needs will be delivered by Policy 43 of the submitted
    Regulation 19 Horsham District Local Plan (LP). This emerging policy seeks to
    meet the identified current and future accommodation needs of Gypsies, Travellers
    and Travelling Showpeople in the District through the regularisation or
    intensification of existing sites and allocation of new sites. The LP was submitted
    in July 2024 and is still subject to examination. As such, it carries limited weight.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009237


21. When I factor in the lack of a five-year supply, the current unmet need for pitches
    and the lack of clarity on when the needs will be met, the provision of two pitches
    adds significant weight in favour of the proposed development.
Personal circumstances
22. In the absence of a five-year pitch supply, the appellant is not seeking a personal
    permission, and he would accept a condition restricting the use of the proposed
    pitches to those meeting the Framework’s definition of Gypsies and Travellers.
    Nonetheless, it is relevant to consider the personal circumstances in this case.
23. The Gypsy status of the appellant is not disputed, and as found in the previous
    appeal, the appellant, his partner and their three daughters comprise a family
    whose way of life together fulfils the definition of Gypsies/Travellers. As such, the
    appellant and his family have the protected characteristic of race under section
    149(7) of the Equality Act 2010. The public sector equality duty (PSED) at section
    149(1) of the Equality Act requires me to have due regard to eliminating
    discrimination, advancing equality of opportunity and fostering good relations.
24. The appeal scheme supports the traditional way of life of and facilitates the
    establishment of a settled base for a Gypsy family. This allows cultural traditions to
    be balanced with the practicalities of modern living. Further, the unmet need for
    pitches indicates inequality in housing opportunities and the proposal helps to
    offset this in a modest way.
25. It does not automatically follow that the appeal should be allowed because the
    PSED is relevant. Nevertheless, the equality implications weigh notably in favour
    of permitting pitches at the appeal site because dismissing the appeal would
    perpetuate the disadvantages currently endured.
Best interests of the child
26. In considering the previous appeal, the Inspector referred to the health conditions
    of a daughter who is still at school (in the sixth form). The Inspector found that it
    would be in her interests to have a settled base, given her various health
    conditions and that she is registered to a doctor nearby. There is nothing to
    suggest that this situation has changed.
27. Assuming that this daughter is still a child and living on the site, Article 3 of the
    United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (Article 3 of the UN
    Convention) is engaged. This requires that the child’s best interests are a primary
    consideration and case law has established that no other consideration in a
    subsequent assessment of individual circumstances should be regarded as more
    important or be given greater weight.
28. The best interests of the child would be served by the family continuing to live on
    the site and this carries significant weight.
Other
29. As the site mainly comprises a sand school, the proposal would not involve the
    redevelopment of previously developed land under Policy S5 of the Framework. It
    would contribute to making efficient use of land outside a settlement, but Policy L3
    of the Framework makes clear that other policies should be taken into account.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009237


Other Matters
30. In relation to water neutrality and the Sussex North Water Supply Zone, the
    Council considers that the proposal would not have an adverse effect on the
    integrity of the Arun Valley Special Area of Conservation, Special Protection Area
    and Ramsar site, either alone or in combination with other developments granted
    since 31 October 2025. Irrespective of this, given my conclusion below there is no
    need for me to consider the implications of the proposed development on
    protected sites because the scheme is unacceptable for other reasons.
31. The Council did not find harm or development plan conflict in relation to several
    other matters, including its proximity to settlements and services, impacts on
    heritage assets, living conditions, highway safety, biodiversity, drainage and
    infrastructure. However, even if I were to agree with the Council on these points,
    the absence of harm would be a neutral matter which would not carry weight in
    favour of the proposed scheme.
Planning Balance
32. I have found that the site would be unsuitable for the proposed Gypsy
    accommodation as it would fail to conserve and enhance the natural beauty of the
    HWNL. The resulting conflict with Policies 23, 25, 30 and 33 of the HDPF would
    lead to a conflict with the development plan as a whole, and with the Framework
    as set out above. I attach substantial weight to this harm.
33. I have identified several other considerations above, which together add
    considerable weight in favour of the proposed scheme. However, the benefits of
    the proposal would be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects on the
    HWNL, the importance of conserving and enhancing the beauty of which is
    recognised by Policy N4 of the Framework. The introduction of the proposed
    development into the HWNL is sufficient for me to conclude that the scheme is
    unacceptable.
34. I have considered the option of granting permission for a temporary period. This
    requires a balancing exercise taking account the limited duration of any permission
    and any reasonable expectation of a change in planning circumstances by the end
    of the period.
35. I accept that the prospect of alternative authorised sites becoming available
    remains uncertain given that the LP remains at examination. As such, I have no
    indication of what temporary period would be sufficient for the Council to adopt the
    LP, or for any future allocations to come forward.
36. Irrespective of this, the harm to the HWNL, even for a temporary period, would be
    unacceptable given the statutory and policy requirements for conserving and
    enhancing its natural beauty.
37. Taking all this together, the material considerations do not clearly outweigh the
    harm arising from a limited period of occupation such as to justify a temporary
    permission.
Proportionality
38. If the appellant and his family could not live at this site, they would be forced to
    reside on the roadside or double up on pitches elsewhere. Dismissing the appeal

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009237


       would represent an interference with the home of the appellant such that Article 8
       of the Human Rights Act is engaged. There is also a positive obligation imposed
       by Article 8 to facilitate the Gypsy way of life. Further, under Article 3 of the UN
       Convention, there is a need to consider the best interests of the child. The human
       rights interference associated with this conclusion is in accordance with the law
       and necessary in a democratic society to protect environmental interests, which is
       a legitimate objective. The nature of the harm I have found is such that the public
       interest cannot be achieved by means that cause less interference with the
       appellant’s rights and the child’s best interests. Therefore, dismissing the appeal is
       a proportionate response.
39. In accordance with the PSED, I have also given due regard to minimising the
    disadvantage suffered by the occupiers of the site as persons without a permanent
    home and to meeting their needs insofar as they are different to those without
    relevant protected characteristics. Whilst ultimately the appeal is to be dismissed,
    these considerations have been at the forefront of the decision-making process.
    Nevertheless, the specific nature of the harm identified means the outcome is a
    proportionate one.
Conclusion
40. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be
    dismissed.

A Wright
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
