Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026 by J Reed MPlan MRTPI
Decision by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009590
51 Sidecliff Road, Roker, Sunderland SR6 9JR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Keir Gray against the decision of Sunderland City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/02838/FUL.
•   The development proposed is rear extension to form enlarged kitchen area.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published by the Government. This is a material consideration in
   the decision-making process from the day of publication. As the changes made do
   not affect the main issue in this appeal it was not necessary to seek the views of
   the main parties.
4. I note the submission of amended plans by the appellant during the application. For
   the avoidance of doubt, I have based my recommendation off the plans that the
   Council determined the application against as clarified in the decision notice.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
   the occupants of 53 Sidecliff Road with particular regard to outlook.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal dwelling is a two-storey terraced property with a two-storey outrigger to
   its rear as well as a modest yard area. One of its directly attached neighbours is 53
   Sidecliff Road (No.53) and the properties are separated by a brick wall with their
   respective yard areas situated either side of the boundary.
7. The appeal proposal is to erect a flat roofed single storey extension with a sky
   lantern to the area of yard directly abutting the appeal dwelling’s rear elevation. The
   proposed extension would extend along and above the boundary shared with
   No.53. From the information before me and my observations onsite, the outlook

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009590


     from the ground floor rear and side windows and the rear yard of No.53 were
     limited due to a combination of the height of the two-storey outriggers, the
     boundary wall and the properties close relationship.
8. The appeal scheme would result in a blank, featureless wall against the common
   boundary and due to its depth, it would dominate views from the rear windows of
   No.53. The proposed extension would result in a strong sense of enclosure when
   coupled with the existing effect from No.53’s two storey outrigger. This cumulative
   visual dominance would unacceptably reduce outlook from both the neighbour’s
   windows and the garden space to the immediate rear of No.53 to the detriment of
   the living conditions of its users.
9. I take on board the appellant’s argument that there is already a brick wall
   separating the gardens of the appeal building and No.53. However, this is
   significantly lower than the total height of the proposed extension and thus would
   not sufficiently mitigate its adverse effects as I have explained them. The occupiers
   of No.53 have not objected to the appeal scheme, but this would not obviate the
   need for an assessment as to its effects in the context of the main issue.
10. I note the intentionality of the flat roofed design in order to minimalize the
    extensions height as well as the presence of planting on the boundary. I observed
    on my site visit that the boundary planting did not extend along the full depth of the
    proposed extension resulting in the proposed extension still being visible even with
    its flat roofed design. Furthermore, the boundary planting could be removed at any
    point which would increase the extensions prominence. While the proposed
    development may not impact the neighbouring occupant’s access to daylight and
    sunlight this does not alleviate my concerns in regard to outlook as outlined above.
11. The proposed development would therefore be unacceptably harmful to the living
    conditions of the occupants of 53 Sidecliff Road with particular regard to outlook.
    As such it would fail to comply with Policy BH1 of the Sunderland City Council Core
    Strategy and Development Plan 2015 – 2033 (2020). This seeks amongst other
    things for development to provide a good standard of amenity for all existing and
    future occupiers of land and buildings. The proposal would also conflict with policy
    L2 of the Framework which seeks to ensure acceptable living standards for
    residents and neighbours.
12. The proposed development would also fail to accord with the guidance set out in
    the Council’s Development Management Supplementary Planning Document which
    advises that single-storey rear extensions which have an unacceptable impact on
    the living conditions of neighbouring properties will be resisted.

Conclusion and Recommendation
13. The proposals would conflict with the development plan and there are no material
    considerations worthy of sufficient weight to indicate a decision other than in
    accordance therewith. I therefore recommend the appeal is dismissed.

J Reed
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009590


Inspector’s Decision
14. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
