Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009618
Land off Rectory Rise, Petrockstowe, Okehampton EX20 3HQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr James Drew of Drew & Sons Plant Hire against the decision of Torridge
     District Council.
•    The application reference is 1/0338/2025/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as, construction of 3 in no. dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The main parties have had the opportunity to comment on any implications of the
       recent publication of the amended National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) on their cases. Their comments have been taken into account in the
       determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues in this appeal are:
       •   whether or not the site is a suitable location for the proposed development with
           particular regard to the spatial strategy of the development plan and to the
           accessibility of the site to services and facilities;
       •   the effect of the development on highway safety; and
       •   whether the mix of housing would reflect the local need.
Reasons
Suitability of location
4.     Policies ST01 and ST07 of the North Devon and Torridge Local Plan 2011-2031
       (LP) collectively set out a spatial strategy for the area that seeks to direct new
       development to the most accessible and sustainable locations. Policy ST07 sets
       out the strategy for development in rural settlements with at least one prescribed
       service or community facility, where appropriately located development of a
       modest scale will be enabled to meet locally generated need.
5.     In qualifying rural settlements, including Petrockstowe, Policy DM24 of the LP
       supports proposals for local occupancy and affordable housing where they meet
       an identified local need. However, such support is contingent upon, amongst other

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009618


         matters, the site being located within or directly adjoining the built form of the
         settlement and robust mechanisms being secured to ensure that the dwellings
         continue to serve local needs in both the short and long term. In this regard, the
         supporting text makes clear that the policy is principally intended to facilitate local
         needs and affordable housing provision.
6.       By contrast, the appeal scheme comprises three unrestricted market dwellings.
         Furthermore, Whilst the site adjoins development on its northern, eastern and
         western boundaries, it lies outside the defined built form of Petrockstowe and
         therefore within the countryside. Although Petrockstowe is a larger rural
         settlement, it is not one of those listed in Schedules A or B of Policy ST07 and
         does not represent a location where market housing is ordinarily supported under
         the spatial strategy of the LP. Accordingly, the proposal derives little support from
         Policies ST07 and DM24, upon which I place substantial weight.
7.       Policies ST10, DM06 and TR3 of the Framework broadly set out that development
         should be located where it can support sustainable movement patterns, provide
         good accessibility, and make effective use of existing and planned transport
         infrastructure. The Framework Connectivity Tool indicates that the appeal site
         achieves a score of 6 out of 100, this figure reflects a location with very poor
         connectivity.
8.       Access to the very limited range of services and facilities within Petrockstowe
         would be reliant upon walking along rural lanes that are only intermittently served
         by footways and street lighting. As such, walking or even cycling cannot be
         regarded as an attractive, convenient or particularly safe means of travel,
         especially during the winter months, hours of darkness, or periods of adverse
         weather.
9.       Consequently, future occupants would be likely to be more dependent on private
         vehicles to access a wider range of services and facilities found elsewhere,
         including Great Torrington (approximately 7.5 miles away), Hatherleigh
         (approximately 4.5 miles away) or Merton (approximately 2 miles away) where
         day-to-day needs could be met.
10. I have considered the appellant’s comments in regard to the planning
    submissions1 for the adjacent site. Whilst the appellant has outlined the range of
    services available at the time of those submissions, the evidence before me and
    that which I observed at my site inspection indicates a reduction in the number of
    services available, particularly with the closure of the public house and village
    church. This changing context means that future occupiers of the proposal are
    likely to have greater need to travel to access services and facilities, upon which I
    place substantial weight.
11. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal site is not a suitable
    location for the proposed development, having particular regard to the spatial
    strategy of the development plan and to the accessibility of the site to services and
    facilities. Accordingly, the proposal conflicts with Policies ST01, ST07, ST10 and
    DM06 of the LP. Collectively, these policies seek to direct development to
    sustainable locations, protect the countryside from inappropriate development, and
    promote patterns of growth that reduce reliance on the private car.


1
    Reference 1/0246/2020/OUT and 1/0950/2021/REM.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
Appeal Decision 6009618


Highway safety
12. Access to the appeal site is gained via Rectory Rise, the main thoroughfare
    through the village of Petrockstowe. The access road, installed to facilitate the
    previously highlighted development is steep, narrow and lacks a turning head.
13. The Transportation Advisory Note (TAN) submitted with the appeal outlines that,
    amongst other factors, changing travel patterns, increased cycling for health and
    commuting, the use of electric bicycles, and the growth in homeworking would be
    likely to have a positive impact on the number of vehicular movements to and from
    the site.
14. However, these are not persuasive factors in determining whether a development
    is located safely or indeed sustainably. This is because these factors remain
    optional, weather‑dependent and unevenly accessible. Moreover, homeworking
    trends are sector‑specific and reversible. Therefore, it is not clear that daily travel
    demands will be significantly reduced in the long term. Moreover, highway safety
    assessments are grounded in the permanence of spatial relationships between
    housing, accessing services, employment, public transport and using the road
    systems which serve them, rather than in lifestyle choices that may fluctuate over
    time or across demographic groups.
15. Although the evidence indicates that there have been no recorded accidents on
    this section of Rectory Rise during the past 24 years, this is based upon the
    historic and current use of the access.
16. In addition to the above, given the rural location of the site where community
    facilities and services and public transport links are limited, the proposal would
    give rise to a high level of dependence upon the car as a mode of transport by
    future residents. Moreover, as 3-bedroomed houses, it is reasonably likely that
    occupants would have more than one car. As such, there would likely be a
    significant intensification of vehicular traffic using the access road in connection
    with the appeal scheme, compared to current and historic levels.
17. Whilst the access may lawfully exist, the appeal scheme would intensify its use
    through the introduction of additional dwellings and associated vehicle
    movements. Visibility for drivers emerging from the site is limited and a clear and
    reasonable view of oncoming traffic cannot be achieved. In these circumstances,
    the limited visibility would likely increase the potential for conflict between road
    users.
18. Indeed, at my site visit I accessed and egressed the site by vehicle and on foot. In
    the former, I had to edge into Rectory Rise by some distance in order to obtain a
    clear view in either direction. Whilst the appellant relies on the principle of ‘creep
    and peep’ and has directed me to an appeal decision in Cornwall where that
    approach was found acceptable, that conclusion was reached in the context of
    specific circumstances, including the particular characteristics of the road, works to
    improve the access, and the nature of the proposed use. In contrast, the appeal
    proposal would introduce three permanent dwellings, generating a more regular
    and predictable level of vehicular activity. Consequently, I am not persuaded that
    the appeal decision provides a direct comparison, and the limited visibility
    available at the access would increase the potential for conflict between vehicles
    using the appeal site and those travelling along Rectory Rise.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009618


19. Moreover, measures to improve existing levels of visibility at the junction with
    Rectory Rise cannot be guaranteed. This is because some of the land that would
    be necessary to secure this improvement is outside of the appellant’s control. The
    provision and retention of a suitable visibility splay could not therefore be
    effectively secured by way of a site management condition.
20. Exiting the site on foot heading toward the bus stop located near to the access of
    Chapel Close, I encountered a blind bend, with no footway for some distance on a
    relatively narrow stretch of the road. In the other direction, there was no footway
    and limited street lighting.
21. Consequently, I have had particular regard to the Highway Authority’s
    recommendation of refusal on highway safety grounds. Its concerns stem from the
    increased level of vehicular traffic that would be generated by the development
    and the need for such traffic to utilise a less than acceptable junction, creating
    conditions that may be prejudicial to the interests of highway safety.
22. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude that the proposal would have a
    harmful effect on highway safety. Consequently, it would conflict with LP Policy
    DM05, which requires development to provide a safe vehicular access and egress,
    considering the needs of all highway users, to which I attribute substantial weight.
Housing mix
23. Policy ST17 of the NDTLP emphasises the need for a balanced local housing
    market whereby development proposals should reflect local housing needs and
    demands of existing and future communities.
24. The Council’s officer report outlines that the appeal scheme does not provide the
    appropriate mix of dwellings necessary in order to meet the district’s housing need
    as evidenced by the Housing and Economic Needs Assessment (2016). It is clear
    that the policy supports residential development proposals that deliver a mix of
    dwellings, in terms of size and type which respond to local circumstances.
25. Whilst the appellant suggests that the proposed dwellings would be of a modest
    size, support disabled or multi-generational living and be readily adaptable for
    homeworking, they are unlikely to be accessible to those in need of affordable
    housing and, in terms of their sizes, they would not reflect the identified local need.
26. Consequently, the mix of housing would not reflect the local need, and substantial
    weight is attributed to the harm that would be caused by this. Accordingly, the
    proposal would be contrary to Policy ST17 of the LP, which seeks, amongst other
    things, to secure a housing mix that reflects the needs of the local community.
Other Matters
27. The appellant has directed me to several appeal decisions2 where matters such as
    location, character and appearance, self-build and five-year housing land supply
    were main issues or material considerations. However, the developments subject
    of these appeals were all conversions and/or for changes of use of existing
    buildings to dwellings . That being the case, these schemes are not directly
    comparable with that subject of this appeal, and they do not lead me away from
    my previous findings.

2
    PINS references: APP/Q1153/W/24/3345701, 6000561, 6001897, 6001401.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
Appeal Decision 6009618


Planning balance and Conclusion
28. The parties acknowledge that the Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year housing
    land supply (5YHLS). The Council has confirmed that it is able to demonstrate a
    housing land supply of 4.61 years. However, because a shortfall of around this
    order is marginally below Government expectations, little weight is attributed to the
    contribution that 3 houses would make to reducing the shortfall.
29. Nevertheless, and in so far as it relates to this appeal, the development plan
    policies relating to the location of development, highway safety and local housing
    need are broadly consistent with the strategic aims and overarching objectives of
    the Framework.
30. Moreover, Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 says
    development should be in accordance with the development plan unless material
    considerations indicate otherwise, and this is reaffirmed in the Framework. I have
    concluded above that the proposal would not be suitably located, would not
    provide a safe vehicular access and egress, considering the needs of all highway
    users, and would not respond positively to local housing needs. As such, there
    would be conflict with the development plan, when considered as a whole.
31. However, policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development
    proposals should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development.
32. Policy S3:1.a. outlines that Framework policy S4 should be applied to development
    within settlements. However, on the basis that the appeal site is adjacent to, but
    outside of a settlement, policy S4 is not relevant. Instead, and because the appeal
    site is outside of a settlement, policy S3:1.b. indicates that Framework policy S5
    should be applied.
33. Policy S5 sets out that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside of settlements, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision
    making policies in the Framework.
34. Policy S5:1.e. of the Framework, provides for limited infilling within groups of
    houses. Whilst the site is bounded by existing residential development on a
    number of sides, it comprises an undeveloped field that remains visually and
    functionally connected to the wider agricultural land extending to the south and
    west.
35. Consequently, the site does not read as a small gap within an otherwise
    continuously developed frontage. Rather, it forms part of the settlement edge and
    contributes to the transition between the built form and the surrounding
    countryside. In these circumstances, development of the site would be more
    appropriately characterised as an extension to the settlement rather than infill
    development. For these reasons, the scheme would not constitute limited infilling
    within a group of houses, and as such the circumstance at S5:1.e. does not apply.
36. However, because the Council cannot demonstrate a five year supply of
    deliverable housing sites, and on the basis that the criteria at S5:1.j. would be met,
    the circumstance at Framework policy S5:1.j. is relevant.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009618


37. The proposed development would contribute to the delivery of housing, and as
    such, it would broadly align with the parts of the Framework that seek to support
    the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes.
38. Moreover, policy HO7 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to
    the benefits arising from the provision of homes that would contribute towards
    meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community, as identified
    through local housing needs assessments and other relevant evidence.
39. However, in this case the appeal proposal comprises 3 unrestricted open market
    dwellings that would not address the specific housing requirements within the local
    area.
40. Therefore, and whilst the provision of these additional dwellings would make a
    modest contribution to the overall housing stock and to reducing the shortfall in the
    Council’s supply of housing land, only little weight is attributed to the associated
    partial compliance of the scheme with Framework policy HO7 and to the other
    parts of the Framework that support the delivery of housing.
41. Furthermore, for the reasons outlined in the main issues above, the proposal
    would have an unacceptable impact on highway safety. That being the case,
    Framework policy TR6:4., which is a national decision making policy as referred to
    in policy S5 of the same document, indicates that the development should be
    refused. Consequently, substantial weight is attributed to the harm that would be
    caused to highway safety and to the associated Framework conflict.
42. For these reasons, when taken together, the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework. As such, the presumption in
    favour of development at Policy S3 of the Framework does not point to permission
    being granted in this instance.
43. The proposal conflicts with the development plan when read as a whole, and there
    are no material considerations that indicate the appeal should be determined other
    than in accordance with the development plan.
44. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
