    Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 July 2026
by R Dickson BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009193
44 South Street, Havering, Romford RM1 1RB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Amir Akbar against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Havering.
•    The application Ref is J0004.26.
•    The development proposed is change of use of upper floor storage above a retail unit to form 2 No.
     1-Bed 2-Person flats with internal alteration, cycle parking and bins.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. However, in respect of the matters relevant to the
   main issue in this appeal, it remains broadly consistent with the previous version.
   Therefore, no party would be prejudiced were I to determine this appeal on the
   basis of the revised Framework.
Background and Main Issues
3. Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning
   (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the GPDO)
   permits a change of use of a building from commercial, business and service (use
   class E) to dwellinghouses (use class C3) subject to certain limitations and
   conditions.
4. Paragraph MA.2 of Class MA sets out that development is permitted subject to,
   amongst other aspects, an application to the local planning authority as to whether
   prior approval is required in relation to the conditions set out in Paragraph MA.2(2).
   One of these conditions, MA.2(2)(d) relate to impacts of noise from commercial
   premises on the intended occupiers of the development.
5. Prior approval was refused on the basis that the proposal would not meet the
   requirements of condition MA.2(2)(d). There is no dispute that the other criteria of
   Class MA are satisfied. As such, there is no need to give them further consideration
   in this decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009193


6. Part 3, Class W of the GPDO sets out the procedure for prior approval applications
   under Part 3. Paragraph W.10(b) requires the decision-maker to ‘have regard to the
   National Planning Policy Framework… so far as relevant to the subject of the prior
   approval, as if the application were a planning application’. Whilst I have had regard
   to the guidance within the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework),
   this is only where it is relevant to matters of noise.
7. As such, I consider the main issue to be whether the proposal would be permitted
   development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA, of the GPDO, with particular
   regard to the impacts of noise from commercial premises on the intended occupiers
   of the development.
Reasons
8. The appeal site is a commercial building, with retail use at ground floor level
   fronting South Street, and ancillary storage space on the upper floors. The appeal
   site backs on to Exchange Street, a key service route, allowing access to the rear
   of the commercial units along both South Street, and The Brewery, a retail and
   leisure park.
9. The appellant has submitted a Noise Impact Assessment by AF Acoustics Ltd,
   dated 28 April 2026 (document reference 3243-AF-00001-01) (noise assessment).
   To inform the noise assessment, measurements were taken from a position at the
   front and rear of the building to capture noise from both vehicle movements and
   plant associated with The Brewery, as well as noise from the plant adjacent to the
   appeal site, associated with German Doner Kebab.
10. The Brewery contains a number of retail and leisure uses, including a supermarket,
    gym, takeaways and restaurants. As such, there is likely to be some variation in the
    amount of movement, activity and noise throughout the week. Similarly, the
    takeaway kebab shop adjacent to the appeal site is likely to experience variation in
    its use throughout the week. During my site visit, I also observed the service yard
    opposite the appeal site, and while only a snapshot in time, several service and
    delivery vehicles were operating.
11. The noise assessment covers approximately a 24-hour period during the working
    week, from Monday to Tuesday. However, this limited survey period is unlikely to
    accurately reflect the noise environment within the area at busier times, such as
    during the weekends, where it is reasonable to assume that both The Brewery and
    the kebab shop would be busier, and noisier compared to a weekday. I am
    therefore left in some doubt as to how much noise might be experienced by future
    occupiers. As such, I am not satisfied that the noise assessment is robust or that its
    conclusions can be relied upon in the context of the existing situation.
12. Mitigation measures have been proposed to limit noise entering the proposed flat,
    including the requirement to keep windows closed and the installation of
    mechanical ventilation, which I accept would reduce the noise within the proposal.
    The noise assessment also recommends that a Level 2 Acoustic Ventilation and
    Overheating Assessment is undertaken. Given the recommendation for a further
    assessment, and that I cannot be certain that noise levels measured in the
    assessment are representative of those experienced over a typical week, I cannot
    be certain that the suggested mitigation measures would be adequate to address
    the impacts of noise from the surrounding commercial premises.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009193


13. For these reasons, I am not satisfied that the proposed development would
    adequately address the impacts of noise from commercial premises on the
    indented occupiers of the development. Accordingly, the proposal would fail to
    satisfy provision MA.2(2)(d) of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the GPDO.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.

R Dickson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
