Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by O Marigold BSc DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009632
Land East of Hawarden, Holsworthy Beacon, Holsworthy, Devon EX22 7NE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by David Watkins of W J Watkins & Sons Ltd against the decision of Torridge
     District Council.
•    The application Ref is 1/0736/2025/FUL.
•    The development proposed is proposed 2 no. detached dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for proposed 2 no.
       detached dwellings at Land East of Hawarden, Holsworthy Beacon, Holsworthy,
       Devon EX22 7NE in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       1/0736/2025/FUL, subject to the conditions in the Schedule to this decision below.
Preliminary Matters
2.     As part of the appeal, the appellant has provided amended plans and information
       in respect of surface and foul water drainage. The Council has commented on
       these matters. Given this and the relatively small nature of the change, I consider
       that no party would be prejudiced if I take these amended plans and information
       into account. I shall therefore determine the appeal on this basis.
3.     Since the appeal was made, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) has been published, on 17 August 2026. The Council and the
       appellant have had the opportunity to comment on this. I have determined the
       appeal using the current planning policy position.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would accord with the spatial strategy of the
                Development Plan, having regard to access to services and facilities, and
           •    whether adequate provision for foul drainage could be provided.
Reasons
Spatial Strategy, Services and Facilities
5.     Policy ST07 of the North Devon and Torridge Local Plan (the Local Plan), adopted
       October 2018, provides the Council’s spatial strategy for the area. It supports
       development within settlements identified in the policy. However, the appeal site is


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009632


       on the edge of Holsworthy Beacon. This does not have the facilities necessary for
       it to constitute a Rural Settlement as defined in the Local Plan. As such, the policy
       limits new development to types which do not apply to the proposal, which is for
       market accommodation. Consequently, it would conflict with Local Plan policy
       ST07.
6.     The aims of the Council’s spatial strategy, including Local Plan policy ST10, seek
       amongst other things to reduce the need to travel by car and to enable alternative
       sustainable travel options. It therefore guards against development in
       unsustainable locations. In this case, the nearest main settlement is Holsworthy,
       along rural roads with no lighting or pavement. Accordingly, walking and cycling to
       the town is unlikely to provide a realistic alternative to the private car for many
       people.
7.     That said, the length of car journeys to Holsworthy would be relatively short,
       limiting the adverse effects of private vehicle use, such as increased carbon
       emissions. Furthermore, bus stops are available within reasonable walking
       distance of the site. On the evidence before me, buses provide some weekday
       services to Holsworthy as well as to Barnstaple and other locations.
8.     Access to the bus stops would require walking (or cycling) on a lane with no
       pavement or street lighting, but only for a fairly short distance. Although traffic
       speeds may in practice be higher, the site is within the 30mph speed limit area. In
       addition, a ‘ring and ride’ scheme is available to qualifying people. On this basis,
       public transport may well provide an alternative option for some journeys, including
       for people of limited mobility.
9.     Nevertheless, for the reasons given above, the proposal would not accord with the
       spatial strategy of the Development Plan, having regard to access to services and
       facilities. It would therefore conflict with Local Plan policy ST07.
Drainage
10. Local Plan policy DM02 supports development where it would not result in
    unacceptable impacts on surface or ground water from pollution. The site is
    located within the Holsworthy critical drainage area. At application stage, little
    evidence was provided to assess whether the ground has suitable permeability.
    The Council’s concerns related particularly to arrangements for the treatment of
    foul effluent.
11. At appeal stage, details have been provided of percolation tests that have been
    undertaken. Surface water soakaways and drainage field designs have been
    submitted, reflecting the results of these tests. As identified by the Council’s
    Environmental Health Officer, the results suggest that the testing was carried out
    in accordance with BRE365, but BS6297 is the appropriate methodology for foul
    drainage design. Although BS6297 is referred to later in the report, the Council
    seeks confirmation of the standard used.
12. An appeal1 found that the requirement for percolation test results should not be left
    until after the position of buildings and other built form is fixed. However, as
    suggested by the Council, a pre-commencement condition could prevent any
    development from starting until suitable drainage details have been provided. As a

1 PINS reference APP/W1145/W/19/3220228



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
 Appeal Decision 6009632


       result, adequate provision could be made for foul drainage and so the proposal
       would comply with Local Plan policy DM02. This matter is therefore neutral in the
       planning balance.
Other Considerations
13. Relevant to the appeal, the Framework applies a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. Policy S4 applies within settlements, and policy S5
    applies outside of them. Settlements do not include hamlets and scattered groups
    of houses located outside predominantly built-up areas. The pattern of
    development around the appeal site is somewhat sporadic and secluded, with
    fields opposite and behind the site.
14. Even so, outside of settlements, Framework policy S5(1)(e) permits limited infilling
    within groups of houses. Hawarden and another dwelling lie close to the site, and
    planning permission has been granted for two additional dwellings between the
    site and Highfield, which are under construction. Other properties within
    Holsworthy Beacon are not far from the site, and not all have a linear position,
    instead forming a group. In its original Statement of Case, the Council
    acknowledged that the appeal proposal would not be physically isolated from
    neighbouring built forms, and would represent an infill development. As a matter of
    planning judgement, I find that the development would meet the S5(1)(e) definition.
15. In these circumstances, policy S5 requires that development should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, assessed against the Framework national decision-making policies. Such
    effects would include a failure to comply with Framework policies which state that
    development should be refused in specific circumstances.
16. DP3(3) is one such policy. It makes clear that proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with specified design principles which
    include liveability and movement. The draft Design and Placemaking planning
    practice guidance provides further advice. Liveability relates to social interaction
    and equitable access to a variety of services and cultural facilities, particularly in
    town centres. Movement includes where transport infrastructure provides choices,
    good connections to nearby settlements, and the prioritising of walking, wheeling,
    cycling and public transport.
17. That said, policy DP3(3) makes clear that the application of the design principles
    must be appropriate to the nature of the development, its location and context.
    Framework policy TR3 recognises that connectivity opportunities may differ in rural
    areas. Given this, and my findings above, the proposal would have an acceptable
    degree of connectivity and would not conflict with Framework policy DP3. It follows
    that policy S5, and the Framework as a whole, is supportive of the proposal.
18. A recent appeal at Hollocombe2 found that development in a location closer to
    Holsworthy would not be an appropriate location for housing. However, I have few
    details of the availability of public transport in that case, which was also found to
    be unacceptable on highway safety grounds. Furthermore, the planning policy
    position is now different. This case does not therefore change my overall findings.



2 PINS reference 6005680



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
 Appeal Decision 6009632


Other Matters
19. The proposal would result in an overall Biodiversity Net Gain within the site, but a
    deficit of habitat units would remain. This would require additional units to be
    purchased off-site. The appellant has provided evidence of the availability of a
    registered habitat bank to provide the units. Schedule 7 of the 1990 Act requires
    that development may not be begun unless a biodiversity gain plan has been
    approved by the Council. The Council is satisfied that this provides a sufficiently
    robust and enforceable mechanism to ensure that the credits would be purchased.
    I see little reason to disagree. This matter is therefore neutral in the planning
    balance.
20. The proposal would be accessed from the highway using a single access divided
    into two driveways. The layout shows parking and turning space within the site.
    The application site includes sufficient space for visibility splays, and no objection
    has been raised by the Highway Authority. Accordingly, the proposal would be
    acceptable in respect of highway safety.
Conditions
21. The Council has provided a list of conditions, which I have assessed and where
    necessary amended, having regard to the advice in the Planning Practice
    Guidance. A condition requiring adherence to the approved plans is necessary for
    certainty. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, a condition
    requiring adherence to the approved external materials is required.
22. To ensure adequate living conditions for nearby properties and the protection of
    the environment, a condition is required to secure details of the management of
    foul water. This must be a pre-commencement condition, because it may affect
    fixed items and the undertaking of works at an early stage. To ensure highway
    safety, it is necessary that details of the visibility splays are provided, and that the
    splays remain unobstructed. For the same reason, provision of the vehicular
    turning facilities is necessary.
23. In the interests of the living conditions of nearby properties, hours of construction
    work are restricted to suitable times. To prevent harm to human health,
    arrangements for the reporting of unexpected contamination are necessary.
    Development must take place in accordance with the submitted Ecological
    Appraisal, in the interests of biodiversity.
Planning Balance
24. I have found conflict with Local Plan policy ST07. However, the policy is materially
    inconsistent with Framework policy S5, by not supporting general housing which
    constitutes infilling within groups of houses in locations that are not in Rural
    Settlements. In accordance with Framework Annex A, I give the conflict with policy
    ST07 very limited weight. Against that, I give substantial weight to the support to
    the proposal provided by the Framework, a material consideration of critical
    importance. The planning balance is therefore in favour of the development.
Conclusion
25. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 states that
    applications for planning permission, and thus appeals, must be determined in
    accordance with the Development Plan, unless material considerations indicate

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
 Appeal Decision 6009632


       otherwise. Despite the conflict with the Development Plan read as a whole,
       material considerations in the form of the Framework indicate that planning
       permission should be granted. Consequently, I conclude that the appeal should be
       allowed.

O Marigold
INSPECTOR


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location Plan, 1345-02, 1345-03. It shall also
              be carried out in accordance with plan 1345-04-D or as amended by details
              approved in respect of foul drainage.
     3)       The development hereby approved shall take place only in accordance with
              the external materials specified on the approved plans and within the
              application form.
     4)       No development shall commence until details of foul drainage have been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
              submitted details shall include the results of percolation tests, carried out in
              accordance with the methodology set out in British Standard BS 6297:2007
              (or any subsequent revision), and sufficient information to demonstrate that
              the proposed means of foul drainage is feasible and will not result in pollution
              or harm to the environment. The development shall thereafter be carried out
              in full accordance with the approved details prior to its occupation, and
              retained as such thereafter.
     5)       The development hereby approved shall not be occupied until plans showing
              the highway visibility splays have been submitted to and approved in writing
              by the Local Planning Authority, and the approved splays have been created.
              Once created, the approved visibility splays shall be retained as such, and
              shall be kept free of any obstruction exceeding 1.05 metres in height at all
              times.
     6)       The development hereby approved shall not be occupied until the vehicle
              manoeuvring space has been provided within the site in accordance with the
              approved plans, to enable vehicles to enter and leave in a forward gear. This
              area shall be retained and made available for these purposes at all times.
     7)       Construction works (including deliveries of construction materials) shall not
              take place other than between 0730hrs and 1900hrs on Mondays to Fridays,
              on Saturdays between 0800hrs and 1300hrs, and at no time on Sundays and
              Bank or Public Holidays.
     8)       Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the
              development hereby permitted that was not previously identified shall be
              reported immediately to the Local Planning Authority. Development on the
              part of the site affected shall be suspended until a risk assessment has been
              carried out and submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
 Appeal Decision 6009632


              Authority. Where unacceptable risks are found, the development shall not
              resume or continue until remediation and verification schemes have been
              carried out in accordance with details that shall first have been submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
     9)       The proposed development shall be undertaken in accordance with the
              recommendations set out in Section 8 (Mitigation) on page 14 of the
              Ecological Appraisal produced by Penpont Ecology Services Ltd and
              submitted on 19 September 2025.
End of Conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
