Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by K Dryden BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009167
27 Gloucester Road North, Filton, South Gloucestershire BS7 0SQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Speare Developments Limited against the decision of South Gloucestershire
    Council.
•   The application reference is P25/02828/F.
•   The development proposed is erection of an extension and conversion of existing floorspace to
    provide 7no. Houses in Multiple Occupation (Use Class C4), bin and cycle store, laundry room, and
    associated works. Retention of existing commercial floorspace (Use Class E) at the ground floor.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of an
   extension and conversion of existing floorspace to provide 7no. Houses in Multiple
   Occupation (Use Class C4), bin and cycle store, laundry room, and associated
   works. Retention of existing commercial floorspace (Use Class E) at the ground
   floor at 27 Gloucester Road North, Filton, South Gloucestershire BS7 0SQ, in
   accordance with the terms of the application, reference P25/02828/F, and the plans
   submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Speare Developments Limited against the
   Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
   appeal relates, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026, which replaces the previous
   Framework published in December 2024, and all other iterations. I consider that
   there have been no major changes relevant to the main issues in this appeal. It will
   therefore not prejudice any party by making my decision with regard to the new
   Framework.
4. The planning application is a resubmission of a previous planning application,
   P25/00196/F. The Council has stated that due to an administrative error, a decision
   was issued on the earlier application, despite the application being ‘called in’ by a
   local councillor. Following this, the Council took legal steps to quash the decision
   and the appellant agreed to a consent order. The planning application was
   subsequently resubmitted through planning application P25/02828/F and was
   determined at the Council’s Development Management Committee, in accordance
   with their scheme of delegation.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009167


Main Issues
5. The Council has raised no concerns regarding the partial loss of ground floor
   commercial floorspace, the proposed extensions and external alterations to the
   building, nor the internal living conditions for future occupiers of the proposal with
   regard to space standards. Based on my observations at the site visit and the
   evidence provided, I have no reason to take a different view.
6. The main issues are:
     •    whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for its future
          occupants with regard to private outdoor amenity space; and
     •    the effect of the proposed development on the availability of on-street car
          parking in the area, with particular regard to highway safety; and
     •    the effect of the development on the housing mix of the area.
Reasons
Private outdoor amenity space
7. The appeal site relates to a vacant two-storey building occupying a prominent
   position at the junction of Gloucester Road North and Braemar Avenue, within a
   parade of commercial properties. To the rear, the site is bound by Braemar
   Crescent. The proposal seeks to retain commercial use (Use Class E) within part of
   the ground floor, whilst converting the remainder of the ground floor and the upper
   floors, together with the addition of a roof extension, to provide 7 separate House in
   Multiple (HMOs), accommodating a total of 34 occupants. Each HMO would
   contain between 3 and 6 bedrooms and would therefore fall within Use Class C4.
8. The proposal provides two areas of shared private outdoor amenity space for future
   occupiers, located to the side of the building adjacent to a small private road, with a
   combined area of approximately 40sqm. The Council contends that the level of
   outdoor amenity space provision would be insufficient and would thereby harm the
   living conditions of future occupiers.
9. Policy PSP43 of the South Gloucestershire Local Plan, Policies, Sites and Places
   Plan (2017) (PSP), requires all new residential units (including those created by the
   change of use, development or sub-division of existing buildings), to have access to
   private amenity space. Whilst the policy sets out a required amount, as a guide, for
   residential flats and dwelling houses, but is not specific regarding the external
   space requirements for HMO development. I also note the provisions of Policy
   PSP39 of the PSP which requires that adequate amenity space is provided in HMO
   proposals.
10. The evidence before me indicates that the appeal property lies within close walking
    distance of two substantial areas of public open space, Millenium Green and
    Monk’s Park. Whilst not private amenity space, they would nevertheless provide
    value to future occupiers with regard to outdoor space provision and opportunities
    for recreation. Furthermore, the building will provide adequate internal facilities for
    laundry, bike storage and waste collection and in this regard, outdoor space would
    not be required to fulfil these functions. Given the nature of the accommodation
    proposed, which would not comprise larger family sized units, the level of outdoor
    amenity space provision is satisfactory.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009167


11. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would provide acceptable living
    conditions for future occupants with regard to private outdoor amenity space. It
    would therefore comply with Policies PSP43 and PSP39 of the PSP which together
    seek development to have access to adequate private amenity space. I further find
    no conflict with PSP Policy PSP8 in so far as it requires development proposals to
    not create unacceptable living conditions or have an unacceptable impact on the
    residential amenity of occupiers of the development.
On-street car parking provision
12. The proposed development provides no off street car parking as part of the
    proposal, and the Council has stated that the area cannot accommodate additional
    on-street parking, which would result in a highway safety impact. It is a reasonable
    consideration that 34 unrelated individuals living at the property would generate
    additional demand for parking and could own vehicles which they would wish to
    park in the area.
13. The Development Management Committee minutes of the 5 March 2026, set out
    that the Transport Development Control Manager considered that the appellant had
    undertaken a parking survey in accordance with the Council’s agreed methodology
    at peak times. Whilst photographic evidence submitted by residents was noted, the
    survey demonstrates that sufficient on-street capacity exists within the surrounding
    streets. Furthermore, there had been no material changes to the highway network
    or parking arrangements since the survey was undertaken, and no objection was
    raised by the Council’s Transport Development Management officers on this basis.
    The appellant has subsequently submitted an updated parking survey with the
    appeal which demonstrates that around 29 parking spaces would be available on
    local roads, with a further 20 available within Filton Road car park.
14. I have not been provided substantive evidence to demonstrate that the proposal
    would give rise to harmful additional parking demand, nor that there are plans for a
    controlled parking zone in this area. Furthermore, the Council’s Transport
    Development Control Manager has not raised concerns regarding highway safety,
    which is a material consideration to which I attach significant weight.
15. Whilst I acknowledge that my site visit took place on a weekday during the mid-
    morning and represents only a single point in time, I observed that there was
    capacity for on street parking within Braemar Avenue and the surrounding
    residential streets, which appeared free flowing with little evidence of traffic
    congestion.
16. I note the concerns from third parties regarding a potential increase in on-street car
    parking demand due to the loss of a nearby car park serving the commercial
    parade along Gloucester Road North. However, I have not been provided with
    evidence to demonstrate that such change would occur or that it would be likely to
    result in a material increase in parking demand.
17. Additionally, whilst comments have been made regarding inaccuracies in the
    appellant’s parking survey, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that its
    findings are materially flawed as a whole. In this regard, I note that the Council’s
    Transport Development Control officer raised no concerns regarding the
    methodology or accuracy of the survey. Matters relating to construction traffic could
    be addressed through the imposition of a construction method statement condition.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009167


     Furthermore, whilst no dedicated disabled parking provision is proposed within the
     site, opportunities for on street parking exist in the surrounding area.
18. The appeal site is well located for access to local services and is served by nearby
    bus routes, which would provide future occupants with a realistic alternative to the
    private car. In addition, secure bicycle parking would be provided, with capacity for
    up to 34 bicycles.
19. Consequently, I find that the proposal would not result in unacceptable parking
    pressures within the surrounding area, nor would it adversely affect residential
    amenity or give rise to highway safety concerns, including the risk of accidents from
    drivers looking for parking spaces or conflict with emergency vehicles.
20. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would not have an
    unacceptable effect on the availability of on-street car parking in the area, nor
    would it cause harm to highway safety. The proposal is in accordance with Policy
    PSP16 of the PSP which sets out a minimum number of car parking spaces per
    bedroom for HMO proposals, which can be provided within the curtilage, or
    alternatively through submission of appropriate evidence of the availability of on
    street parking during evenings and weekends.
Housing mix
21. Policy CS17 of the South Gloucestershire Local Plan Core Strategy 2006-2027
    (2013) (CS) sets out that in order to support mixed communities in all localities,
    new housing development, comprising both market and affordable, must provide a
    wide variety of housing type and size to accommodate a range of different
    households, including families, single persons, older persons and low-income
    households.
22. Furthermore, Policy PSP39 of the PSP requires that proposals for Houses in
    Multiple Occupation (HMOs), will be acceptable, provided that they would not
    impact on the character and amenities of the area within which they are located;
    not prejudice the amenity of neighbours; provide adequate amenity space; refuse
    storage and servicing; and provide parking in accordance with the Council’s parking
    standards.
23. Whilst the Houses in Multiple Occupation (Refresh) Guidance for New
    Developments Supplementary Planning Document (2026) (SPD) does not have the
    status of development plan policy, the document is an important material
    consideration in the determination of this appeal. The SPD seeks to provide further
    guidance in order to ensure that new HMO developments meet the requirements of
    the Council’s development plan policies in terms of impact on the surrounding
    areas.
24. The SPD sets out, in ‘Additional Explanatory Guidance 1 and 2’, criteria relating to
    housing mix that apply to applications for the change of use of a dwellinghouse
    (Use Class C3) to an HMO in sui generis use. However, the proposal before me
    relates to the conversion of a vacant commercial building and would provide 7
    small HMOs falling within Use Class C4. As such, the circumstances of this appeal
    differ materially from those covered by the SPD, and the document does not
    provide specific guidance directly relevant to assessing the proposal’s effect on
    housing mix.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009167


25. Notwithstanding, I note that the SPD advises that a 10% threshold is widely
    accepted as a guide to identifying when an application may begin to affect the
    mixed nature of housing stock within a community. Given my observations at the
    site visit, including that Braemar Avenue and Braemar Crescent to the north and
    west of the appeal site are predominantly residential roads, and having regard to
    the objectives of the development plan policies cited above; it is reasonable in this
    instance to consider the composition of households within the local area in order to
    determine whether the proposal would achieve an appropriate and balanced
    housing mix, supporting a wide variety of households.
26. The SPD advises that applications for the change of use from a dwelling house
    (Use Class C3) to an HMO (Sui Generis Use) that would result in an additional
    HMO in localities where known HMO properties already represent more than 10%
    of households; or more than 20% of households within a 100 metre radius of the
    application property are unlikely to be in conformity with Policy CS17 of the CS or
    PSP39 of the PSP, as this is unlikely to result in ‘mixed communities’ and may
    result in such development becoming concentrated. The SPD advises that this
    could also impact on the character and amenities for the area within which they are
    located.
27. From the evidence before me, including the 5 March 2026 Development
    Management Committee minutes, the Council contends that based on Census
    Output Area (COA) data, that around 5% of properties within a 100m radius of the
    application site are currently licensed HMOs. This figure has been provided using
    the measuring point for calculating the concentration figure, based on the Council’s
    mapping system, which is referenced in the SPD. Therefore, whilst a small section
    of the appeal site sits within a COA where the concentration figure is around
    10.9%, that figure is not directly relevant to the calculation undertaken for
    properties within a 100m radius.
28. With regard to the concentration of more than 10% within a COA, the Council has
    stated within its appeal statement, that the concentration figures for both COAs
    have been updated and now exceed the 10% threshold. However, no additional
    substantive evidence has been submitted to demonstrate this. I also note
    commentary from the appellant in their appeal statement, dated May 2026, that the
    site is predominantly located in a COA where the concentration figure is around
    9.5%, and that the Councils online mapping data includes the proposed
    development which demonstrates a figure of around 10.1%. As such, from the
    concentration data and evidence before me, I cannot clearly conclude that there
    would be a breach of the SPD requirements based on the concentration of existing
    HMOs.
29. In any event, and even if the threshold is exceeded as the Council suggests, the
    application of the 10% threshold is principally relevant to proposals involving the
    change of use of a dwellinghouse. Furthermore, the SPD advises that where the
    threshold is exceeded, a further assessment is required to establish whether any
    harmful impacts would arise. Having regard to the matters before me, including the
    provision of private amenity space and the availability of on-street parking, I have
    found above no overriding considerations or harmful impacts that would justify
    withholding planning permission.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009167


30. I have also had regard to the concerns raised by interested parties regarding the
    concentration of HMOs in the area and the potential implications for the character
    and amenity of the area, as requested in paragraph 5.4 of the SPD. This includes
    matters relating to noise and disturbance, anti-social behaviour and increase in
    student population, sewerage, drainage and waste management issues including
    vermin, and the potential impacts on local services, policing and healthcare, loss of
    light and privacy and the nature of the Class E use at ground floor, alongside
    concerns regarding the loss of employment and retail floorspace.
31. I have not been provided with substantive evidence to demonstrate that the
    proposal would cause harm to local services or adversely affect the living
    conditions of neighbouring residents or character and amenity of the area.
    Furthermore, having regard to the proposed extensions and alterations at the
    appeal site, together with their relationship to adjoining properties, I am satisfied
    that there would not be an unacceptable impact in relation to loss of light or privacy
    for neighbouring residents. It is also noteworthy that the Council raises no concern
    in regard to the proposed ground floor Class E floorspace, loss of employment and
    retail floorspace, or the hours of opening, and from the evidence provided, I have
    no reason to disagree. Additionally, it is not for this appeal to review the SPD or the
    threshold at which it is considered that an over concentration of such uses occurs,
    or the ‘sandwiching’ threshold.
32. Whilst the Council’s reason for refusal refers to the number of flats and bedrooms
    within the proposal, these factors alone do not demonstrate harm to the housing
    mix. The appeal scheme would convert a vacant commercial building and would
    not result in the loss of an existing dwellinghouse. Consequently, the proposal
    would contribute to housing choice in the locality.
33. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would not harm the housing mix of the
    area. The proposal therefore accords with Policy CS17 of the CS which seeks to
    support mixed communities in all localities and Policy PSP39 of the PSP, which
    sets out that proposals for HMOs will be acceptable provided that they would not
    impact on the character and amenities of the area within which they are located;
    not prejudice the amenity of neighbours; provide adequate amenity space; refuse
    storage and servicing; and provide parking in accordance with the Council’s parking
    standards.
Other Matters
34. I have taken into account all other concerns raised, including those relating to the
    quality of life for adjoining and future occupiers, where the Council has raised no
    concern regarding overheating in the proposal, and from the evidence provided I
    have no reason to take a different view. Furthermore, planning obligations towards
    infrastructure and services would only be required where such contribution would
    meet the statutory tests for planning obligations. I have not been provided with
    information to demonstrate that the relevant thresholds for a contribution have been
    met. Moreover, none of these matters carry sufficient weight to alter my overall
    conclusions.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6009167


35. Interested parties have raised concern regarding the Council’s statutory
    consultation process. However, I have found this to be satisfactory and in
    accordance with the legislative requirements1.
Conditions
36. The Council has suggested several conditions which I have considered in light of
    the advice in the Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. Where I agree the
    conditions are necessary, I have adjusted the wording of the conditions to
    improve precision and enforceability.
37. In addition to the standard three-year time limit condition for implementation, I
    have imposed a condition that defines the approved plans in the interests of
    certainty.
38. A condition securing the implementation of the agreed details of bicycle storage are
    necessary to support the use of sustainable methods of travel which is in
    accordance with the quantum required in the Council’s parking standards.
    Additionally, a condition securing the implementation of agreed details of the refuse
    and recycling storage facilities is necessary in the interest of visual amenity and to
    ensure that the proposal supports the Council’s relevant waste reduction targets.
39. In compliance with the Council’s nature conservation objectives and in the interests
    of safeguarding protected species, I have included a condition to secure the
    provision of ecological enhancements at the site. This is by way of one condition,
    where the Council’s two suggested conditions provided repetition. Additionally, as
    suggested by the Council, I have added a condition to secure details of the external
    lighting at the site, in the interests of safeguarding protected species.
40. Details of external materials, including samples of the external facing materials
    alongside a sample panel of the materials to be used in the construction of the
    walling, are necessary to achieve a satisfactory appearance. Additionally, I have
    added a condition to ensure that the occupancy of the property is restricted, in the
    interests of ensuring an appropriate housing mix in the locality.
41. A Construction Method Statement is necessary to safeguard the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers and to ensure highway and pedestrian safety during the
    construction phase of the development. The condition would provide a mechanism
    for controlling construction traffic, contractor parking, deliveries, and measures to
    mitigate noise, dust and disturbance to local residents. Whilst I note the
    requirements of the Council in their suggested condition, I have adjusted the
    wording. Given the modest scale of the proposed development, it would not be
    reasonable to require the submission of details of the main contractor, the contact
    details of the site manager, nor processes for keeping local residents and
    businesses informed of works being carried out and dealing with complaints.
Conclusion
42. For the reasons given above, the development would provide satisfactory living
    conditions for future occupiers with regard to private outdoor amenity space, would
    have an acceptable effect on the availability of on-street car parking in the area,
    and would not harm the housing mix of the locality. The proposal accords with the

1
    The Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              7
Appeal Decision 6009167


     development plan taken as a whole and there are no other material considerations
     to suggest that the decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
     Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.




K Dryden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6009167


                                           Schedule of conditions

1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
   date of this decision.

2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   following approved plans: Drawing nos. 1100 Rev P1, 1200 Rev P2, 2200 Rev P9,
   3101 Rev P12, 3102 Rev P16, 3103 Rev P14, 3104 Rev P13, 3105 Rev P4, 5100
   Rev P12, 5101 Rev P13, 5102 Rev P11, 5103 Rev P10, 5104 Rev P11, 5105 Rev
   P10, 5106 Rev P10 and 5200 Rev P8.

3) Prior to the first occupation of the residential development, bicycle parking for 34
   bicycles shall be provided in accordance with drawing number 3101 Rev P12 and
   that space shall thereafter be retained and kept available for the storage of
   bicycles.

4) Prior to the first occupation of the development, refuse and recyclable waste
   storage facilities shall be provided in accordance with drawing number 3101 Rev
   P12 and that space shall thereafter be retained and kept available for the storage of
   refuse and recyclable waste.

5) Prior to first occupation of the development, the ecological enhancements detailed
   within section 4 of the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal Report (Johns Associates,
   November 2024) shall be installed and thereafter be retained.

6) Prior to the installation of external lighting, full details including height, design,
   location and intensity shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
   planning authority. Such details shall include lighting specifications and locations
   designed to prevent light spill over new roost provisions and surrounding areas.
   The lighting installation shall then be carried out in accordance with the approved
   details.

7) No development above ground level shall take place until samples of the materials
   to be used in the construction of the external facing materials of the development
   hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
   planning authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
   approved samples.

8) No development above ground level shall take place until a sample panel of the
   materials to be used in the construction of the walling has been prepared on site for
   inspection and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The sample
   panel shall be at least 1 metre x 1 metre and show the proposed material, bond,
   mortar colour and any other details to be used in the development. The approved
   sample panel shall be retained on site until the work is completed and the
   development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved sample panel.

9) The number of occupants of the development hereby approved shall not exceed 34
   (thirty four).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         9
Appeal Decision 6009167


10) No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until a
    Construction Method Statement has been submitted to, and approved in writing by
    the local planning authority.
     The Statement shall provide for:
           i)   the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;
           ii) loading and unloading of plant and materials;
           iii) storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development;
           iv) measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during construction;
           v) delivery, demolition and construction working hours.
      The approved Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to throughout the
      construction period for the development.

                                           End of conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      10
