Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by A Chan Markovitz BA (Hons)
Decision by Tamsin Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009960
22 Woodside Close, Walsall, West Midlands
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
   The appeal is made by Mr James Pettitt against the decision of Walsall Metropolitan Borough
    Council.
   The application Ref is 26/0181.
   The development proposed is “single storey rear extension 5.615m”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Applications for costs
3. An application for costs was made by Mr James Pettitt against Walsall Metropolitan
   Borough Council. This is subject to a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
4. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended (the
   GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
   subject to limitations and conditions.
5. Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior approval is
   required for development which exceeds the limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is
   allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph A.4(3) provides that the local
   planning authority may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
   development does not comply – or that the developer has provided insufficient
   information to enable the authority to establish whether the proposed development
   complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such
   permitted development.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is whether the development applied for would be granted planning
   permission by Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009960


Reasons for the Recommendation
7. Permitted development rights granted through the GPDO are subject to a number
   of conditions and limitations, including those set out in Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1,
   Class A, paragraph A.4(10) of the GPDO. This paragraph states that the
   development applied for must not begin before either the Council notifies the
   appellant that prior approval is not required, the Council notifies the appellant that
   prior approval is given, or the Council does not notify the appellant as to whether
   prior approval is given or refused within 42 days from the date that the application
   for the development was received by the Council. The proposed development
   cannot benefit from permitted development rights if the conditions set out in
   paragraph A.4(10) are not met and work begins before confirmation has been
   given, or a decision has failed to be given, within the 42-day timeframe.
8. The Council notified the appellant that prior approval was refused on 19 March
   2026. There is no dispute between the parties that the Council notified the
   appellant that prior approval was refused within 42 days from the date that the
   application was received by the Council. From the evidence before me, I see no
   reason to disagree.
9. I undertook my site visit to assess the appeal on 21 July 2026. On my site visit, I
   observed that development of a single-storey rear extension, as applied for, had
   begun. It appeared that a foundation had been laid, and walls constructed around
   it, of the form and scale of the single-storey rear extension shown on the submitted
   plans and described in the application form. Given that prior approval must be
   given before work begins, it is not possible for prior approval to be given
   retrospectively through this appeal, and the appeal can be dismissed on the basis
   that the development as applied for has begun.
10. The Council refused the application as they considered that the proposed
    development would not comply with Article 3, Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A,
    paragraphs A.1(j), A.1(ja) and A.4(3)(b) of the GPDO. As development has begun, I
    cannot further assess the development’s compliance with the GPDO.
11. Consequently, as development has begun, the development applied for is not
    permitted development and would not be granted planning permission by Article
    3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
Conclusion and Recommendation
12. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

A Chan Markovitz
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
13. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

Tamsin Law INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
