Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by N Unwin BSc (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009578
13 Stone Lane, New Whittington, Chesterfield, Derbyshire S43 2DG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Horvath against Chesterfield Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is CHE/26/00071/HOU.
•    The development proposed is described as: proposed first floor extension over existing ground floor
     extension.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
       appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
       consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework. References hereafter are to
       the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
3.     The appeal relates to a planning application that was not determined by the
       Council within the prescribed period. I note that the Council would have refused
       planning permission should it have made a decision on the development. I have
       had regard to the parties’ submissions in establishing the main issue which is:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of future occupiers with
                regard to outlook, and the occupiers of 15 Stone Lane (no 15) with regard to
                outlook, and daylight and sunlight.
Reasons
4.     The appeal property forms a detached two-storey dwelling within a residential area
       and shares a similar front building line with neighbouring no 15. The proposed rear
       extension would create five bedrooms at first-floor level. Bedroom 2 would have a
       single small window identified on the submitted plans as being obscure glazed,
       restricting outlook. Further, the window would be close to, and face the side
       elevation of, no 15. This would result in an exceptionally poor outlook for the
       occupiers of bedroom 2, having an unacceptable effect on the living conditions of
       future occupiers.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009578


5.     The appeal building and no 15 share a similar rear building line at first-floor level
       with a single-story rear extension of the appeal property projecting beyond this. A
       tall fence delineates the boundary between the two with glazed doors at ground
       level and a single window within the first-floor rear elevation of no 15 closest to the
       appeal site. No 15 benefits from a large elongated rear garden providing good
       levels of daylight and sunlight, and outlook to occupiers from these openings and
       the area of garden closest to the dwelling.
6.     The proposed extension at first floor level would project above the existing rear
       single storey extension and located to the south of no 15. The Successful Places
       Supplementary Planning Document (2013) (the SPD) says that a general rule for
       windows effected by extensions is that a significant reduction in daylight is likely to
       occur if a 45 degree line from the centre of the effected window is intersected by
       the proposed extension. However, it goes on to say that this rule should be applied
       flexibly, taking into account site conditions.
7.     The Council have provided an illustration of the proposed first floor extension
       marginally intersecting a 45 degree line drawn from the centre of the ground and
       first floor windows of no 15, closest to the appeal site. Nonetheless, given the
       presence of the existing ground floor extension, the additional built form would be
       modest when viewed from the rear openings and garden area of no 15. The
       proposed rear extension would additionally utilise a shallow pitched roof, and when
       combined with the appeal properties lower ground level, would further minimise
       the built form when viewed from no 15. Moreover, the proposal would preserve the
       sunlight and daylight, and outlook received from the extensive rear garden of no
       15. As such, in this particular instance it is acceptable to depart from the 45 degree
       guidance within the SPD.
8.     Whilst the proposal would be acceptable with regard to its effect on the living
       conditions of the occupiers of no 15, it would harm the living conditions of future
       occupiers with regard to outlook. Therefore, it would conflict with the relevant
       provisions of Policies CLP14 and CLP20 of the Chesterfield Borough Local Plan
       (2020) which when read together require development to have an acceptable
       impact on the living conditions of users.
Other Matters
9.     Whilst I note there are letters of support from adjacent properties including the
       occupiers of no 15, this does not justify the above identified harm.
10. The appellant contends that the proposal could be achieved through permitted
    development rights, nonetheless there is little evidence before me to support this.
    As such, I can only afford this limited weight.
Conclusion
11. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

N Unwin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
