Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by S McIntyre BSc (Hons), CEng, MICE, MCIHT
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009340
Verge by Abingdon Road / Broadway, Didcot OX11 9BL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Miss Ashleigh Boyce, AMP Clean Energy, against the decision of South
    Oxfordshire District Council.
•   The application Ref is P25/S1790/FUL.
•   The development proposed is construction and operation of a micro energy storage project.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for construction and
   operation of a micro energy storage project at the verge by Abingdon Road /
   Broadway, Didcot OX11 9BL in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   P25/S1790/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The location of the development is defined by the submitted plans, and I am
   satisfied that the appeal site can be accurately located from the address and plans.
3. The Council has prepared a Joint Local Plan (JLP) for South Oxfordshire and Vale
   of White Horse, which, once adopted, will replace the existing local plans. The JLP
   was submitted for examination in December 2024 and hearing sessions have
   commenced but not completed. Therefore, the JLP may be subject to change prior
   to its adoption, which limits the weight that can be afforded to the emerging policies
   in it in respect of this decision. Further no party has referred to any specific policies
   in the emerging plan. Consequently, I have considered the appeal having regard to
   policies in the statutory development plan.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026, and the appellant and Council were invited to consider whether
   the revised Framework had relevance to their case. I have considered submissions
   received from both parties.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
   of the area.
Reasons
6. The site is located on the grass verge adjacent to the roundabout junction of
   Hadden Hill (A4130), Abingdon Road (A4130) and Broadway, on a key route into
   Didcot from the surrounding area. The character of the area is heavily influenced by

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009340


     infrastructure, including the adjacent highway, including streetlights and road signs,
     the overhead electricity line and pylons visible in the near distance, and the
     elevated railway line with its prominent gantry carrying overhead electricity cables
     on the other side of the roundabout. Also, in the verge to Abingdon Road, adjacent
     to the roundabout, is an electricity substation which, whilst small, is visually
     prominent. I observed during my site visit that vegetation around the substation had
     recently been cleared, possibly as part of works underway on the adjacent site,
     where publicity boards indicate that a development of a self-storage use is
     underway.
7. Despite the dominance of nearby infrastructure, when combined with the nearby
   trees and hedges and the adjacent open fields, the site contributes to a sense of
   openness and verdancy on this north side of the roundabout for users of the public
   highway in the vicinity of the appeal site.
8. Planning permission has been granted for a large strategic residential development
   of up to 750 dwellings, known as Ladygrove East (planning application reference
   number P19/S0720/O), that includes provision of a wide strategic cycleway a little
   beyond the verge, parkland, allotment area and housing. I observed significant
   construction activity on the Ladygrove East site during my site visit. A connection
   between the strategic cycleway and the roundabout is proposed a short distance
   from the appeal site. As a consequence of development in the area, the character
   north of the roundabout will become more urban and less open.
9. The development would be modest in scale and low in height relative to other
   infrastructure features in the locality noted above and, due to its small footprint, it
   would occupy only a small area of the highway verge along this part of the highway.
   Whilst its design and materials are functional, it would not have an incongruent
   appearance in the setting given its proximity to existing infrastructure. Furthermore,
   the facility would be at least partially screened by proposed tree planting.
10. The development would nonetheless introduce new built form to this roadside
    verge in a prominent location where several roads converge, and at a proposed
    pedestrian and cycle entrance to the Ladygrove East development. It would be
    conspicuous in close public views from the highway, and the facility would interrupt
    the views that are currently available across the adjacent fields. It would, albeit
    slightly, erode the extent of the buffer that would otherwise be provided between
    the road network and Ladygrove East. It follows that the proposal would lead to a
    reduction in openness and verdancy to the detriment of local character. Due to the
    small-scale of the proposal, the effects would be minor in nature and localised in
    scale, but they would nonetheless be harmful.
11. Overall, I conclude that the proposal would cause harm to the character and
    appearance of the area. Consequently, there would be conflict with policies
    STRAT3, DES1 and DES2 of the South Oxfordshire Local Plan (2020) (the Local
    Plan) which require development within the Didcot Garden Town Masterplan Area
    to positively contribute to the achievement of the Didcot Garden Town Masterplan
    principles, which include design that adds value, respects existing landscape
    character and reflects the positive features that make up the character of the local
    area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009340


Other Considerations
12. The Battery Energy Storage System proposed would import electricity from the
    local network at times of low demand or high renewable energy availability and it
    would export that electricity back to the grid during periods of high demand. As
    such, it would enable us to use energy more flexibly and help de-carbonise our
    energy system cost-effectively, as is recognised in respect of electricity storage in
    the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG).
13. The proposal would be consistent with the Framework’s objective to support the
    development and operation of energy infrastructure in ways which align with wider
    development, clean power, and net zero objectives (including the delivery of clean
    power by 2030). Whilst the benefit of the proposal is not precisely quantified in the
    evidence, Policy W3 of the Framework is clear that applicants should not be
    required to demonstrate the need for renewable or low carbon energy development
    and electricity network infrastructure; and that substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of improving energy security and the transition to a net zero future, as
    well as the contribution that small-scale renewable and low carbon energy projects
    can make to reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
14. Notwithstanding its small scale, the proposal would make an important contribution
    to ensuring energy security and the transition towards a net zero future. Indeed,
    Policy DES9 of the Local Plan states that the Council encourages schemes for
    renewable and low carbon energy generation at all scales and provides support for
    such planning applications where there would be no significant adverse effects in
    respect of specific matters, including landscape. In accordance with the
    Framework, these benefits of the scheme carry substantial positive weight.
Other Matters
15. Concerns have been raised regarding highway safety. However, the Highway
    Authority was consulted on the application and did not identify any issues in this
    regard. Given the alignment of the adjacent roads and the setback of the proposed
    facility from the highway edge, there would be no detriment to driver, pedestrian, or
    cyclist visibility. The effects of construction traffic on the highway network would be
    temporary in duration and could be effectively managed through a construction
    traffic management plan. Moreover, the evidence includes a site layout plan which
    shows there would be no impediment to the delivery and use of the footpaths and
    cycleways proposed as part of the Ladygrove East development.
16. Guidance produced by the National Fire Chief’s Council, which is referenced in the
    PPG, emphasizes the need to eliminate or reduce hazards to emergency
    responders and the public through the careful siting of battery storage
    infrastructure. Whilst the proposal would be located near to active travel routes
    proposed for the Ladygrove East development, there would be a good degree of
    separation afforded by adjacent verges and landscaping. Therefore, in the absence
    of substantive evidence to the contrary, the proposal would be sited to avoid a
    safety hazard.
Conditions
17. I have had regard to the list of suggested conditions provided by the Council and
    have considered these in light of the Framework and the PPG and I have amended
    the conditions as necessary.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009340


18. Conditions relating to the commencement date and plans are required for certainty.
    I have removed the “tailpiece” from the Council’s suggested condition relating to the
    approved plans to avoid uncertainty about what has been permitted.
19. Given the proximity of the appeal site to a busy roundabout a pre-commencement
    condition is necessary, requiring submission and written approval by the Council of
    a construction traffic management plan to demonstrate safe access and to mitigate
    impacts on the local highway during construction. The appellant has provided
    written agreement to this pre-commencement condition.
20. The appellant has stated that the proposed battery storage project would be visited
    for maintenance twice a year and that the checks would only require one person on
    foot. The service person is proposed to park in the nearest car parking space and
    then walk over to complete maintenance. Currently there does not appear to be any
    parking restrictions adjacent to the roundabout, possibly because there is currently
    no reason for people to park here. A detailed site maintenance plan needs to be
    secured by condition to avoid highway safety risks arising from inappropriate
    parking.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
21. The proposal would conflict with the development plan in respect of its effects on
    the character and appearance of the area. This brings the proposal into conflict with
    the development plan when read as a whole. It would also be in conflict with Policy
    DP3.1of the Framework which expects developments to enhance their
    surroundings.
22. In this case, the substantial weight I ascribe to the benefits of the scheme, in
    respect of de-carbonisation and energy security, would outweigh the minor and
    localised harm I have identified in respect of the character and appearance of the
    area. There would, therefore, be clear justification for the harm that would arise, as
    is required by Policy DP3.3 of the Framework.
23. Consequently, whilst there would be conflict with the development plan, there are
    material considerations that indicate a decision should be made otherwise than in
    accordance with the development plan. I therefore conclude that the appeal should
    be allowed.



S McIntyre
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009340


Schedule of Conditions
    1. The development to which this permission relates must be begun not later than
       the expiration of three years beginning with the date of this permission.

    2. That the development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with
       the details shown on the following approved plans, Plan 1, Plan 2 Rev B, Plan 5,
       Plan 6, Plan 7 and Plan 8.
    3. A Construction Traffic Management Plan (CTMP) shall be submitted to, and
       approved in writing by, the Local Planning Authority prior to the commencement
       of development. The approved CTMP shall be implemented prior to any works
       being carried out on site and shall be maintained throughout the course of
       construction of the development.
    4. The development hereby permitted shall not be brought into operation until a
       Site Maintenance Plan has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the
       Local Planning Authority. The development shall be maintained thereafter in
       accordance with the approved Site Maintenance Plan.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
