Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by K Mee BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009498
The Vestacare Stadium, Whitebank Road, Oldham OL8 3JH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Charlie O'Brien against the decision of Oldham Metropolitan Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is VAR/354748/25.
•    The application sought planning permission for “1) replacement of the existing grass football pitch
     with a new 3G pitch and associated fencing 2) development of new natural turf playing field and
     associated works” without complying with conditions attached to planning permission Ref
     PA/339093/16, dated 12 December 2016.
•    The conditions in dispute are Nos 13, 14, 15 which state that:
     13) The floodlights illuminating the new 3g pitch shall not be illuminated outside the hours of 8am
     and 10pm from Mondays to Fridays and between 8am and 8pm on Saturdays and Sundays.
     14) The use hereby approved shall not operate outside the hours of 8am and 10pm from Mondays to
     Fridays and between 8am and 8pm on Saturdays and Sundays.
     15) Prior to the development being brought into use, a Community Use Scheme shall be submitted to
     and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority, after consultation with Sport England. The
     Scheme shall include details of pricing policy, hours of use, access by non-members, management
     responsibilities and include a mechanism for review. The approved Scheme shall be implemented
     upon commencement of use of the development.
•    The reasons given for the conditions are:
     13) To minimise the impact of the floodlights and protect adjacent occupiers residential amenity.
     14) To protect the residential amenity of adjacent residents from noise and disturbance.
     15) To secure well managed safe community access to the sports facility, to ensure sufficient benefit
     to the development of sport as to outweigh the detriment caused by the loss of the grass playing field
     and accord with Policy 23 – Protection and Open Spaces.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issue
2.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) on 17 August 2026. It does not change the planning policy context in
       respect of the main issues, and I have determined the appeal accordingly.
3.     Planning permission was granted for a replacement 3G pitch and associated
       fencing. The appellant seeks to vary the conditions attached to that permission to
       extend the operating hours to 11pm on 2 days per year, between the start of May
       and the end of September. The appellant requires this to allow for non-football
       related events, including music festivals, beer festivals and boxing events, to take
       place on 2 days per year.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009498


4.       The application form is misleading insofar as it identifies condition 15 as one of the
         existing conditions proposed for variation. However, it is clear from the appellant’s
         submissions that no change to condition 15 is sought. Instead, the appellant
         proposes the imposition of an additional condition requiring the submission of an
         Event Management Plan (EMP).
5.       Having regard to the Council’s reasons for refusal and the representations
         received, the main issue in this appeal is whether conditions 13, 14 and a new
         condition requiring an EMP are reasonable and necessary having regard to the
         effect that extending the operating hours of the 3G pitch and floodlighting would
         have on the living conditions of the occupiers of nearby residential properties, with
         particular regard to noise and light.
Reasons
6.       The appeal site comprises an existing football stadium with 3G pitch along with
         associated function suites, boxing club, food provision, changing facilities and
         grass pitches. The stadium has a current capacity of 1320 spectators, although
         this is not currently controlled by planning conditions, and is open all year round. A
         draft EMP has been submitted to demonstrate how the nature and date of the
         proposed 2 events, the number of people attending and the management of
         parking could be controlled.
7.       The area is predominantly residential in character, mostly comprising semi-
         detached dwellings with modest gardens. A golf course is located to the east, with
         a small area of vegetated land adjacent to the south with housing beyond. The
         Garden Suburb Conservation Area (CA) adjoins the appeal site to the north-east.
         Its significance derives from its planned development as Oldham’s first garden
         suburb, designed to provide spacious living conditions within a low-density layout
         characterised by generous green space. Although the appeal site is visible from
         properties within the CA, the proposal would not undermine the key characteristics
         that contribute to the CA’s special architectural and historic interest and would
         therefore result in no harm to its significance.
8.       The appeal site is already in regular use for much of the daytime and early evening
         throughout the week. As a result, neighbouring occupiers experience limited
         respite from the general noise and disturbance associated with the site's
         operation. The proposal would extend such impacts on two evenings during the
         warmer months of the year, when outdoor amenity spaces are most likely to be
         used and windows left open in warm weather. Consequently, the effects on living
         conditions would be more acutely experienced on these days.
9.       The appellant has failed to submit any technical information relating to noise,
         despite a previous refusal for a similar proposal1 seeking to allow extended
         operating hours for 4 days per year. Whilst I note that the Council did not
         specifically request such information during the pre-application stage or application
         process, the appellant's assertion that the club already generates noise, and that
         an additional 2 to 6 hours of operation on 2 days per year would cause only limited
         inconvenience, is unsupported by any substantive evidence.
10. I have taken account of representations from residents of nearby dwellings
    highlighting concerns over issues with noise, light pollution, general disturbance,

1
    LPA reference VAR/353080/24


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6009498


       parking and anti-social behaviour outside the appeal site. I also note that the
       Council’s Environmental Health Officer raised no objection to the principle of the
       proposal.
11. However, the proposed extension to the operating hours would increase the period
    during which neighbouring residents would be exposed to noise and light
    disturbance, including from non-football events and during the warmer months. A
    point is reached beyond which the extended use of the 3G pitch and floodlighting
    within the stadium, even if only for 2 days per year, would unacceptably harm the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, particularly given their close proximity.
    In my judgement, allowing the proposed extension to the operating hours would
    pass this point. Moreover, given the nature of the proposed events, the lack of
    technical information relating to potential noise levels, the likely number of people
    attending and considering the draft EMP provided, I am not convinced that this
    harm could be satisfactorily mitigated through a condition requiring the submission
    and approval of a detailed EMP.
12. Consequently, I conclude that conditions 13 and 14 are reasonable and necessary
    having regard to the effect that extending the operating hours of the 3G pitch and
    floodlighting would have on the living conditions of the occupiers of nearby
    residential properties, with particular regard to noise and light. The proposal would
    therefore be contrary to Policy 9 of the Oldham Joint Core Strategy and
    Development Management Policies Development Plan Document (November
    2011) which, amongst other things, seeks to ensure that significant harm is not
    caused to the amenity of existing neighbouring occupants and to protect the
    environment and human health from unacceptable impacts caused by noise and
    light pollution.
13. The proposal would also conflict with paragraphs P3:1., P3:2.b., P3:2.d., P3:2.e.
    and DP3:2.a. of the August 2026 version of the Framework which together, and
    amongst other things, require consideration of the likely effects of development on
    health and living conditions and seek to prevent unacceptable levels of noise,
    artificial light or other forms of pollution for neighbouring residents, to create well-
    designed places which support healthy communities. These objectives are broadly
    consistent with paragraphs 135 f) and 198 a) of the previous Framework, which
    sought to secure a high standard of amenity for existing users and avoid noise
    giving rise to significant adverse impacts on health and the quality of life.
Other Matters
14. The appellant contends that the proposal would deliver social and economic
    benefits, including helping to keep football subscription payments low to support
    youth sport in a deprived area with below average participation in sport and would
    therefore contribute to the wellbeing and health of the local community. However,
    no mechanism is before me to ensure that any income generated as a result of the
    proposal would be used specifically for this purpose. In any event, based on the
    evidence before me, I attribute these benefits only limited weight.
15. Although some representations refer to historic breaches of the existing planning
    conditions, there is no substantive evidence before me to confirm these have
    occurred or that any enforcement action has been taken by the Council in this
    regard. This has not therefore been determinative in my decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009498


Conclusion
16. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

K Mee
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
