Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 July 2026 by K Hole BA (Hons)
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009278
256A North Street, Bedminster, Bristol BS3 1JA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Dilip Patel against the decision of Bristol City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/14205/F.
•   The development proposed is installation of safety rail to flat roof.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. With regard to the main issue of this appeal, the relevant policies are
   not materially different from the previous iteration of the Framework. I am therefore
   satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation with the main parties since,
   with the above in mind, their respective cases would not be prejudiced.
4. A revised plan (Drawing No AL(0)001 Rev B) has been submitted showing an
   additional safety rail in close proximity and parallel to the first floor rear wall of the
   host building which would incorporate a secure opening section that would allow
   maintenance access to the roof. As this plan does not make a fundamental change
   to the development proposed, accepting it would not unduly prejudice any
   interested parties, who in any event have also had the opportunity to comment on it
   during the appeal process. I have therefore based my recommendation on the
   revised plan.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
   occupiers of neighbouring properties on North Street and Gathorne Road with
   particular regard to privacy, noise and disturbance.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal property is a first floor flat with a door leading from its kitchen onto the
   flat roof of a ground floor rear projection. I observed on site that the rail to the outer

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009278


     edge of the roof, as indicated on the appellant’s revised plan, has already been
     installed. Together with the presence of the access door, this creates the
     perception that the wider roof is an accessible, safe and usable space. Indeed, I
     saw for myself furniture on the roof and hanging plants on the rail indicating use of
     the wider roof as an amenity space. I understand from the revised plan that a
     further rail would be installed closer to and parallel with the first floor rear wall. I
     also understand that signage would be installed indicating that the roof is for
     emergency egress only. Even so, with the railings to the outer edge in situ the
     temptation to use this area as an amenity space would subsist.
7. In instances where the wider roof may be utilised, occupiers of the host property
   would have clear views back towards the rear first floor windows at 258 North
   Street (No 258). Moreover, they would have close up, direct views from an elevated
   position into the private outdoor spaces of neighbouring properties, most
   particularly those serving the rear of No 258 and 1 Gathorne Road. Although some
   appreciation of neighbouring outdoor spaces is to be expected in urban areas, in
   this case the considerable extent of the roof and its elevated position mean that
   anyone on it would be highly discernible to occupiers of these neighbouring
   properties. Consequently, and whilst there is no evidence to suggest noise levels
   would be above those usually expected in a residential environment, activity on the
   roof would be highly perceptible thereby significantly increasing the perception of
   being overlooked.
8. The appellant has indicated that the use of the roof could be controlled by a
   condition. However, it would be difficult to enforce a condition prohibiting its use
   particularly given that any breaches are likely to be temporary and sporadic. No
   specific details have been provided in terms of the ‘non-trafficable finish’ suggested
   to demonstrate that this could be reasonably conditioned and would prevent
   access. Given the extent of the flat roof, and in the absence of any detailed design,
   there is also the potential that privacy screens to its perimeter would appear at
   odds with the character and appearance of surrounding buildings. Furthermore, a
   condition requiring the removal of the outer edge railings would contradict the
   development shown on the revised plan and there is no indication that the appellant
   would be agreeable to such a condition.
9. I understand that the proposal was of a result of a Home Improvement Notice (HIN)
   issued by the Council requiring improvements to fire safety. However, it has not
   been demonstrated that the proposed scheme, with the outer railings retained, is
   the only way in which to comply with the HIN. This somewhat diminishes any safety
   benefits that would be derived from the proposal.
10. Consequently, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the living
    conditions of occupiers of neighbouring properties on North Street and Gathorne
    Road with particular regard to privacy. In that regard, it would conflict with Policy
    DM30 of the Bristol City Council Site Allocations and Development Management
    Policies Local Plan (2014) which requires extensions and alterations to existing
    buildings to safeguard the amenity of neighbouring occupiers.
Conclusion and Recommendation
11. The adverse effects identified under the main issue substantially outweigh any
    benefits derived from the proposed development. For the reasons given above and



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009278


     having had regard to all other matters raised, I recommend that the appeal should
     be dismissed.

K Hole
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
